O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	To you, three dear sons, I have completed this book which is the last of the science of medicine along with its completion, and I have finished it through its explanations and by its declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to me in a vision that I should complete it for you with this treatise, which is a part of the work of hands, that is to say "surgery".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of hands is neglected in our region and is foreign to everyone, thus the science is lost and decayed, and nothing remains of it except the small descriptions in books of the ancients that the hands have moved.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this has come the error and the vanity, and the intentions are closed, and the science is obscured.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation;	It seems to me that I want to revive it along with the organization of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and of abbreviation;
et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	and I will come together with the forms of the iron cauterizations, and other instruments of the work with the adjustment of the declaration and preparation of them, as it is necessary.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And for the reason that no good master of hands is found in our time, the art of medicine is extended.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And it is necessary for the one who undertakes to learn in the science of anatomy, as Galen said, so that he knows the judgment of the members, and the forms and the conjunctions and separations of them, and has knowledge of the bones and nerves and brains and the number of them, and the movement and rest of the veins, both moving and resting, and their issue.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc;	And for this Hippocrates said that the name is not much, and with the work is little;
et meismement en l’art de main.	and we place in the art of hand.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes;	We tell you in the introduction of this book that whoever is not knowledgeable about the things previously mentioned, should beware so that they do not fall into error and that they do not harm men.
ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	that I have seen many times several of those who undertake this science and if they abandon their science and their experiments.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa I apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col;	For I saw a foolish surgeon who cut into the aposteme of scrofula on the neck of a woman, and cut the arteries at the neck;
por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	because so much blood came out that the woman fell dead in his hands.
Et vis I autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans;	And I saw another surgeon who extracted a stone from a man's bladder, and the stone was large;
si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens III jors.	he removed with it a piece of the bladder, and the man died within three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I have already seen it called for by the healer, and I saw the condition of the patient and the size of the stone, and if one touched it he would die.
Et vis I autre mire qui prist en cure I duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie;	And I saw another doctor who took in care the duke of our land who had his leg broken, and with the breakage a wound;
et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi I termine;	and the doctors, complaining of ignorance, held the breakage on the wound by strong binding, and did not leave the wound to form a scab, and they left it thus for a certain time;
et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie;	and he commanded that it not be untied;
et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	and remained thus until the leg became entirely swollen and the foot, and came to destruction.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe;	I was called to come to him, and I hurried to come and untie the leg;
et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	and when I had untied it, he was at peace and did not feel any pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner;	But all along the corruption was already confirmed in the member, and it cannot be healed.
et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	and the corruption does not cease to spread through the member as long as the member is entirely lost.
Et vis I autre mire qui effondra I apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And we see another case where the abscess bursts the swollen tumor, and then becomes inflamed because of the evil of its symptom.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For tumor, when it is full of melancholic humor, does not require anything but to be touched with iron if it is not in a place where one can then remove all that is corrupted.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en II divisions:	And for this, dear son, it is necessary that you know that the work of hands is divided into two parts:
c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions;	that is to say, attention, where there is danger in several conditions;
et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	and I will show in each place of this book where there is fear and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos.	For which reason it is necessary that you guard yourself, so that foolish people cannot speak badly of you.
Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez;	Take your arms in caution, and undertake your illnesses lightly and firmly, and use the better way so that by the grace of God you come to health and are praised;
et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit;	and let the terrifying diseases of grievous sickness;
et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	and put away from you that which makes you doubt, and have faith in you so that you can come from this world to the other of glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens:	Galen says in one of his commentaries:
«Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	Do not take a foolish doctor to cure your illness, lest you be called a foolish patient.
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	I have divided this treatise into three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez;	The first chapter is about cauterizations of fire and about cauterizations of sharp medicine, and this chapter is ordered from the head to the feet;
et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	and of the forms of cauterizations, and of the uses of cautery, and of all that which is necessary in the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses;	The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and of ulcers and of wounds, and of the extractions of arrows, and of similar things;
et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	and it is the chapters put in order and the forms of the treatments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses;	The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things;
et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	and it is ordered from the bottom of the feet to the head, and of the forms of the treatments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Additionally, we remember the work, it is necessary that I describe the quality of the aid and the harm of each complexion.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus;	I say that the qualities of the aid, and of the harm, are a longer speech and subtle science and secret responses;
et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu;	and of this speaking many of the wise men agree;
et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	and my writings suffice little for their words, for I abhor length.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que II complexions:	I say that cauterization helps universally all complexions where there is matter, except for two complexions:
c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	that is to know the hot and moist complexion, and the dry and moist complexion.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide;	In a hot and dry complexion with mixed matter, they disagreed about nothing and said that cauterization is of great aid;
et li autre dirent le contraire:	and the others said the opposite:
que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	that cauterization is not suitable for an illness that comes from heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour;	For the nature of fire is hot, and it should not be used to cure a hot illness with heat, nor with dryness;
et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	and it is said by those who say the opposite that cauterization provides great aid to hot and dry illnesses that occur in the body of men.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you examine the body of man and its moisture according to the temperament of fire, you find the body cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this statement.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have found it true many times by experimentation.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens;	And let no one interfere with it except he who has experienced it, and who knows through long practice the chapter of cauterizations, and the diversity of complexions of men, and the dispositions and causes of their illnesses, and the occurrences and the space of the tension;
des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	of other complexions we have no fear, namely in cold and moist illnesses.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all the parts gather and agree with the cauterization.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, son, that fire cauterization assembles in secret of cures, and has greater goodness than cauterization of burning medicine.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For the fires are simple, and do not come except to the member that is cooked, and do not harm another member unless it is named.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation;	The hot medicines pass from one member to another by touching, and bring to the members diseases of grievous sanitation;
et par aventure ocit lou malaide.	and by chance kill the patient.
Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	The fire, due to its height and goodness of its substance, does not do harm, if there is no excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses;	And this I have found by experiment and through the length of service and study that I have put into the art, and established on the truth of things;
et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant;	and for this I excuse myself for the length of the speech, for it does not please me that I withhold from you the secret which is hidden in fire, and the quality of the work, how it expels the diseases of the body, as the philosopher says in demonstrating;
or le recevez en vos pensees.	Receive it in your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, son, that they agree on what time the cauterizations should be done, and choose taking pains.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere;	And I say that cauterization is suitable at all times, because the harmful effects that follow are often cured by the aid of cauterization;
et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	and likewise the cauterizations are for necessary pains and hastenings that cannot wait for the time when a greater evil may come to the limb.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire;	And do not think ever, dear son, as foolish people do;
car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue;	for the disease that is healed by cauterization has no return;
et il le dient ensi;	and they say it to him thus;
mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	but it is not so as they believe, because cauterizations are not a medicine that alters the temperament, and dries the humors which are the cause of the pain, and is worth more than medicine for the hastening of its value, and for the virtue of its work and of its authority.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut;	And it is possible that the disease comes from the patient's complexion, at times according to the humor of the disease and its position.
et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie;	and are gathered in him the excesses by the acquisition of foods and similar things, if it is not for cauterizations administered to him or he has pus of excess and moisture, such as cauterizations of teeth for the pain, and similar things, and such pain does not return.
mais ce avient poc.	but that happens rarely.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir;	And many people do not understand why cauterization is called the last resort of medicine, and it is true;
mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	but they do not believe that cauterization is worth anything after medicine, but their intentions are false, and cauterization is the last resort of medicine because when we administer methods of cures for a disease and they do not work, then we administer cauterization, and it works.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	It appears well that cauterizations are the last resort of medicine, not according to the intention of foolish physicians.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance;	The ancients said that cauterizations with instruments of gold are better than those of iron, and they did not say this because of the quality of the gold or because of the height of its substance;
et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes;	and they said that the place of cauterization does not become gangrenous, but this is not true because I have experienced it, and found that it is true in some men;
et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	and cauterizations of gold are worth more than those of iron, as they praised them.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez;	And however when you heat an instrument of gold, you do not know how hot it is by the color of the gold, and it cools down quickly;
et s’on le chaufe trop;	and if one heats it too much;
si font au feu;	it becomes disfigured by the fire;
et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	and then there is enough of an impediment
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And for this reason we use the fire cautery that we have shown to be suitable for our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	I have ordered this chapter of the limbs from head to feet, so that the way is easier to find.
dou cautere olivaire	of olive cautery
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	These cauteries are useful for moisture and cold on the brain, and in it there is good done by the cause of a disease which is called "soda", and by the cause of many humors that descend from the head to the eyes, and to the ears, and because of a multitude of noises and pain of teeth and pain of throat, and similarly for all diseases that come from cold such as paralysis and sodeness and apoplexy and similar diseases.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief III nuis ou IIII, selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir;	The form of this cautery is such that the patient should be purged by a solvent medicine clarifying the head, three or four times, according to what the strength and the age and the habit of the patient can endure;
et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	and then make the patient rest their head.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis;	And then make them sit with their arms crossed between your hands, and put their hands on their chest;
aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses II eulz;	afterwards place the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his two eyes;
et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	and there will come out your two thumbs, if it bleeds from the bottom then heat the cautery that is called "olivare", of which this is the form:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant;	And put it on the left side of the bottom, and make it descend and extract your hand little by little while turning;
puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os I sol petit;	then lift your right hand, and show the place to you if you see the bone a little bit;
et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit;	and if you do not see it, then reapply the cautery until you see the bone as I have told you;
aprés pren I poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse III jors;	afterwards take a little silk, and put it in water and wet cotton inside, and put on the wound, and let it be for three days;
aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre;	after a hand is put on the moistened bandage;
et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	and let it stay there until the chill has been drawn out;
aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	after treating the wound of the joint that is called "tetrafarmaçon", as long as it is healthy.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge;	And the old ones said that the more a wound suppurates, the more it will discharge;
et por ce si aide mues.	and for this reason it is helped by movement.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And some of them said that one should cauterize so much that part of the bone is burned, and then scrape off what is burned from the bone, and it will be cured.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme I vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors;	And the others said that one should cauterize so much on it, and burn so strongly that a piece of bone as wide as the needle that women put in their belts is removed, because the humors issue freely out;
et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte;	and one must let the wound remain covered for a long time;
aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	after that, one must clean and dress it.
Et ces II manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor;	And these two manners of cauterizations do not seem to me to be good in every case, except in certain men where there is a way of fear;
et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier;	and it seems to me that I ought to leave it alone;
car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres;	for the head is weakened by the continuous flow of fluids from the body, as we demonstrate in other limbs;
et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	and also when the head of the patient is weak by nature, and the first appearance of cauterization seems more safe and gentle to me, and in that manner I observe then a healthy outcome.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	of the old pain of the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres;	When the head suffers from chronic pain, and it lasts for a long time, then the patient should use yolch or pills which are called "cochie", and purging of the head and oils and plasters;
et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	and if they perform the cautery that we have mentioned before, it is not worth it.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit;	Take care that the head of the sick person's arm is of strong nature, and that it is not too cold;
adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	then cauterize the dislocated one with a cauterization a little as we have said above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai I cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»;	Afterwards perform the cauterization on each horn of the head just to the bone, as we have said before, and perform the cauterization on the place that is called "vasselz".
et est I leus en coi on met ventouses;	and it is the place where one puts ventouses;
et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os:	and put your hand so that you do not see to the bone:
li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors;	the sick person feels much greater pain in this cauterization than in others, and I will speak of it elsewhere;
et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	and it is necessary that the cauterizations of the horns be more subtle than those where one cauterizes the middle of the head, and this is its form:
dou cautere dou chief	of the cauterization of the head
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie:	When in one part of the head there comes sudden pain, and the illness extends to the eye, and the head is purged with medicated cleansing remedies, and one has done the other cures that I have spoken of in the division of illnesses, and all this does not profit anything:
adonques li fai cauteres selonc II manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	then one makes cauterizations according to two methods, that is to say with medical needle and with fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope I poc as II chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir;	The cauterization with medical needle is that you prick a needle of alum, and remove the crust and apply it to the head, and then make the temple where the pain holds in such manner that you can rub the needle of alum under the skin;
et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi XII houres;	and when it will be applied, tie it and bind it well and let it stay for twelve hours;
et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi II jors ou III;	and then untie it and pull out the needle of alum, and let the wound be so for two or three days;
puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	Then put a poultice on the wound, plunged into butter until it can be put in place.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	After the treatment of the injury, as long as it is healthy;
et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	and see to it if you make use of certain burning medications that I have written or twelve treatments of burning medications.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	The cauterization with iron is according to this method.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Heat the cauterizer of which this is the form:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait I poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance;	And it is called "clos" because the head is made in the form of a nail or it has little curvature, and in the middle a small appearance;
et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse;	and put it on the painful place, and hold your hand and turn the iron a little lightly, until the middle of the spine where the heart is, be dry;
et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	and lift your hand so that the artery does not become hard, which is bad, and causes an abundance of blood to flow.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par III jors;	After putting cotton in a pouch of oil, and put it on the wound for three days;
puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	then I put moistened cotton in butter, and then treat the wound with ointment until it is healed;
et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	and if you want to cauterize this migration with the cautery that is called "cultellare", at the tip, and beware of touching the artery in this migration which is not ancient.
de emigraine	of the migration
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans;	When you treat a migration as we have previously said in the divisions of illnesses, and it does not improve, and you see that the previous saying of medicine and of iron does not suffice, then it is necessary to heat the cautery that is called "cultellare" until it becomes white;
et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os;	and mark thus on the painful wound a line of half a thumb in length, and remove your hand once, and hold that you do not touch the artery and that you do not approach the bone;
et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez;	And beware of the jaw that moves when one chews, and the nerves do not have regard for what moves and that spasm does not come to the patient, and beware of the decrement of blood from the artery when it will be cut, or cutting that causes great fear and shame to the one who does not know himself, and who is not a studied and experienced person.
et laisse l’uevre em mi voie;	and let the work be in my way;
mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	but I will tell you how to stop blood when the artery is cut, and I will show you in this book where it is written.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee;	And if you see that these cauteries do not suffice for the disease, and the patient is suffering, cauterize in the middle of the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it is healthy;
et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait II coutelz;	and if you see, administer the cauterization that we have spoken of in the chapter on the extraction of the artery, with the cauterization that has two blades;
et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	and is this cautery better than that one and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	of the pain of the ears from a cold source
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When in the ear comes pain from cold, and one has applied medicines that dissolve and other cures that we have mentioned in the division, and the pains do not move, then heat this cautery which is called "poins", of which this is the form:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les II se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche;	After puncturing all around the sick ear, or around the two ears where the pain is held in both, and a little below the root of the ear since you have signed the place of injection;
et ait X poins entor chescune oreille;	and have X points around each ear;
aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	after the cure, the place as long as it is healthy.
de la torture de la bouche	of the torture of the mouth
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie;	Torture that must be cured by cautery is not far from those that move with phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of the disease;
et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	and do not perform cauterization on similar things that come from hemorrhoids and from the spasms of the kidneys.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de III cauteres:	When you treat this kind of torture that comes from a flow of blood and purging of the head and gargling, and it is not effective, then it is necessary to cauterize the patient with three cauterizations:
l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des II levres;	one at the root of the ear, and another a little behind the temple, and the third at the joining of the two lips;
et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce;	and put the cauterization on the healthy part, and make a cauterization directly on the back of the ear a little below the crown of the head, and another on the temple as long as a finger;
et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse;	and let the cauterization be so hot that it burns the heart;
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	and this is the form of the cauterization:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros;	And it is similar to the scalpel that we have previously mentioned, but it is a bit more subtle and it is necessary that the blade be a bit thicker;
aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After curing the limb as I have said before, as long as it is healthy.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai IIII cauteres:	When a case of apoplexy is old and you cure it as we have said, and it does not improve, and the patient has no fever, then you should make four cauterizations:
II sus les II cornes dou chief, et I emmi le chief, et I ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac;	Two on the two horns of the head, and one in the middle of the head, and one on the limb called "vassel" as we have previously said, and the fourth cauterization on the mouth of the stomach;
et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	and let it be cured as we have said before.
de litargie	of lethargy
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil;	For this illness it is necessary to give the patient great and pills that purify the brain;
aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres;	After treating the head of the patient entirely, and putting on the occipital area the plaster of mustard which is written or mentioned in the treatise of plasters;
et c’est li maniere dou cautere:	and this is the manner of the cautery:
si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	if you do it as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est;	If he is wounded in that place, it is good;
et s’il ne l’est, se li fai III cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere I doi de gros;	and if he isn't, then have three cauterizations made on the middle of the head descending to the neck, and one finger's breadth between each cauterization, two fingers thick;
et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai I cautere en mileu;	and treat it like the others, and if you see swelling, and the patient is suffering, have one cauterization made in the middle;
et se mestiers est, II autres sus les II cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	and if the disorder is, two others on the two horns, and treat it until it is healed;
et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	and let the cauterizations be which are called "olivare", as I have said before.
de la froidor dou chief	of the coldness of the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit;	It is necessary that the head be cleaned with herbs and that which we have said before;
aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et I derrier et III sus l’espinee dou col;	afterwards, heat the head of the patient, then perform cauterization within the head and on each horn, and behind the ear and three on the spine of the neck;
et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai IIII cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos;	and if you are a skilled practitioner, and the body is moist and the patient is suffering, and the illness is severe, then perform four cauterizations on the spine of the back;
et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main;	and let it be until the most tender part of the heart is dry, and lift your hand;
aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	after the treatment until he is healthy, and it is the cauterization that is called "olivare" which we have mentioned before.
de l’epilempsie	of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	Epileptics should not undergo cauterization except for those who are phlegmatic, and it is necessary to first cleanse the brain with herbs and other treatments that we have mentioned in the section when the patient has great and suffering pain from taking medicine.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes;	And if it's an infant who can't yet suffer, have them gargle and chew, rubbing the brain often with good meat.
aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai I cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et I cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne;	After the king of the head in the middle, and have the cauterization done according to what we said before, and the cauterization on the vessel, and on each horn;
et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	and if the patient is weak and suffering, have cauterizations done as I said to the one who has paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and of the neck, and let the cauterization be olive-based according to the method that I said.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai I cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is an infant, have them undergo a subtle cauterization in this manner:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When because of melancholy the superfluities or the corrupted and thick humors are present, then cauterize with these cauterizations as we have said for the one who has paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if by the cause of melancholy the superfluous humors are declining into melancholy, and the body of the patient is moist, then one should give something to drink that will cleanse the brain, according to what is stated beforehand in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide;	After the king of the patient's body;
aprés fai I torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com I cercle, si le met emmi le chief;	after making a plaster of linen, well done, like a circle, put it around the head;
et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars;	and the patient should be crossed, and held firmly from all sides;
aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien;	after applying the bandage, and it is of no use to anoint with old barberry butter;
et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir;	and heat it with tempered fire, so that the fingers can bear the heat without suffering;
aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier;	after having seen the circle inside the head, and let it cool down;
et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and do this to the patient each week once with another good government, until he is healthy.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	Or you will see yourself being cauterized by making several points on the entire cauterization.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument;	This type of cauterization disturbs the brain greatly;
et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	and then put on cotton moistened in butter and in fat of geese.
de l’awe des eulz	of the juice of the eyes
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When the juice comes first to the eyes by the signs that I mentioned in the division, then anoint and give to drink to the patient something cleansing the head, and warming all moisture, and make them sweat in a bath several times while fasting.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai II cauteres sus les II temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as II eulz ensamble, ou en I se li dessendemens est en I;	After instruct him to shave his head, and make him cauterized in the middle of the head, and make two cauterizations on the two temples if the discharge of the juice is in both eyes, or in one if the discharge is in one.
et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple;	and cut to the cauterization all the veins and arteries that are near the heart, and let the cauterization be long according to the width of the temple;
et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	and beware of the effusion of blood, and if you see too much blood coming out, then stop it with a poultice as soon as you can.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras;	And I will teach you about the extraction of arrows and the cutting with a cautery how you will stop it;
et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les II os derrier.	and sometimes they perform cauterization or branding between the two bones in the back.
dou cors des larmes	of the body of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors;	When the tears of the eyes are old and accustomed and are on the veins, or beside the arteries that are in the appearance of the head from the beginning;
et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz:	and one sees that it is from cold, phlegmatic superfluities, then one does the cauterization that I spoke of at the beginning of the treatise concerning the eyes:
I cautere emmi le chief, et II cauteres sus les II temples, et II cauteres ou haiterel desoz les II os;	One cauterization in the head, and two cauterizations on the two temples, and two cauterizations or brandings between the two bones;
et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout I petit cautere.	and if it is more seriously burned, then cauterize carefully from above the eyebrow with all small cauterization.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	tears of the eyes from within the eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide III nuis cochies;	When you administer medicine according to what we have said in the division, and it does not benefit him, then give the patient three handfuls to drink;
aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire;	after the king of the head, and make a cauterization in the middle with two olive-tree cauterizations;
et fai II cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les II sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous;	and make two cauterizations of the cauterization that is called "clavilis" on the two eyebrows, a little above the eyebrows;
et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	and beware of the artery that you do not cut it.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the form of the cauterization that is called "clavilis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	When the skin of the eye is softened by disease and moisture, then cauterize with this cauterization that is called "olivare".
de coi ci est li forme:	of what this form is:
Et se tu vues si fai II cauteres sus les II sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont;	And if you see that it makes two cauterizations on the two sores as long as the eyebrows are;
et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	and do not let your hand be still unless until the third part of the papier is burned, according to the manner that I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	hairs that grow on the eye
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc II manieres:	It happens sometimes that the hairs of the eyes turn into a pustule, and prick the eye, and one makes cauterizations in two manners:
c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	it is to know about fire, or burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals;	For the fire cauterization, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow as long and even;
et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain;	When they grow and are even, then put the patient in a warm place;
aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz;	After that, draw on the skin of the eyes a figure that is as subtle as the tip of a feather, and let the beginning of the sign be beneath the hairs;
puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Then put moist cotton in a mixture of oil and musk, applied to the eye, then heat the cauterization instrument of which this is the form:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit;	After cauterizing on the figure that you have drawn, little by little and many times, so that the heart is warmed in that place;
et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil;	and the signs of the health of the eye are that you see the skin drawn back, and the hairs lifted to the tip of the eye;
adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi III jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	then lift your hand, and leave it there for three hours, then put moist cotton in butter until the heat of the cauterization is removed;
aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the treatment of the joint as long as it is healthy.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers;	And after that the hairs grow, and the skin is softened then restart the cauterization on the same spot, just like you did previously;
et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	and if the hairs are removed, then cauterize until the skin is restored to its natural state, and is even, and does not prick the eye of the hair.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte;	The medical cauterizations of burning are those that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow as long as they are large and even, then make a parchment in the shape of the leaf of myrtle.
puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien;	then take French soap and living ashes, one half and one quarter, and mix them together well;
et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz;	and make it quickly, so that it does not get cold, then spread it on the shape that you have made like the leaf of myrtle, and put it on the skin of the eyes.
et se li maladie tient en I oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en I, et se en ambedous ausi;	and if the illness is in the oil supplement, one must work on it, and if it is in both ears;
et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef;	and put two fingers into the ear cotton wool moistened in a little water;
et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse I poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	and let the head of the patient be in your hands and put your finger showing on the medicine, and press the pouce and wet the mouth every time the patient feels a burning sensation from the medicine, for it feels like a burning as from fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have held it for a long time, then give the medicine to your patient.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision;	And when the burning sensation has passed, then lift the limb of the patient, and look to see if you find the skin lifted like it was lifted by contraction of fire or by incision;
et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	and if it is thus, then it is good.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point;	If not, then put more of the medicine on the limb or the medicine has not taken effect, until your work is even, and your eyes are placed to the point;
puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then put on cotton wool soaked in butter until the heart and arteries are cooled, after the treatment of the joint which is called "dyaphenisis" and others, until it is healed.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	And it is necessary that you take good care of your work with great care so that there is no lack in the knowledge of medicine for the eyes.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant;	And if the skin becomes soft afterwards, and the hairs prick in the eye, then reapply the medicine to that area which is softened by the proper skin, just as you did before;
aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	after the treatment until it is healed;
et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	and this is the shape of the mortar for the dead:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens;	And be aware that the eyes of men are diverse in size and in smallness, and thus should be your constructions;
et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	and let not the right way be hidden from him to whom is the study of this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	of the treatment of fistula by cauterization
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat a fistula as we have said in the divisions of diseases, and your treatments are not profitable, then it is necessary that you perform cauterization in this manner.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain;	Instruct the patient to put his head on your healthy side;
et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief;	and hold the patient's head between your hands in such a way that it does not move, nor does his head decline;
aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil;	afterwards apply moist cotton to the eye or juice of wormwood on the eyelid;
aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz:	afterwards heat the cauterization instrument which is suitable:
et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere;	and it is shaped at the head like the form of a feather of a bird, assembled so that the cauterization instrument is ready;
se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente;	if you see it, it should be pointed from one side of the head to the other, and if you see it, it should also be as sharp as a needle;
mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	but nevertheless, this is what is of most value for your work.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche;	After the fistula has been pressed, it is covered, and in that state the putridness, and the dryness;
et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe;	and it is closed, thus the opening, and through the hole the bowel;
aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie;	after putting on the hot cauterization, and hold your hand on the cauterization at the part of the nail near the edge of the eye, so that your hands do not cause folly;
et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	and put the cauterization in the fat of the eye, and corrupt it.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	If you come to the beginning of the cauterization just to the bones, it would be good.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors;	If that does not work, then restart the cauterization one more time, and also if you are a master of the profession, and let it be for three days;
aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers;	After I put on cotton moist in a bath, and the treatment of the joint is done until it is healthy, and if 40 days pass and it is not healthy, then put on medicine with corrosive ointment so that the bone is exposed;
et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	and the King as according to what he will come in his chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	And there is a manner of cauterizing of fistulas that none of the ancients spoke of.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu;	Cut into the fistula, and make the place.
aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	afterwards put in the incision a subtle stick of wax where its form is;
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc;	and they make the quantity of an ounce of lung;
et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil;	and hold your hand firmly on the stick, and let the patient not move their foot, so that the melted lung does not run to its hole;
et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe:	and then one puts on the patient's hole cotton moist in a tub of water or in water;
li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	The flesh sinks if treated with a fistula, and the blood passes through wondrous sanitation.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	And if the fistula is healed by the cauterization that we have spoken of, it's good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	If not, then it is necessary to administer a tube to the navel, and to bring the fistula to the body of the navel according to what is proper for it.
des crevaices en levres	of cracks in the lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Many times there occur cracks in the lips that are called "poil", and similarly in the lips of infants.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe I petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these cracks of what we have said in divisions, and the treatment does not benefit, then heat a small cauterizing iron according to this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font;	And thrust it hastily into those cracks until it comes to the source of the flow;
aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the treatment, leave the limb of the patient alone as long as it is healthy.
de l’aposteme de la goule	of the abscess of the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule;	When an abscess comes in the root of the throat or in the uvula or palate, or the roots of the teeth, after having made decay and rottenness and is swollen and becomes a fistula;
et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie:	and you treat it as we have said in the sections, and it does not profit them;
adonques covient il que tu aies I cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule;	then it is necessary that you apply the cautery according to the quantity of the fistula;
aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu;	after the opening or perforation of the fistula, and hold your hand until the hot iron comes to the source of it, or touches the rear of the limb;
et fai ensi une fois ou II, aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and do this once or twice, after the treatment of what we have said in cures, until it is healthy;
et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin;	and if it is thus cured, it's good;
et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	and if not, then you should uncover the limb and cut out the corrupted bone, according to what you will find in its chapter.
dou movement des dens	movement of the teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain;	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you cure them with medicine and it is of no use, then put the head of the patient on your healthy one;
aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent;	after cauterizing, the shape will come such that you put a chain over the tooth;
et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent;	and put the cauterizing iron hastily inside, and hold it so that the patient feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth;
aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit;	after lifting your hand, recauterize according to your will;
aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	then fill the patient's mouth with salty water, and make them pull it back and spit for an hour.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in a similar way the teeth which were loose become firm, and the gums softened are restrained, and the rotting moisture is dried.
de la dolor des dens	of the pain of the teeth
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc II manieres:	When toothache comes from cold, or there is cold or fever, and medical treatments are of no use, then it is necessary to perform cauterization in two ways:
et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	and cauterization with a burning instrument and cauterization with fire.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain;	Cauterization with a burning instrument is such that you take the wick of a candle, and the tip in an iron or bronze skewer;
aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez;	afterwards take cotton and envelop it around the tip of a stick, and the marrow in melted wick, and put on the aching tooth quickly and hold until it is cooled;
et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus I fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	and do it often until its virtue reaches the root of the tooth, and if you see marrow and cotton in cold melted wax, and put on the aching tooth, and put on the hot iron as long as the fire reaches the decay of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide;	The fire cautery is such that you should hold a iron or steel rod, and let it be thick so that the heat does not reach the patient's mouth;
aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez;	After heating the cautery, so that the form appears afterwards, and put it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery has cooled down;
fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	Do this often, for the pain will be gone the next day or the day after.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer;	And it is necessary that the patient fill his mouth with warm bread in the impression of this cautery, and then pull out the root;
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	and this is the shape of the cautery:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir;	And make a cautery of the head of the ulcer that you want, and according to what you are able;
et c’est li forme de la caine:	and this is the shape of the cane:
des scrophules	of the scrofula
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie;	When the scrophules are of phlegmatic and cold moistures, and do not obey digestion by medicines, then heat the hairy cauterized iron from which afterwards comes the form, and it has two openings for the fumes to issue from the cauterization of the other part;
et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume;	and put the hot cauterized iron on the abscess once, or as it is needed, until it comes to the bottom of the abscess;
et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors;	and if the abscess is small then put cauterized iron according to the quantity of the abscess, and leave it in this way for three days;
et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee;	and put on cotton cloth moistened in broth until the wound is closed;
aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	after the cure, anoint the limb with ointments and tents until it is healthy.
Li forme de la cainne:	The form of the cane:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives;	When the moistures prevail on the channels of the body, and similarly when it comes from a cold complexion, then it is necessary that the patient be purged first by solutive medicines;
aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	After the cauterization is done at the root of the throat, and be careful that you do not come too close to the throat, and do not put a fire closer than a small space.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant;	After they do another cauterization at the joint of the neck at the head of the spine, and it is the cauterization that is called "clavicle" from which we get the term in front of us;
et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	and treat the body as we have said before, until it is healthy.
de la toust	of the cough
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai .II cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis;	When all the diseases of the lungs are from cold moistures, and the patient has no fever or cough, and it is a chronic disease, then do two cauterizations on the shoulders in the hollow places;
et I autre cautere emmi le pis entre II mameles;	and another cauterization between the two breasts in the chest;
et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	and it is the cauterization that is called "clavicle" according to the form which has been mentioned before.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles;	And if you see, make cautery by pricking all the cautery that is called "poins" where its form is thus before in the disease of the ears;
et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	and let the poins be just to XXX, or inserted within.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	After the cure, adjust the limb according to what has been said before, and let the cauteries be in three rows according to this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais III a cop.	And for this reason the cautery is made lighter, because you make three at a time.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit;	After that, let the patients sweat on their back and on their sides;
aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre;	After lifting the heart that is within the diaphragm, with the fingers of your left hand;
et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners douqueil ci est li forme:	and if the joint is dislocated within, then heat the cautery which has two nerves because that is its form:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble IIII cauteres;	and cauterize the heart as long as it pierces until to the costal, and there comes the figure of the cautery assembled with four cauteries;
et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a III ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres;	and for this reason the cautery is made with the cautery that has three nerves, because the figure of cauterization is six cauteries;
et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a III ners:	and the nerves are according to the subtlety of a thread and it is the form of the cautery that has three nerves:
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce I nerf por coi il i a VIII cauteres.	And sometimes it is joined to this one nerve because it has eight cauteries.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil;	After put on the cautery, broken roots with seat;
aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After making the patient rest, and not moving the limbs for a long time until they are well comforted.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	And if it is dislocated above, little matter does it make, then perform cauterization on the thickness of the cauterized claw, or many cauterizations by pricking.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	For the joint is closed again, and the moisture is stopped, and the patient is healed.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	When in the stomach come chills and many moistures until they extract to their complexion, and are multiplied the diarrhea for them, and in manners of accustomed cures, and it does not profit them, then it is necessary that the patient be warmed on his back, and stretch out his legs and hands.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture;	Make on this one three cauterizations, one below the shoulder by the quantity of an egg, to all the claw cauterization, and two cauterizations between the two ribs as many as the figure of the cauterizations shall be at three angles, and let there be space between the one and the other so that they are not joined together when they will suppurate;
et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	and let the cauterization be such that they grasp the two parts of the heart, and let the shape of the cauterizations be according to this form without adjustment:
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme;	And if you see a large cauterization in the stomach according to this form;
et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche;	and he who will have fear of this cauterization, cauterize by pricking and marking on the stomach at the point according to the quantity that you see of the thickness;
puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	then cauterize all the area which is called "poins".
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the treatment of the wound that we have had before, as long as it is healthy.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez;	When to the liver comes pain of cold and of moisture and of great swelling, as long as it is far from its natural complexion through the excess fluids;
et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil;	and the patient is cured of that which we have said in treatments, and it does not profit him, thus it is necessary that the patient be warmed on his stomach;
et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient;	and signs of three cauteries according to this form and this figure and this quantity on the liver, removing the hypochondries, or where the sides of the spleen come;
et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi;	and it has a thickness between each cauterization of a finger;
et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere;	and let the cauterization be as long as the body, and do not press your hand too much on all the cauterization;
et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez;	and let it be so that the mucus of the heart is burned, and let the patient's right side be on his feet;
et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais;	and if he cannot, then let him be seated, and extend his legs, and lift his arms;
et c’est li forme:	and this is the form:
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors;	And if it is your intention, then cauterize these cauteries of the cuticular, if you are subtle and wise in the art, and beware that you do not burn the whole heart, for you would dry out the whole body;
et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	and that it does not come near the navel, for the blood vessels are very subtle in this place, and one sees the veins clearly.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile:	When there is an abscess on the liver, and you want to know if it is in the flesh of the liver or in the membrane:
s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort;	if it is in the flesh, the patient feels pain not too severe;
et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	and if it is in the membrane, he feels a sharp pain.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste;	And when this treatment touches the mirrors, it requires that the patient be treated on their head;
et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	and then indicate from below where the abscess is, and then heat the cautery which resembles a nut, whose shape is this:
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers;	And cauterize the cautery until the blood vessels are dry, and come near the sphincter, until the pore is completely closed;
aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez;	After the treatment according to the treatment of the injuries as long as it is healthy;
et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	and it is not suitable that anyone uses this cauterization except those who have studied for a long time in the art of medicine, and through whose hands these diseases have been corrected many times.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	Therefore, he can hardly work, and nevertheless it seems to me that it is better to leave him alone.
dou cautere de pleuresin	of cauterization of the pleura
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere:	The ancients said that one should perform cauterizations on the pleura with roots of aristolochia, and in this manner:
pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois;	take a root of aristolochia as long as you can find, the largest possible, and let it be dry, and let it be as thick and as long as your two fingers;
et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize I cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et II petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe;	and grind it into oil, and dip it in fire, and perform the cauterization between the shoulder and the neck, and perform two small cauterizations a little lower on the part that is below the beard;
et II cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc;	And apply cauterization between the fifth rib and the sixth, declining a little backwards;
et I cautere emmi le pis, et I autre sus l’estomac, et I entre II espaules, et II as II costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre II espaules;	and apply one cauterization in the chest, and another on the stomach, and one between the shoulders, and two on the sides of the chest opposite the cauterization which is between the shoulders;
et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	and do not press with your hand, but make it open as in applying an ointment.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme;	And the authorities said that no man should use fire cauterization on a similar rash, and they warm it and put it between the ribs, until it comes to that abscess;
et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	and this is without pain, as we have said concerning the abscess of the liver.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	But in this work there is fear that the patient will die now, or a fistula comes which cannot be healed.
de la mice	of the bladder
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent III manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the disease of the tooth that we have spoken of in the divisions of treatments, and it does not profit, then there are three manners of cautery that are good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant;	One of the manners is that you make three or four cauteries, in a row according to the length of the tooth, according to the shape of the cautery of the flesh that we have spoken of before.
et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos;	and do not press your hand on the entire cautery, and let the patient sit up on his back;
et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule;	and another manner of cautery is that you heat the cautery that has two nerves, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder;
et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	and lift the skin that is near the tooth, or where the cold of the patient comes from the left side, and let the elevation that you lift the skin according to the skin, according to the length of the body, and the cautery be according to the width of the body.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII.	After that burn the inflamed areas until the heart is perceived from the other side, and then apply the cauterization, and thus in this way there will be four.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	And if you want, then cauterize all of the cauterization to three areas.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After the cure when it has obtained purification by long tension, and this is better than the other cures mentioned before.
de ydropisie	of dropsy.
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	Cauterization is not suitable for droptics, except in the manner that is called "ascites".
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis;	When you cure according to the methods that we have spoken of in divisions, and your cure does not profit me, then it is necessary that you do four cauterizations around the navel, and one on the stomach, and one on the liver, and one on the spleen, and two behind the back on the spine, and one on the right side.
et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	and let the cauterization be carefully applied near the spinal cord.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere;	Afterwards, leave the cauterization open for a long and tense purging, and do not neglect the treatment of the disease after the cauterization;
et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les II ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	and healing will hasten, and the two intentions will come together with the aid of God.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit;	The shape of the cauterization for the belly should be a spike which we have shown before.
et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	and that for the back should be olive-shaped, according to what has been set forth here before.
de l’enfleure des piez	of the swelling of the feet
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire;	When the feet are swollen in one who has dropsy, and are full of watery cysts, it is necessary that you cauterize on the back of the foot between the thumb and the little finger;
et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	and lift your hand with the cauterization without turning.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	And do not enter too much by depth, thus would be the outer layer of the citrine, and let the cautery be according to this form:
Aprés fai sus II jambes II cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire;	After that, apply on both legs two cauteries, one on each leg at the point of the cullet or knee;
et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe;	and let the cauteries be on the long, one below the kneecap in front and the other behind, in the middle of the leg;
et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse;	and leave the cauteries on for a long time without removing them, until the wound has issued;
aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	after the treatment of the other treatments that we have spoken of.
de la menoison	of the mentions
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures;	When a discharge from the belly comes from cold and moisture, so that the retaining and digestive virtues which are in the stomach and intestines are weakened, and cannot be cured by methods of treatments;
et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai I grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule;	and you see the patient suffering greatly and of strong virtue, then apply a large cauterization on the stomach according to what has been spoken of before, or the stomach cauterization, to cauterize in a circle;
et IIII cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout I cautere clavile subtil, et II cauteres sus les hainches.	and 4 cauteries around the subtle navel for every subtle cauterization of the spine, and 2 cauterizations on the hips.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et I cautere sus chaicun yle, et II petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see the moisture abundant and the patient suffering, have it cauterized on the thumb, and one cauterization on each heel, and two small cauterizations on the stomach below the navel, for the treatment is beneficial when it has good help.
de la cure des emorroydes	of the treatment of hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres:	When the hemorrhoids are at the foundation, or one or several, and are old and are of thick cold and moist humors corrupted, and are treated as we have said in sections, and it does not benefit, then make cauterizations:
III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois;	3 on the spine of the back, which is all divided into small portions and a little triangle, and 1 cauterization below the navel, 2 fingers.
et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile;	and if you think that his stomach is chilled, and the food does not digest, and one sees the face swollen, then one applies the large cautery on the stomach, as it was previously stated, and another on the liver, and another on the spleen with all the clamp cauteries;
et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	and let the cautery be applied for a long time.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After healing, leave it so that it is healthy.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the fleshiness which is called "thelul
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit;	When you cut into thelul, heat the cautery which seems to relieve, and then apply it all burned on the cut thelul;
et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort;	and leave it so that your hand reaches the birth of the vein, where the blood flows without being cut;
fai ceu une fois ou II, et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit;	do this one or two times, and if there is much of thelul, then cauterize each one as we have said;
aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez;	After the treatment of profitable members as long as they are healthy;
et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	and if you cauterize with a large cauter on the ulcer, it will have more aid.
de plaie mal curee	of a wound badly healed
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot bear cutting or surgical treatment, which we will discuss in its place, then comes a disease that cannot be healed except by cauterization.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	When there comes a fistula, and it is inflamed and irritated by putrid matter and rotten humors, then the doctor will prove with a subtle thread, and be careful that you know the depth of the thread as much as it has.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing;	After heating the cauter that seems to be in order, and put it in the fistula according to the quantity that the thread has entered, and renew the cauter as long as those rotten and corrupt bodies are burned, one time, or two, or three, according to the quantity of what is needed.
et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	and beware of the nerves that are beneath, and of the large veins.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans;	if the fistula goes to the body of the bladder and to the intestine, beware of these places, and do not make those wounds that are in the flesh, and think that it is not a perforating.
aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement;	after the cure, the flesh as long as it is healthy, and if the wound is healed, and the materials are pushed back together at length, then know that the wound is entirely healthy;
et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font;	and if the materials are not pushed back, know that the flesh is torn, and the bone is corrupted at the source;
et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	and thus like one of those things that we will tell about in its place.
de la maladie des reins	of the disease of the kidneys
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit;	When pain of cold comes to the kidneys, and of great swelling, and it does not take the shape of a woman, then it is necessary that you perform cauterization on the kidneys on one side and on the other with the clavicle cautery that we have spoken of before;
et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra III cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	and if we have the cauterizations in a straight line, there will be three cauteries, and they will provide greater aid.
de la vessie	of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et I a destre et I a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce;	When the bladder is weak and fragile from cold and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then make a cauterization on the outer part above the bladder, where the hairs of the pubic area begin, and to the right and to the left, and let each cauterization be as long as the width of a thumb;
et li fais I cautere defuers le dos, ou II se tu en as besoing;	and make a cauterization on the back, or two if you are in need of it;
et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	and let the cauterizations be arranged according to the previously described form.
de la marris	of the liver
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde;	When the liver is cold and moist, and does not allow for conception because of this, and the flowers are corrupted and their ends are delayed;
et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor:	and when they come, they feel great pain:
adonques covient il c’on li faice III cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et II cauteres defuers le dos;	then it is suitable to make three cauterizations around the navel, as we have said concerning the cauterization of the bladder, and two cauterizations on the back;
et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	and let the cauterizations be done with a key, as we have said.
de la hainche	of the thigh
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble;	When the viscous humors descend to the box of the thigh, and for this reason it moves from its place, and the sign is that the thigh is longer than the other when one measures them together;
et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a I cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle;	and the place of separation is found, then it is suitable that you cauterize the patient on the box of the thigh with a cauterization similar to a circle, and mark before the place around the box as it turns, so that the box is within the circle;
et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	and if there are cauteries such as those with which one cauterizes the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai III cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs;	And if these cauteries are not present, then make three cauteries of the large olive tree, and let the cauteries be as deep as all the abscesses;
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and heal them until they are healthy.
de la dolor de la hainche	of the pain of the thigh
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene:	When pain comes in the thigh, and it is from cold and moisture, and the patient is cured of what we have said in the section and the cure is not effective, and the illness is ancient:
adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	then it is necessary that you purge the patient of the thick humors with foul-smelling pills, or other good similar pills.
Aprés li fai cautere;	After you make a cautery;
et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres:	and the manner of the cautery is in two ways:
c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	It is to know assemblage of burning medicines, and fire cauterization.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz:	Fire cauterization is done in many ways, of which one is the following:
que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire;	that you cauterize on the box of the thigh three triangular cauterizations in this form, and it makes a deep and large wound, and there is between each cauterization a space the size of an egg, and let the cauterizations be olive-shaped;
aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	sometimes one makes a cauterization in the middle on the head of the thigh, because there are four according to this form:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche;	And if you see that one cauterizes with a circular cauterization which we have previously spoken of in the dislocation of the thigh;
mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	but make it in such a way that the circle encompasses the entire thigh, and all the spaces around the heart are dry.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	And this is the manner in which it is done for sciatica, when the pain is in the thigh, and does not seem to reach either the hip or the leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc;	And if it reaches the hip and the leg, have two cauteries made there where the patient says the pain is, and one cauterization above the knee four fingers, on the left side a little;
et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur;	and let the cautery be applied with a warm cloth, and let the thickness of the cauterization be that of a leather strap;
et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	and if the patient feels that the pain extends to two fingers from the foot or near the ankle, then cauterize there where he feels the pain three points or four at the cauterization which is called "points".
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus;	And if it is necessary, have more made;
et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	and if he knows that the pain is below the knee towards the thigh, have a cauterization made with the cloth cauterization or circular one, and take great care in all your cauteries that you do not leave the cauterization so long that you burn the nerves and the large arteries, and that you do not cause the patient more nuisance and contraction.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	And I myself have seen many who had cauterization on the leg near the foot, and it let them so that the leg became entirely swollen, and the foot also, and it was pierced and corrupted to the foot.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	After a abdominal solution where he got death.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	And if the pain is in two places together, perform cauterization in one and in the other, in this manner.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce;	And the wise men said regarding the cauterization of the thigh, that this is the method: make an iron instrument and let it be as thick as a walnut, or a little less, and let it be hollow and let one hollow be joined to another with the space of a nut.
et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait;	and let the hollows be open on two sides, and also be like nuts, and have an iron hand well made;
et c’est li forme:	and it is the form:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit;	And let it be heated until it is entirely red and gives off a sweet scent, and then apply it to the box of the patient's ankle, and turn on the healthy side.
et lou cauterize une fois I cautere reont et lou laisse III jors;	and let the cautery be applied once the fire cautery is ready and let it be for three hours;
et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens;	and then make a plaster of butter, and let the wound be covered for a long time;
aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	after the treatment of the joint until it is healthy.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent;	Albucasim says that we should use little of this cautery because of its danger, and few see those who use it;
et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	and however these are good cauteries, which one can suffer, and where they adhere to.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi;	The medical burning cauteries are that you make an instrument with notches in which descends the margin of the door, and let it be of copper or iron with a long edge, and in height two nuts, and between each one the quantity of the thickness of a die;
et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	and let them be open downwards and upwards, and join together according to this form:
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche;	Afterwards put on the bandage of the thigh to the patient lying on their healthy side, and press your hand much on the bandage of the thigh;
aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	afterwards put it between the two circles of the warm water which is warmed by the fire a little, and let it be for an hour or ten, and let the patient suffer from the heat and the burning of it.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu;	For it finds mortification as from fire;
et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit;	and when the mortifications have passed, raise your hand with the instrument and lift the thigh of warm water, and let it be for three hours, and put on a poultice as long as what is black from the eschar remains;
et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait;	and let it be for three hours that the purulence stays in the strait;
et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	and this would be the last aid after the treatment of wounds as long as it is healthy.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument;	And if the pain has extended to the thigh or to the leg, make an instrument that holds according to what you have done on the injured limb;
et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	and this is the manner of warm water, and I have written it or treated about the rectification of medicine.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	Take alkaline substance and living lime, as much of one as of the other, and grind them together, and put them in a new pot.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir;	or it should have a small hole through which the point of a razor can enter;
et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main;	and put that pot in another well-plugged pot, and put on it the alkaline substance and lime and sweet water, as much as there is of the powder when you have well sprinkled it with your hand;
et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	and let it be so until it descends to the water and freezes or congeals, then take all that water, and throw it on hot coals and on quicklime as before.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres.	And then it will be very sharp and will be administered in many medical treatments and in cauterizations of other limbs.
Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	For it makes work like fire, and also other medicines that one cauterizes well the haunch thus as thesis and myrrh and lime with soap, all these things mixed together.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	And Galen tells us of a cure in which a man was cured of the pain of the haunch and of the sciatic vein, and praised it highly, and said that no other cure was needed, and that he was healthy at once when this cure was made, and he bathed as he teaches hereafter.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie;	And apply in a similar way that you press the green fresh and dry litargire, and bruise it much with a bit of grease, and put it on the thigh and on the thigh and on the leg where the pain is, and the injury;
et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	and let it be for three hours and according to the quantity that the patient does not feel the burning anymore.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	And then make him enter into a bath so that his body is warmed a little, and make him enter into bed, and the pain will go away completely and he will be healthy.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	And know that one should not use cauterization of such medicines unless it is after the evacuation of the body.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout;	And Dioscorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with threads of linen, it helps much;
et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	and the cauterization should be done in a similar way.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	Take the knee and the fat of old oil, and put it on the pit that is between the thumb of the foot and the other called the heel pit.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains;	After taking dry fibers of goat's kidney, and dipping them in fire until they are charcoal, and then putting them on the wool, and leaving them there until they are stained.
et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee;	and do it again thus, and do not stop doing it until you think by sensation that it comes to the bone, and that the pain is eased;
et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	and this kind of cauterization is called "cauterization of the goat".
de la dolor dou dos	of the pain in the back
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, either from a blow or from percussion or from too great evacuation, or from similar things of cold matter spread, none of these things is worth cauterization, except for that which comes from an infusion of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne V cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir;	It is necessary after this that the patient is treated with foul-smelling pills or other similar things, that they are applied to the back, where the pain is, three signed lines of inch, and in each line a cautery or more according to the virtue and quantity that the patient can suffer;
et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»;	and let the cauteries be made according to the cautery that is called "points";
et se tu vues, fai III cauteres ou IIII au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	and if you see fit, make three or four cauteries at the middle clavicle according to this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor;	Many times this sickness comes to little children, and the signs of the onset are that they have a constricted arm when they get up, and fear;
et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	and you will find in the upper part of the spine of the back and in the appearance that comes on the other vertebrae.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this and you judge it to be cured, then cauterize it with the cautery of the vertebra according to this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	If the cautery touches each part of the spine equally.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	And if you see, that the cautery around the spine pricks two or three lines, and the points are close to one another.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	After the cure, anoint the limb as long as it is healthy according to what we have said, and beware that you do not apply cautery in awkwardness which is near a nerve.
de la dolor des jointes	of the pain of the joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere:	When the pain of the joints is from moistures that are spread to each member of the body, and when pain comes in the feet, which the doctors call "podagra" properly, and when it is of a cold cause and cures of medicines cannot cure it, then it is cured by cauteries in such manner:
fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	Make many cauteries around the joint of the foot, and let the cauteries be olive-shaped according to this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	And if it is necessary that you prick on the face of the foot, then make a cautery at the entire area where one calls «point».
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire;	And if the pains come near the knees and other joints, and this happens many times, then make a cautery on each knee three or four cauteries of each part, to all the olive-tree-like cautery.
et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	and if you have more of a trade, if you make more, but do not hold your hand further than the length that the shinbone is long.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	And if the pains descend near the knee and to the back, then administer the cautery that we have spoken of in its chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes;	And if the pains are in the hands, then make pricks around the forearm two lines;
et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main;	and if a point of pain remains in the fingers, then make pricks on each joint and on the hair of the hand;
et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	and if the pains come near the joints or near the shoulders, cauterize each part, and give good governance to the patient and apply remedies.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	For if you make him have good governance and you purge phlegm, he will be healed with the help of God.
de la routure dou syfac	of the rupture of the spleen or liver (or possibly 'spleen' alone
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor;	When a rupture comes into the anguish, and the intestines fall to the groin and it is newly, then it is necessary that when you cure the wound, that you do not touch the one that day;
et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre;	and that he uses things that loosen the belly, so that the feces come down from his belly;
aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors;	after making him sit on his back between your hands, and instruct him to hold his arm as long as the intestine is being repaired, and apply them to your hands, and sign from below the rupture on the bone of the hip, and make a sign that is similar to half a circle above the body;
puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Then heat the cautery of what kind it is:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	until it becomes white and throws away its sensibilities.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu;	Then reset the bowels to their place;
et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier;	and let the minister guide your hand so that they do not turn back;
et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains;	and open well the thighs of the patient, and put one cushion and one servant on the thighs, and another on the back who holds the hands;
puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os;	then put the cautery on the sign with all your hand, and hold it straight and hold it as long as you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, then recommend it again another time until you come to the bone;
et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere;	and guard subtly that the bowel does not protrude when you perform the cautery;
que tu ne le brulasses;	that you do not burn it;
et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	and that by this the patients do not die, or other evils.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	And know that when you do not come near to the bone with the cautery, your work is worth nothing.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure;	And it is necessary that the cauterization of children be subtle according to the measure of their bones, and for large people also large according to their measure;
aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	after three days cure the limb from the cautery of tar until the eschar is removed;
aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee;	after curing other ulcers until it be healed, and let the patient lie on his back for forty days until the wound is well dried;
et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	and it is necessary that their bandages be tightened for a long time, so that the boils do not burst when he gets up to go to chambers.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors;	And after forty days, when he wants to get up, a well-made splint should be applied to him, and the poultice for forty other days;
et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire;	and let it have good rest, so that it works little and guards against too great a repletion of drinking and eating, and of too high a temperature;
et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	and when it makes this teaching then it is completely healthy.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And I will speak later about the treatment of cutting in its chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	of the rupture of the belly
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur;	When ruptures come in other bellies and are connected, and you see that they do not grow anymore, then have made the cautery of the cautery repeated according to its quantity, and let it be the third of the heart;
aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit;	after the treatment according to what we have said;
et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	and none of the ancients have said that one should be cauterized with a cautery at three angles according to this form:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	but first mark the limit of the flesh and make a line across the width above the rupture, and another below, and hold in hand the entire cautery instrument.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But the first cauteries are lighter and more moderate.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	of pain residing in any member
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	When pain comes to any member, from a fall or from a blow, and that pain holds for a long time, and the cure of medicine is not effective, then it is necessary that it be cauterized with the cautery that is called "poins", and let the cauteries be according to the length of the member and its smallness and weakness and its virtue and location of torsions and of its pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien;	if it is healed from the first cautery, that's good;
se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	if it is not healed by that name, recommend another cautery on top of the first, for such is the custom that it must be changed on the member that is closest to it, for which reason it is necessary that you do the cauteries until the patient is healed.
de meselerie	Of mixture
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	The mixtures are helped many times by cauterization with great assistance, and likewise the illness that comes from the corruption of phlegm and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief:	When you want to cauterize, beware that the illness is at its beginning, and if it is curable according to what we have said in the division, and does not descend nor stay, and you doubt that the corruption does not infect the whole disease, then make a cauterization on the head:
I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous;	Put one cautery on the head to the nue, and the other towards the forehead at the end of the eyebrows;
et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel;	and two on the two horns, and one behind on the shoulder blade;
et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir;	and let it be so that the cautery reaches to the bone, and so that the crusts come out from there so that the vapors of the thick humors can come out;
et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	and the cauterization on the mouse according to what it is in front of.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse;	And if the mixture is spread all over;
et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et I cautere en som lou neis, et II cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et VI cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et I grant sus la crupie et I autre delez, et II sus les II espaules;	and it is manifestly necessary that you apply the cauterization of these cauterizations that we have mentioned on the head, and one cauterization on the nape of the neck, and two cauterizations on the spine of the neck, and six cauterizations on the spine of the back, and one large one on the pubic area and another below, and two on the shoulders;
et II sus les coutes, et II sus les tendrons dou pis, et I sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains;	and two on the hips, and two on the tendons of the feet, and one on each joint of the hands and of the feet, and on the palms of the hands;
et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler;	and beware of the nerves that are on the rear calf, that you not burn them;
et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et I autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et I autre sus lou foie.	and sometimes make a cauterization on the bone of the finger, and another on the bone of the stomach, and another on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite;	And know that the more I do of cauterization, the more I do to help, and it brings him profit;
et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	and know that the patient does not feel a point of pain from the cauterization as much as they feel it, because the body is already entirely corrupted.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	And it is necessary that the cauterization be large and small according to the limbs and joints, according to what you will find in the manners of the cases.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	After the cure, treat the limb with flour of wheaten bread and honey and other treatments until it is healthy.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre;	When inflammation comes to any limb and is treated with medicines and oils and plasters, and it is not healed, then have cauterizations on the limb according to its size and smallness.
et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur;	and let the cauterization be a little within the thickness of the skin;
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat the joints until they are healthy.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure;	And sometimes a cautery is applied to the hand and to the foot and to the back, at the exit of the nerve that moves the limb, and thus if it is the bone that is swollen;
et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	and in no way should one interfere unless they are knowledgeable about the limbs and the exits of the nerves moving the body.
de albaras	of Albucasis
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color;	When the disease called "albaras" has grown, and the instruments of medicine are of no value, then cauterize with a cautery somewhat deep, according to the quantity of the thickness of the skin, until the whiteness is removed, and its color is changed;
puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie;	Then treat with flour of vetches and of lentils with rose oil and leaves of plantain, and blood of colt and blood of almond, each a part;
et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	and be wrapped together, and be tied with a bandage, and be elevated to the level as long as it is healthy.
li cure de chancre par cautere	the treatment of cancer by cauterization
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	When cancer comes at the beginning, and you want to stop it, then cauterize with a cauterizing iron which seems a circle, all around the tumor of the cancer.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre;	And all the wise men said that one should make a cauterization in the middle of the cancer;
et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois;	and however this does not seem good to me, for I fear that it would be ulcerated and corrupted, and I have already seen it happen many times;
et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	and a more proper thing is that it be cauterized around, with the cauterizing iron which is called "circle", as we have said in many cauterizations.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	of the swelling that cannot be measured
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens;	When some people have a disease called "adubelati", and it comes from the excess movement or because of the superfluous humor that it causes, or because of the weakness of the patient when he is decrepit (that is to say too old) and he has little blood, or because of the tension;
et tu la vues haster de meurer:	and you hasten the stopping of moving:
adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant;	then you cauterize around many small cauteries by pricking;
aprés le laisse ensi.	after that, leave it thus.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	For it hastens the stopping of moving.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you perceive the need to cauterize everything, heat the cauterizing iron according to what its form is:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	And put your hand in the middle of that disease which is called "adubelati" until the cauterizing iron has penetrated the heart, and let the cauterizing be such that the patient feels relief in some manner so that the course of the corruption is alleviated.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	After the treatment as long as he is perfectly healthy.
li cure dou feu par fer	The treatment with fire by means of iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	Another kind of illness is what is called "corrosive", and it is nothing other than a gangrene of a limb, because it eats away the limbs just as fire does dry wood.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est;	If you see this illness in a person who can suffer cauterization with fire, then heat the cauterizers little and large, according to what is needed for the person or where the illness is;
aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	After the cauterization of all parts, as long as you eradicate all the corruption, and nothing of it remains, that everything which is corrupted should be removed.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	And then let it be for three days, and apply to the limbs cauterized a soothing balm with oil, until the burns from the fire are removed, and all the corruption.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	After the treatment of painful hemorrhoids there is bleeding.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin;	And if you see that after three days healthy stool does not appear, it's a sign;
et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	and if not, then restart the cauterization on that which has remained from the corrupted limbs.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu;	And this disease has sometimes been cured with sharp medicine instead of fire cauterization;
mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division:	but nonetheless fire cauterization is of greater aid, and I have already spoken about the treatment with sharp medicine in the division:
pren la quant tu en as mestier.	take the quantity that you have in your profession.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	of the pores that come to the feet
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	Many times it happens that to the feet through wounds is born a disease which is called "fistula" according to our intention, and is a gross faulty thing that afflicts the foot.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	And the cauterization of this disease is according to two methods.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	It is to know the cautery of fire, and the cautery of hot water.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges;	Cautery of fire is that you heat the cautery head as if it were a feather pen, and made of good iron to the measure that it can pierce the nail from all sides, and that it has subtle edges;
aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou;	afterward put all hot on the nail, and turn your hand all around the nail until it comes to the bottom of the nail;
et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture;	and let it stay thus three hours until it induces a purulent discharge;
puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	then make a plaster of wild mallows bruised with vinegar, and let the plaster stay on all night, and the nail will fall out and will be disrooted from its roots.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat the leg of the joint with a warm poultice as long as it is sore.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude;	And if they are turned by various aches in the body, and often occur in the hands and feet, then you must apply cautery of hot water;
et est en teil maniere:	and it is in a similar manner:
pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues;	take a chain of iron or a needle, or a thorn from a vine, and put it on the nail and the flesh, that is to remove the warts;
et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine;	and put the chain on so that it penetrates all around, then you put a little warm water, and hold your hand firmly, and press your hand in turning so that the edge of the chain comes to the root of the nail, and then find the hot water penetrating just to the root;
et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre;	and let the patient suffer a little the burning of the hot water for an hour;
puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	Then let it be, and it will tear out all its roots entirely.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	Do this afterward, as long as you scratch all those that are on the body, then cure the ointments which cause the flesh to swell.
li cure dou trembler	the cure for trembling
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices IIII cauteres ou IV sus l’espinee dou dos, I cautere entre chescune espinee;	When some people shiver from cold or from nerves, or from quartan fever or other, it is fitting that you do four cauterizations or four on the spine of the back, one cauterization between each vertebra.
et I cautere ou pez, et I sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire;	and one cauterization at the foot, and one on the stomach for an olive cauterization;
si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	it will leave off the shivering, and it will hasten the health from the cold illness.
des pustules puans	of pus-filled pustules
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	Sometimes appear on the bodies of the sick, boils or pus-filled pustules, which come from corrupted thick materials.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule:	If it happens first that they appear to make a cautery on each head of the pustule:
un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	a subtle cautery of the paste of myrtle, from which the point is taken to be seized by fire, or of the root of aristolochia long, or of the lentick cautery.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez;	And sometimes the cautery is done at the beginning when it appears, in this manner, and they cannot grow again beforehand, but are broken up the superfluities from which they come, and are healthy;
mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	but it is necessary that this be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	when the artery is cut
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses;	Many times there are great outflows of blood from the artery that is cut at the wound that comes to the surface, or at the incision of the abscess, or at the cautery of the limb, and similar things;
et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	and it is a very grievous thing to dislocate.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus;	And however when it happens to anyone, if you hasten to put your second finger on the wound of the vein, and hold it very firmly until the blood is stilled beneath your finger, and so that no more comes out;
puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge;	then apply to the fire the olive cauteries, many small and large ones as long as they are well reddened;
puis empren I, ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	then take I, either large or small according to the wound and the limb in which the artery is torn, and put the cautery on that vein where you hold with your finger, and hold the cautery as long as the blood is restrained.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement I autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if it should flow again when you lift your finger from the vein, and the cautery is insufficient, then quickly take another of the cauteries that are by the fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez;	And do not stop doing one thing after another until the blood is stanched;
et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide;	and beware that you do not injure the nerve that is nearby, and that another evil does not come upon the patient;
et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des IIII manieres que nos avons dit:	and be aware that when blood flows from the artery, one cannot very well stop it, especially when the artery is large, unless it is by one of the four methods that we have mentioned:
ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc;	or by cauterization, or by extraction when it is not treated, or by a strong tightening of a thread, or by medicines applied which have the power to stanch blood;
et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	and should be bound and tightened firmly.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	For one will not profit from the binding of tight ligation of cloths or placing hot things on, or other similar things, if it does not help a little.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne;	And if it happens to someone and he does not have a doctor or medicine present, then he should put his own index finger on the wound of the vein as we have said, and press firmly until it is stopped above the wound and above the vein;
et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez;	and do not move the finger, but rather keep it moist with cold water often so that it is very cold until the blood is congealed and thickened and stopped;
et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	and make inquiries beforehand about what he needs for cauterizations and for medicines.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	This book contains the treatments of stone disease
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres;	We have said in the first chapter about every disease for which it is necessary to use fire cauterization, or burning medicine, and the organs and the causes and the symptoms and the forms of the cauterizations;
et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	and I have placed that chapter from the head to the feet, and I will proceed in this chapter by the same method because it is easier to find what one looks for.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And thus I entrust to you, it is necessary, dear son, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the previous ones about cauteries, and for this reason it requires greater caution.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses;	For in the work of this chapter, there are often evacuations of blood when opening a vein, and incisions on abscesses, and treatments of wounds, and extractions of arrowheads, and cuttings into stone, and similar things;
ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	where there is doubt and fear, and many deaths occur.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	And I advise you that you do not undertake foolishness.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	For many kinds of people come to be cured.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice;	if there come those who are so accustomed to their illness that they die lightly because of the force of their disease, and the greatness of their evil.
et de ces doit on avoir paor.	and of these one should have fear.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit:	And of these it is given to whom its meaning is told:
«atendez, je sui garis»;	Wait, I am a leper";
et li maladie est despitouse.	and the disease is contemptible.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los;	It is not necessary that you consent to those who come to you with this condition, but put more caution in your honor than in your desire, and do not open foolishly but wisely that which you are certain of, and that which you can have taken and received.
et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie;	and make use of prognosis and indication in the treatment of your patients to whom health may be restored;
et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	and this will help you to acquire a good reputation, and glory, and a lasting memory.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Dearest son, may our Lord grant you good understanding and righteousness, and if you wish to aspire to the holy inspiration from His hand, amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	I have ordained this chapter by dividing it into sections, according to what it is before the chapter on cauterizations, which I have divided for you from head to feet, because you will find it easier to find what you need.
dou chief plein d’aigue	of the head full of anguish
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant;	It is known that this illness comes very often to infants at birth, and when the womb holds too tightly the head of the infant;
et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	and sometimes it happens for a hidden reason that one is not aware of.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors;	And I have never seen this illness except in infants, and most of those that I have seen hasten death;
et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	and for this reason it seems to me that it is better for me to leave the work in some treatments.
Et je vis I enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir;	And I saw an infant whose head was full of anguish, and the head became so swollen each day that it could not be supported;
et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os;	and let the moisture flow out as it was dying, and this moisture is gathered from under the bone on the spleen, between the heart and the bone;
et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large;	and the works are such that if the moisture is between the heart and the bone, and the abscesses are small, then you make in the head a wide incision;
et soit ausi longe com II nous, tant que li mostor corre;	and let it be as long as two nuts, until the moisture runs;
et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	and see to it the form of a spatula or spoon;
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai II fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is more thick and the abscess is larger, then make two incisions in the manner of a cross, according to this form;
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut:	And if the moisture is under the bone, and the signs that you see the sutures of the head open on each side, and the water flows out when you press it with your hand inside, and this does not seem to be an answer;
si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief III fendures selonc ceste maniere:	if it happens that you make three incisions on the head in this manner:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	And after the incision, extract the moisture entirely from it.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor;	After that, bind the wounds with bandages and powders, and put on wine and oil, and leave it so until the fifth day;
puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	then undo it, and treat the wound with dressings and with ointments, and let the head be strained, and give to eat to the patient dry food without much moisture until the limb is comforted and healed.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue;	And another method of incision is that you examine the size of the abscess and the gathering of the pus;
car aucune fois est elle devant;	for sometimes it is in front;
aucune fois derrier;	sometimes behind;
aucune fois en destre;	sometimes on the right;
et aucune fois en senestre.	and sometimes on the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir;	Cut then the place where the abscess opens, and the filling of the needle, and do it according to what you have the power to do;
et warde que tu ne coper l’artere;	and beware that you do not cut the artery;
et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	and let flow a little blood, so that the patient does not die from lack of blood and evacuation of moisture.
de reume	of rheum
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les II arteres.	When there is a certain disease called "catarrh" in the eyes or in the chest, and the disease is chronic, and the treatment with medicine is of no benefit, then the last resort is cauterization with what one cuts the two arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief;	It is necessary then, when you cut the veins, that the patient makes his head fall back;
aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel;	after he rubs the place with a coarse cloth until the arteries appear, then the patient tightens his neck against the whole cloth;
puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues;	Then look where the vein beats, and the limbs of one and the other are after the ears, and a little are raised;
puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	Then mark the limbs from the middle, then cut one and the other with a sharp spatula on both sides, as long as the vein extends to the bone, and that is done by the width of the head.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com II dois au traver.	And if you see, push the spatula below the artery and cut upwards, cutting also as the two veins across.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is cut, then the blood jumps out continuously upwards.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os;	And if the artery does not appear on feeling, then it is necessary that you measure the quantity of the thickness of three fingers, then mark from the middle and make it go to the bone;
et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere;	and what is necessary to put blood out if it is one sixth, and by chance a little more or less, according to what the patient can suffer, and the replenishment of the artery;
puis regarde la plaie:	then examine the wound:
s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	if it remains on the pointed bone of the hip, if the disease that causes abscesses does not come, then strain the wound and bind it, and treat it with ointment until it is healed.
de emigrainne	of migraine
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When ancient migraine comes, and sharp catarrh, because of the moistures of tears and the heats in the temples and old forsakenness and similar things, and it is treated with various methods of cures of medicine and all that does not profit it, then we cauterize the arteries of the temples and their cauterization, as we have related.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit;	And the manner of their extraction is that the patient should shave the hairs from his temples, and attend to the artery which opens in the temple, for it opens well by its beating, and is poorly replaced in some men who are too cold;
et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement;	and if it is put back, then remove the patient's neck from certain bandages, then rub the limb with a coarse cloth, and wrap the limb in a warm, damp dressing until the artery appears clearly;
puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	then take the spatula of which is the shape:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie;	then scratch the skin lightly until you come to the artery, then draw it up with the pincers, and separate it well from the tendons that are attached to each part;
et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	and if the artery is delicate, then turn it at the point of the needle, then cut it from that part according to the quantity of the two blood vessels.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	For if it is not cut, then the blood does not flow at all.
Et trai dou sanc des VI c/, jusc’a III;	And let the blood flow from the six hundred, up to three;
et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en II leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc;	and if the artery is large, then it is necessary that you tie it with two threads of strong silk thread, which can withstand the pressure before the wound, and withstand the flow of blood;
puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les II liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez;	Then remove the excess which is between the two lips in that same hour, and then, if you see, if the cauterization of the cautery is next to the bone as long as the head is removed;
et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	and it's a work for the doctor, if the patient has no fever and he is of a warm temperament.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors:	For cauterizations are helped in ending the illnesses:
por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	because it is of greater aid to the illnesses.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites;	Where it is necessary for the extraction of the arteries that one fills the body with old cotton and puts it on well-made tents;
et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and when one unwinds them, let them be cured with dry medicines that cause flesh to grow, and with tents, until they are healthy;
et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez;	and without cutting the artery as long as you have work to do, if you are in a hurry to cure by cauterization, or you fill the body with vitriol and squeeze with your hand so that the blood is congealed;
et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient;	and if you have not that present, then put your finger on the place so long as the blood is congealed, and raise the limb from cold water as soon as the blood stops, and hold it steady as is necessary;
et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de II pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	and that which is more painful and less gentle in the extraction of the artery is that you cauterize the vein of this cautery cutting on two sides, but the cutting be well spaced to withstand longer their heat.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the extremities are too thin, they hold less heat.
Et doit avoir entre les II coutelz I doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les II leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en II leus;	And there should be between the two cuts a thumb of thickness, and then when you have signed to put the two limbs together, and you put the iron burning on until it comes near the bone, and cut the vein in two places;
et soient esloigniet entre les II chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout;	and be separated between the two parts for it is not suitable to be joined by this cautery in every respect;
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	and it is the form of the cauterization:
des larmes	of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis;	When the tears of the eyes are descending from the veins that are on the outer skin of the head, and it does not benefit from any medical treatment that one makes, and you see the face of the patient become inflamed, and feel on the forehead a numbness as if from shivering;
et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	and if the eyes are tender and moist so that the hair of the papers is stained, and the papers are scorched, and burned by the heat of the tears, then there is need for this treatment.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front;	And the ancients called it "confused cure", and it is that you make for the patient who has this disease the hairs that he has on the forehead, then make three equal incisions on the forehead according to the length of the forehead;
et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres;	and let one of the incisions be thus, two fingers deep in the forehead going downwards to the nail, and the other two on either side of the papers, and beware of the incision of the arteries that are on either side of the papers;
et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins;	and stretch out your hand from the continuation of the two jawbones, and let each wound be the quantity of three fingers across the joints;
et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	and prepare a piece of sponge and bind many rags around it to absorb the blood, then cut the spatula sharp from two parts where there is the shape:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision;	of the incision that is above the temple just to the second incision;
et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les II fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	and scrape out all the core that is between the two fissures to the entire surface which is on the bone, then make another cut from the middle incision just to the other second, and then extract this spatula.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	if you cut in the first fissure the instrument that is called "cultellaire", and it is very sharp on one side, and on the other side is soft, not cutting, and this is its shape:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	And put the cauterized part cutting towards the flesh near the heart, and let the cauterized part soften towards the bone, and let it thicken until it reaches the middle fissure.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer;	And cut off the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes as long as the incision is continuous up to what opens from the heart, and then make another cut in the middle fissure up to the other side;
et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris;	and then extract equally from the blood, and press the limb for the blood taken;
puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne;	then put in each fissure a tent of old cotton, and put on draped moistened with wine and oil and vinegar, and guard that abscesses do not come;
et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and on the third day untie the linen, and apply a great plaster of hot water, then the treatment of unction with basilicon oil, and other treatments that one cures wounds, until it is healed.
dou reume des eulz	Two humors of the eyes
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees;	When in any corner there is an acute and customary cataract, and you see the eyes thin and small, and the sight weakened, and the pupils burned;
et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue;	and the hair falls out, and the head is deeply painful, and the patient is in agony;
adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	then it is known by these accidents that these matters and this catharr do not come from many veins, and the doctor knows what the cure is, if it exists.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	And it is that you command the patient to shave his forehead, then make a great incision in the forehead, and another of two fingers in width.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os;	And let the incision be from the left temple to the right temple, and it shall be just to the bone;
et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier;	and dislodge your hand from the nerves of the temples that move to the brain;
et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin;	and when the bone is exposed, suck out all the blood with a sponge, and then swab between the two lips of the wound and put in a lot of cotton, and bandages of linen;
puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut;	then apply warm dressings moistened with wine and oil, and guard against a hot abscess;
quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	when it is inflamed, it is necessary that you rub the bone as long as the flesh begins to grow, then treat it with caustic things, which cause flesh to grow.
En teil maniere:	In a similar manner:
pren II parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine IIII parties, et en fai emplaustre;	take two parts of flower of centaury, and four parts of celandine, and make a plaster;
et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	and administer it to these wounds to cause flesh to grow throughout.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the stopping of the ears
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des IIII choses:	All that falls into the ears is one of four things:
ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer;	Oats, or beast, or stone of mine or similar things as iron.
ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois;	or seeds, like jasper, beans, peas;
ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	or flowing things such as aqua and urine and similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	When there is a stone in the ear or another kind of thing that does not belong to the ear, nor grows in the ear, then put the ear in the sun.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction;	If you see the stone, apply a poultice of violet oil or oil of cypress, then attempt extraction;
et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine;	and make him sneeze with a concoction, and stop up his nostrils when the sneezing comes, and put pieces of cloth or wool in the ear;
et estent l’oreille au desus.	and press the ear downward.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure;	Many times a discharge comes out through this treatment;
et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	and if it does not come out by itself, then one must perform a subtle extraction with careful pinchings, from which this is the method:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin;	If it comes out by itself through the pinchings, that's good;
se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure;	if not, then one must perform an extraction with a subtle hook of small doubled thread;
et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne;	and if it does not come out through that, then make a thread of silk and push the head of the thread through the hole of the ear strongly, and stuff that which is around the thread with wax so that the veins cannot enter with the thread;
puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit;	then pull it out strongly, for many times it comes out as we have said;
et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor;	and if it does not come out in that manner, then take glue of this kind and take the arteries, and put some instrument which has a point for doing that, and put a little cotton around;
puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	Then press the flesh against the stone or whatever it is, and pull strongly.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme;	And if it does not come out from all these things that we have said, then hasten to cut the ear as well as the abscess is hot and swollen, and spasms;
et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant;	and the manner of the cutting is that you first let blood from the patient's head, and extract blood according to the measure of its virtue, then have the patient sit between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and make a small cut in the root of the ear at the fat or dependent flesh;
et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche;	and let the cut be as wide as a reed, until you reach the stone, then extract the bone according to your power, and suck it hastily with your mouth;
et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and the treatment until he is healthy.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction;	And if it's a grain that is embedded and has swollen, then administer extraction;
et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre I spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	and if it cannot exit, then apply the spatula needle subtly according to this form:
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	and administer an incision of that grain.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces;	But do not do it when you think that the grain is moistened by the moisture of the ear, until you have made many pieces;
puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	then extract it with subtle pinchers and a sucker, as we have said, so that the extraction is alleviated.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	In the case then that there is a discharge in the ear, it is necessary for the patient to use a remedy of condiments first, and fill the ear with old cotton.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	And let it rest on the same ear where the discharge is.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	If blood comes out because of that, it's good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu;	If this is not so, then take many stones according to the length of your hand and fingers and toes, and heat them a little by fire;
et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille;	and put them in the patient's ear or through his ears, and rub on the soles of his feet on the other side, and make friction with another foot on the foot that is by the ear;
et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer;	and do not stop rubbing foot against foot until the fever has entirely gone, and thus the fever will be entirely gone;
et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars;	and if you see, then take a reed, and thrust one end into the ear, and the other end is pressed against fire until the hottest part of the reed is burned;
puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	then do another piece of the reeds in the same way until the fever is entirely gone, as we have said before.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division;	In the extraction of a beast, if it is small in body, such as a flea and similar things, treat it as we have said in the section;
mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures;	but if it is of large size so that one can feel it, then administer the extraction of splinters;
et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	and it is the lightest thing to remove what is in the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil:	In the removal of worms from the ears, when you perform the cure as we have said in the section and treatise on distillations, and the cure is not beneficial, then it is necessary to examine the ear in sunlight:
s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	if there are no visible worms, then treat them as subtle splinters, and if they are not visible, take the chain from which this form is made:
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	And let it be narrow at the top and wide at the bottom.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine;	And insert the thinnest end into the ear according to the quantity of the suffering of the patient, then suck firmly on the chain;
fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	do this often until all the worms come out.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere;	And if they do not obey to come out, then stuff cotton into the cavity as I have said in the stone;
et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations;	and if they do not come out readily as we have said, then administer distillations that the old ones have experienced in the treatment of worms, and you will find them or the treatment of distillations;
et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	and if you administer your oils and medicines in the ear with all this equipment, according to its form as you see:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a I petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller;	And be it of silver or of brass, make strainers for the small openings, and above them put sieves to administer drops;
et por presser dedens la distillation a I estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren I raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton;	and to press inside the distillation the instrument of brass made for this purpose, and if you see the discharge and envelop it with cotton around the pointed end;
puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille;	then put your oil or your juice, and that which you see of your medicines in the cavity, and let the cane be in the ear;
puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille;	Then thrust your finger inside the nostril of the entire coty, and press your hand temporarily as long as the oil is distilled or removed from the ear;
et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations I poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille;	and let the patient feel inside, and let the distillations be warmed by the fire, just as one distills in the ear;
et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	and beware that it is not too cold, for the medicine would not be so good.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the stoppage of the ears
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles;	No child is born who does not have a passage in their ears;
et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir;	and this same thing happens to men through stoppage of a wound, or of a flesh born inside the ear, and these stoppings come sometimes deep into the ear, so that one cannot see it;
et aucune fois avient I poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	and sometimes it happens that the passage is blocked, and one sees it very well.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil;	That which comes from the depths, if one cannot see it, is of grievous sanitation in many conditions, and in this one sees that you must put the patient's ear to the sun;
et regarde dedens:	and look within:
se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	if you see the opilation apparent, if the work has all this spatula of which is its form:
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille;	And let it be sharp and cutting at the front and back entirely flat, so that it does not touch the ear;
se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	if the opilation is of flesh near or on the ear, if you hold it with subtle pinces, and cut it lightly, until that flesh is all removed.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	And if the opilation is deep in the ear, take a subtle rasp lightly and heat it a little by the fire, then put it on the ear.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille;	If you suspect an obstruction where the patient feels pain in the ear, perforate lightly, and be careful not to injure the nerves of the ear;
puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	then put in the ear a tent made from the width of the perforation, and the stopper in Egyptian application.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet;	Do this on no day until the wound is healed, or take a tent and stopper made from rose water, and powder with burnt vitriol;
et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	and if you see the ear inflamed, it is necessary that you pull out the tent and put in another moistened one made from wax which is made of rose oil and wax, until the inflammation is reduced;
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat him until he is healthy.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if discharge of blood comes, dip a sponge in cold water, and put it on the ear, and use other treatments that reduce the discharge of blood which are found in the treatises on distillations.
de la char des papieres	of the flesh of the papers
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines;	It is useful for the eyes when they come in papers of the eyes when they are moist and dry, it is necessary that you extend them with tongs and pincers, and the head of a spatula of its roots;
puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	then put on the limb vitriol ointment.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues;	And without removing it, if the cauterization of a subtle lenticular cauterizer is good, and the cauterizer after the incision is worth more;
et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines;	and many times repair, when anything remains from their roots;
et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	and when they are cauterized by fire, then are burned those roots and do not regrow again.
de la gresle	of the gravel
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz;	Many times come in papers of the eyes things that seem gravel in shape and hardness, and for this reason is this disease called "gravel", and it is a gathering of thick moisture in the paper of above and below;
li ovraiges est telz:	The works are such:
pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir;	it is obvious that the swelling decreases on one side and the other, and it is an easy thing to know;
fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	make a poultice of dough then lightly scrape off the roughness from each part, then take it with pinchers and cut it.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide;	if you cannot cut it without piercing a little of the skin, do not grievously harm the patient;
et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	and if the fissure is large, then assemble it with a suture, and treat it until it is healed;
et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	and if it is small, do not apply any pressure, for the organs will restore it at once and join with flesh.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre;	And if the swelling descends inside the ear towards the upper part, then turn the skin, and stretch the swelling with pinchers, and cut and press it from one side and the other;
et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien;	and if the plaster is removed by cutting, it does not cause any harm;
et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	and when the stone is cut, if you lift the eyelid of the salty eye, and treat the place that is full of stones until the patient is healthy.
de la graisse des eulz	of the fat of the eyes
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz;	Exinach is a fat that is formed in the corners of the eyelids, and this happens more to children than to old people, and it causes them much trouble with their eyes, and they get catarrh in the morning, and cannot look at the light of the sun because tears hasten to their eyes;
et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	and because of this they often lie on their faces, and sleep on them, and their eyelids become moist under their eyebrows, which the discharge and appearance of the exinach that appears in the eye have covered.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	And when you press the limb with your fingers and feel the hernia between them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain;	And the manner of the work is that the patient puts their head in your hands;
et puis pren I drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li;	and then take a linen cloth, and prepare a bandage in the manner of a circle according to the quantity that contains the hernia on each part, then put it on them;
et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle;	and press with your fingers on one side and the other, so that the hernia is gathered together within the circle;
puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne;	then make in the middle of the moisture a incision with a sharp scalpel, one finger wide, and not wider than the wound one makes on the vein;
et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach;	and make the skin deep enough that you come to the hernia;
et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	and in many cases the hernia comes out of the incision, in the shape of a piece of white fatty tissue.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars;	Remove then a piece of torn cloth from your fingers at the end, and turn your hand to the right and to the left as far as it is separated;
et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	and beware that you do not put in the fissure, that you do not approach the whole spatula to the eye, that you do not touch it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere;	And if the suture does not appear at the beginning of the fissure, then increase a little the fissure lightly until it appears;
puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	then remove it as we have said, then moisten cloths in vinegar and in water, and put on the wound, and bind with bandages.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	And if it is one of those men who break the seal and put on to corrupt that moisture which has remained.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat him until he is healthy.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if a hot abscess comes to the wound, then cure it with soothing plasters until it is healthy.
des poilz des papieres	The hairs of the papers
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz;	When in the papers hairs grow joined with other than their nature, and are inflamed, if they harm the eyes, and bring forth manners of sickness such as customary tears and softening of the papers and albuge, so that it is a cause of destruction of the eyes;
et est li cure selonc IIII manieres:	and the treatment is according to four methods:
ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	by fire cauterization together with heat, or by sharp medicine according to that which is said in the chapter of cauterization, and it is done either by incision and stitching or by burns, according to what I will say.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre;	It is necessary that you put the head of the sick person on your right shoulder, then turn the paper of the eye to your left hand;
s’elle est convertie, c’est boin;	If it is converted, it is good;
se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil desus;	if not, then insert a needle to the entire thread beneath;
et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai I fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur;	and let it be that the margin of the parchment where the hairs grow among these hairs, and pull the thread to the top across all the parchment, and turn it to the scraper;
puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit;	then make on the part under the parchment, under the hairs joined, to all the spatula scraping, from the large scissor to the small;
puis estrai I fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	then extract the thread, and put under the parchment a small piece of cotton and of cloth, then draw on the parchment a figure of ink, such as the shape of a witness, and however it is necessary that the figure be according to the quantity that you see elevated the parchment which is divided into pieces.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie;	And if a part of the trade where one cuts a large quantity of parchment according to that which the parchment is softened;
puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit;	then make on all the spatula along the two lines that you have drawn, and begin with the large scissor to the small;
et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute;	and let it be one of the fissures near the natural hairs in the thickness of a root, then put the onion in one of the two angles of the heart, then scratch everything;
puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce;	then assemble the two lips with a stitch of a needle to all the subtle thread of wool, and suck the blood, and make dry the superfluity of threads on the two eyebrows with any glutinous things, if you want to do this;
et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII;	and if not, then I have no cure, then leave the stitch and the threads until three or four days;
puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor;	then cure the wound without stitching of dry and constricting things, for the skin relives at the suddenness of the wound and the assembling of it, but the stitch is bad (as the ancients said), and it is work without fear;
et si a une autre maniere:	and if in another manner:
et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	and it is that you show the sheet of a figure which is as the liver of the spleen, as we have described, to three ounces of powder according to the form which is here:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	then cut that which overcomes the small equal forces according to the form which is here:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure;	And if you do not have the power to hold the clamps, and the thing is not equal, take a needle or thread, and put it in the middle of the figure;
et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment;	and put another thread through the large arm, and the second thread through the small one, and join between your two hands the threads equally;
puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	then lift your hand equally, and lift all the skin upon which you have signed, as we have described, then join the two lips of the wound by stitching, and cure it until it is healed;
et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans;	and if an abscess comes to a cutting, thus one calms the patient with similar soothing ointments;
et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit:	and sometimes it happens that the hair of the nipple are converted:
si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision;	if it is necessary that you use what we have said about the incision;
mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	but the stitching on one and the other is more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme:	The treatment of pains is according to this form:
et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai II caines par art, et II liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est;	and it is that you turn the nipple and the skin within according to what I have said, and then make two pains by art, and two subtle threads as long as the nipple and the width of the spatula is;
et cope as II chiés de II pars ou tu tiens les filz;	and cut at the two heads of the two parts where you hold the threads;
puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les II cainnes des II parties forment;	then assemble one and the other subtly on what protrudes from the nipple of the eye, and pull the two pains of the two parts forcibly;
et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	and let it be so for some days, and the skin that is constricted will die and putrefy and rot, until it falls off by itself.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	If it delays, if the scab forms a strong layer, then let the scab form until it is healthy;
et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil;	and when the wound has been sucked, and if the skin is lifted, and no longer will the hairs prick;
et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	and it is the shape of the two canthi that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of length and width;
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute I fil de soie souef et subtil;	the work is such that you take a fine needle, and put in it a thread of soft and fine silk;
puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc;	then assemble the heads and tie one and the other finely, and let the length of the threads be a palm of length;
puis ordene en la chasse I autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil;	then arrange in the flesh another fine thread of silk quickly, and tie the head of the two threads;
puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain;	Then put the patient's head in your hands;
et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil;	and let it be beneath the sun so that your work may be declared, for this is a subtle and minor work, then stick the needle to the entire lock at the root of the hair adjacent to it, and make it pierce the skin hastily as long as you draw it out from above the natural hair;
puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a I ou II ou III ou plusors;	then pull out the hair up to the lock, and stick into the lock that hair, if there is one or two or three or several;
puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	then pull out your hand so that the hairs come out entirely from the lock in the skin with the natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil;	And if the lock is treated and the hairs do not come out with it, then pull the lock downward with all the thread that you had prepared, until the lock comes out from the skin and you see it through the vision of the eye;
adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo II jors ou III, tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus;	Then if you treat the wound and the thread, and close the eye and let it close for two or three days, until the hair adheres to its place and the flesh grows over it;
et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne I poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	and if the hairs are small, then accompany the small hair with the natural long hair of the eyebrows, and let it be joined with that which you left, until it is lengthened and then lift it.
de la porriture de l’oil	from the corruption of the eye
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres:	When this disease called "alexati" or corruption comes into the eye, it is in two manners:
l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	one is natural, and the other unnatural.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	And it comes from a sudden blow, or from a cut, or from cauterization, and from similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee;	And the manner of the work in it is that you split the suture, and separate the lips of it, and put inside tendons of linen, and lift them until they are healed;
et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	and it is not necessary that you use in the treatment of those things that dry and restrict.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere;	For if you do that, the illness returns worse than the first one;
mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic;	but to apply things that soften, such as fenugreek;
et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	and the roots of a plant or tree and seeds of flax be cooked, and anointments of dyachylon melted in some oil, and it wrapped in a bandage, and the treatment of this.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant;	And the treasures of your treatment are that you take care that it not become sour according to the form it had before;
et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	and these works that we have said are not outside of remedies for this illness, that it does not return according to the form it had before.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	of the flesh that comes in the eye
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	This disease which is disordered is truly called "axacrati", and is natural and accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans;	The accidental comes from a wound and from a fissure and from cauterization and from similar things;
et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char;	and the way of the work in this case is that you take a needle, in which there is a double thread, and the stitch in the flesh, and you make it pierce from the left arm to the right, so that the threads come out at the two ends of the flesh;
puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	then the flesh is sewn over the top of the entire needle, and it is cut with a spatula wide.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin;	And if the shape of the papier returns according to what is needed, it is good;
se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere;	if not, then take a rasp and put it in the fissure, and turn the papier, and make two fissures or cut within the papier;
et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»;	and let the head of the two fractures of the two angles of the incision that you have cut, and make one angle so that when they are assembled, the figure is as the figure of a letter which has no "I griesche
puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne;	then sew up that flesh, according to the quantity that its edges are adapted, with that which follows the parchment, then join the two separated parts, and sew them with a thread of linen.
puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat it with what we have said about softening medicines, and with bandages, until it is healed.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant;	And if the sickness comes from a fracture or from a surgical incision or from a cauterization, then you should make a flat incision beneath the hairs of the parchment, and according to what is written before;
puis desevre entre les II leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit;	then separate between the two lips of a bandage, as I have said;
et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil;	and one must perform the work according to the form of the illness, for it is very diverse in form, and the wise masters prepare a device for all that they can do to make the shape return to its natural form;
et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	and the same patient, according to what work and instrument is needed in various conditions.
dou soudement de la papiere	pain suddenly in the bladder
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut;	When this sudden pain has come to men in such a manner that the bladder is seized with the white of the eye, and cannot move or perform its natural functions, then you must put the point of a razor under the bladder, and lift it up;
et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil;	and you stretch it with pincers, until you cut what is adhering to the subtle spatula, which should not be too sharp nor too cutting, so that the patient cannot suffer that the too sharp spatula does not injure the eye;
et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil;	and let your incision be such that you scratch the assembled one lightly, so that the skin regrows according to its natural form;
et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere;	and it heals the entire assembly, and sometimes forms in the oily bitter sauce, and the sweet water of the liver;
puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef;	then put between the skin and the oil a thread of flax, and put on the oil wool moistened in abundance of egg;
et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	and after the third day, apply sweet liver and hot things until it is healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	of the unction of the oil
Saiches que li ungle est selonc II manieres:	It is known that the unguent is in two manners:
elle est nervouse et semblans a I dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om;	one is nervous and similar to a hard skin, and another which is not nervous, but is similar to a white moist congelation, which when one touches it with iron and cuts the flesh with pincers, it cannot be felt;
et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	and one and the other symptom increases towards the large artery, and grows little by little until it covers all the vein and all the light and the movement of the eye.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz;	And the manner of the incision is that the patient puts his head in a position, then covers his eyes;
et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus;	and raises the skin with one hand, then takes the needle to the pinches of small doubling, and stretches it to the underside;
puis pren une aguille, et i met I poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et I fil fort;	then takes a needle, and puts the hair of a horse, or of a cow, or of an ox, and a strong thread;
et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement;	and doubles the point of the needle a little and puts it in the nail, and pierces it with all the needle, and ties the nail with a thread and stretches it to the underside, and scrapes all the hair the cost of the nail which follows the prune and the thread to the hair just to the head, then cuts the remaining part in the root of the artery with all the spatula subtle and small forces, and lets the natural flesh or artery, so that by the incision does not come the body of the arteries accustomedly;
et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit;	and sometimes the nail adheres to the tendon solely, and to the thread, as we have said;
puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	then one scrapes all the spatulum gently from where this is the shape:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie;	And take care that the spatula does not touch the thin flesh and tear it, and that the needle is not perforated;
et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor;	and after the incision, put in the eye a little of powdered salve, and made from litharge, and let it stay there until the next day;
puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	then one cures that which is necessary as long as he is sick.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines;	And if the nail is not numb, and you cannot push the needle, and the nails cannot enter, often this type of nail is cured with medicines;
et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	and grows thus as I have described in the division, and if you see it covered, or the eye of the patient is closed, and take the spatula lightly a little sharp according to this shape:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor;	And rub the onion gently upwards, and if you see that it diminishes somewhat and the reason presses upon it, then distill from your mouth into the hollow cylinder made of litargire and red collier and broiet, and stop up the oil until the next day;
puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	then resume the other work according to this same method, as long as it is all bone.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing is contrary in the oil, as with a hot abscess, then anoint it, and first cure the hot abscess until it is healthy, then resume the work as before, until it is healthy.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne;	And if the appearance of the flesh of the arm causes great harm in the oil due to a serious wound, then suck on the wound, and cut off a part but not all, so that no pus comes from the wounds;
puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	Then distill in the red oil collirium which is made from litharge.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	from the flesh that grows on the plum tree
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste;	It is in the eyes of some men that red flesh grows, and covers the plum and presses on the papers and turns to the defect, and resembles a rose of baluster;
et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force;	and the work of it is that the patient puts his head in a warm place, then opens the eyes, and takes out all that flesh with sharp scalpels, and supports it with force;
puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige;	then cut the first flesh, and continue cutting to the root until the end, and beware that you do not spill the oil on the work;
et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre;	and let the incision of the spatula be as we have said in the incision of the ingle and the small forces that one cuts with the Sebile bone, as the form shows after this chapter where it is demonstrated;
et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut;	and when the incision is completed and all the flesh is removed, then apply the oil of distilled broom or you distill red collirium and similar corrosive medicines, and put on the wound cotton with vinegar of rose, so that it is cauterized by hot aposteme;
et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut;	and if it remains nothing, and the blood cold overcomes, and you doubt hot aposteme, then leave the oil and treat the aposteme with things that appease the hot aposteme;
puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	then return to your work as long as it is healthy, and thus do where the flesh is adjusted in the oil by this similarity.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil;	But nevertheless it is necessary that you lift the treatment of each weak oil from the natural way;
et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer;	and from the accidental way, in work of iron;
et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	and do not put your hand in any of these works until you see that this member is suffering from the work.
des voines des eulz	Of the veins of the eyes
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	There are red veins that are hidden under the eye, and take away its function and weaken the eye entirely.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel;	It is necessary first that you examine the eye, in which the vein is, if it is outside, and not another disease of the eye besides the vein;
adonques le coil en teil maniere:	then take the vein in a suitable manner:
comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	instruct the patient to put his head in your lap, then press those veins all along the shoulder according to your wisdom, and let the shoulders be subtle and double according to this form:
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en I cors selonc ceste forme:	And let there be two shoulders of equal size on the body according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil;	then press the vein with force subtly, and let the blood come out hour after hour, until you see the veins of the eye move again;
et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes;	and beware that you do not block the eyes at the points of the spatulas, and perform this work at midday before the sun, and be very careful in your work so that you do not touch the veins except those.
et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	and when you have done this, then distill into the eye a green and red collirium to corrupt what remains of the cataract.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez;	And if you do not have the power to collect all that in that hour, then make a plaster on the eye with things that ease the pain of the eyes, and let it be for some hours until the pain is eased and the abscess is relieved by heat, then resume according to this method which is described before, until it is healed.
et c’est li forme des forces:	and these are the forms of the fractures:
de la fistule de l’oil	of the fistula of the eye
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule:	The physician calls them "arissati" fistulas:
quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	when you treat them with cauterization and hot burning medicine according to what I previously said, and it is not healed, then a wick is put in the wound where it should drain, and pull out all the moisture that is there, until the bone is exposed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme;	And when the bone is exposed, and you see the corruption and blackness, then remove all the instrument of which this form is made;
et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a I chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	and it is called " rough head", and let the iron be made sharp to a pointed end, and let it be pointed like a file as it is in the present form:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese;	And put on the bone of the corrupted flesh, then turn it between your two hands, and press your hand a little until you feel that the corruption has been removed;
et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	and do this sometimes, then restore the place with medicines that draw out.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez;	if the places are swollen, and there is a tumor, and the body of the bowel is swollen, and it remains thus for 40 days, and it does not suppurate and is not abscessed, and no bad accident comes, know that he is healthy;
se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme:	if it is not so, then there is another trick for bringing the fistula to the pierced hole of the naval according to this method:
et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	and it is that you discover the bone a second time with iron, and with sharp medicines, and when it is discovered, then take the iron according to this method, and let the head of the iron be at three angles, and let the handle be tapered up to the head as you see here:
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif;	then put it on the bone of the arm, and withdraw your hand from the elbow a little, then turn all the iron until it pierces the bone and the patient feels it by that which comes in if he puts his hand on his naval;
et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif;	and then restore the limb with dry medicines, as I have taught you, and when the flesh becomes numb and hardens the limbs, thus it goes to the matter at the kidney;
si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	it is a lighter thing for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	of the discharge of the eye
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide;	When the eyes are open and the pain is everywhere, and it does not come from disturbing the kidney, nor emaciation, then it is necessary that you read to the patient;
puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil I liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz;	then apply the ointment, then put leeches or apply heat to cause suction, then apply on the eye a plaster made of acacia and aloe and incense and sarcocolla, and then extract the eye, and fill it with bandages and dressings;
et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en IIII, et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier;	and the manner of the dressings is that you take dressings soft enough, and fold each one in four, and then put one on top of the other according to the quantity that the eye needs;
puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir;	Then strain by means of a hard bandage above, and reapply the ventoses to suck without piercing.
puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout;	Then apply the ventoses and let the oil be strained for a day and night, and if the ulcers become soft, then you must strain them a lot;
puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin;	Then apply the ointment after the day and night, and if you see the oil repairing, it's good;
se ce non;	If not;
si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then reapply the plaster and the dressings and the ointment and the ventoses until he is healthy.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	of rupture of a torn vein
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com I grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir;	When ruptures come in the torn vein, then it opens, and comes out of the fibers like a grain of resin, and is horrible to see;
adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait I fil double des la partie dou larmier;	Then if you want to close the wound, the work is such that you put a needle in the root of the affected part just above the skin, then put another needle where it has the double thread of the part of the armier;
et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition;	and make it pierce, and leave the first needle according to the disposition;
puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef;	then cut the thread of double wire and tie a part of the vein around, and constrain it well, then extract the needle and put on the moist woolen cloth in abundance of vinegar;
et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee;	and let it be until the thread adheres with the vein, then treat the wound with comforting things until the wound is healed;
et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and often the wound is constrained by the vein enclosing a part of a circle of cloth, until it is healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost;	And if the eye has great appearance, thus it is pierced at the subtle spatulum which comes from the depth of the wound, and the moist albugine is scraped and the eye is lowered, and it enters within as much as;
puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	then extract it until it is healed.
de la bowe de l’oil	of the cavity of the eye
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue;	This illness called "alcunnati" is not outside the cavity that is assembled in the eye, resembling a descending vein, and it is not a vein;
et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz;	and the manner of the appearance of the work is that you make the patient sit upright and straight, then take the head between your hands on both sides, and move it as much as you see the cavity coming out above to your eyes;
puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit;	then let it be fixed, and not descending, and let the light be disordered, and the patient sees things as he usually does;
et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	and if it does not descend below, know that it is a vein, and if the descension of the cavity is not prepared as we have said.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse;	make the patient sit between your hands, then take the subtle spatula and make it go on the cornial web one drop by the continuation of the conjunctiva with the cornial web and the cornea, as much as the cavity is;
et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and when it is dislocated, if it drips into the warm oil or honey mixture to halfway, or warm poultice is applied and halfway, then let it be treated with another treatment until it is healthy.
des aigues de l’oil	of the warmth of the oil
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier;	We have seen the similarities of the warm things in the division, and that which is necessary to pierce;
si en oevre selonc la santeit.	if one operates according to health.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort;	It is necessary that you make the patient sit between your crossed hands, away from the light of the sun, and apply to him the healthy oil and bind it very tightly;
puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres;	then put the cloth with the oil on your left hand if his eyes are on the left, or on your right hand if his eyes are on the right;
puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre;	then take in your right hand, if his eyes are on the left, the instrument which is called "almagda", or in your left hand, if his eyes are on the right;
puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide;	Then put the point of the instrument within the crown by the thickness of a reed in that bladder of the eye to the lower part of the lesser arm, then push the instrument which is called «almagda» gently, and turn your hand as long as it pierces into the bladder of the eye, and feel that almagda comes to the empty thing;
et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour;	and it is necessary that the measurement of the path of almagda be at the depth of the measurement of the space which is from the prunelle just to the end of the blackness;
et c’est li corone de l’oil;	and it is the crown of the eye;
si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	if you see the bone in that paper through the clarity of the cornial web, and then put the instrument just to where the vein is, then press one path after another.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	if the vein descends now, thus the patient sees before him and the instrument in his eye.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc;	After a short rest, and if the pain returns through the second path, put the staff with the instrument, and when it is stuck and does not move, extract it gently turning your hand little by little;
et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	and then put on the pain a bit of gum seed, and apply to that eye from within.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	Then put by virtue on the stopped-up eye a wet linen cloth in rose oil and in abundance of egg, and anoint it with healthy oil.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	We, and those who are of our kind, put on the common people a broth with an abundance of egg.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if the extract cannot enter the eye due to its thickness, because there are some men who have very hard eyes, then it is necessary that you take the instrument called "alberit", whose form is this:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit;	And then pierce the conjunctive moderately, and do not go too deep, but make the subtle incision, then apply the poultice, as we have said;
et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous;	and at the completion of the work prepare for the patient a comfortable bed, where he can sleep on his back in a dark place;
et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor;	and let him avoid all movements, and take light foods, and not move his head to the right or left, and let him be laid according to his condition until the third day;
puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor;	then untie him in the same dark house, and test his sight, and make him see certain things, and then put him back to bed until the seventh day;
et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	and it is not necessary that you do this during the work of the cure or after the incision now, but it is necessary that you alleviate this, because the pain rises quickly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme;	Abscesses of the hand come, that you untie the oil before the seventh hour, and take care of those who have an abscess.
et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	and when it is appeased, untie the vein and put on his face a golden plate to cover any hour, and let him be at that time in the dark house.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas;	And then go out of the little house little by little, and change into his clothes;
et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	and know that no disciples should interfere with this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens;	And one came to us who was from the Arabic region, who told us that in their country they make a plaster called almagra, which draws out the water, but nonetheless I have never seen any of it in our land, nor have I ever read about it in books of the ancients;
et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	and by chance it is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie;	And these are the similarities of the forms of almagra, because those who do not recognize them will see.
et soient d’arain proprement:	and are of Arabian origin properly:
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en III angles ague.	And they are the head of the subtlety in this same subject, and the third angle is acute.
de la char sor le neis	of the hole above the nose
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez;	Sometimes there are born or produced in the nose various holes, because of which there are some that appear as scorpions with many feet;
et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	and if it has such or if it has a hole with a black color of soot, and if it has a hole of brown color.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil;	In this case then of these holes which is brown, and not blackened, it is necessary that you make the patient sit between your hands against the sun;
et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers;	and open its nostrils, and pour the onion on those holes, and rub the three fingers;
pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	Then consider that you must sustain the sharp subtle spatula on one side, as long as you know that the instrument is entirely bony.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout I des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien;	And if anything remains that you cannot cover, then open it to all the subtle and lightweight instruments, so that nothing remains;
et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient;	and let it be without being overwhelmed, or if an abscess forms, then drain it as is necessary;
et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	and if it is malignant abscesses, then hasten and cauterize the wound as much as the blood needs to be stanched and all the flesh eaten away, then apply egg whites or vinegar and sharp wine.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez;	If the wound does not open, and pus comes just to the palate, know that it is healthy;
et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier:	and if pus does not come through as is necessary, know that there is a new flesh in the bone above, for which the instruments do not need to be sharpened;
adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins;	Then it is necessary that you put a thread of flax, somewhat thick, and let it be known by us, and have between each knot a space of one finger or less;
et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche;	and put the patient's head down to the thread in his nose so he can feel it, and pull it in drawing out as long as it comes through the nose into the mouth;
et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire;	and many times this is shown to the child at school, and it's an easy thing for one who wants to do it;
puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	then hold the end which comes through the nose in one hand, and the other end which comes through the mouth in the other hand, and pull one after the other being careful as we are with the thread.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant;	Do this until you know that the knots have corrupted that flesh, then pull out the threads, suck the blood, and moisten the thread with Egyptian ointment, and put it back in the nose as before;
fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char;	Make this for three days or more, as long as the ulcers consume all that remains of flesh;
et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use;	and then put on a plaster of pounded roots for some days until it is healthy, and if there is need for dry medications, then use them;
et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	and this is the form of the instrument to purge the head, through which one distills the oils and the medications;
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi;	And let it be of silver or of copper, similar to a covered lamp, like a chain, and the conductor thus;
et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief;	and if you see fit, make a closed chain, and let the instruments be flat to purge the head;
et ait I mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	and have a handle at the top to hold it when one warms up the oil or some liquid.
de la char sor le neis	of the flesh on the nose
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder;	Many times a disease occurs on the head near the nose which is called "telul", and grows and becomes large, so that it is a visible thing to look at;
et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant;	and for this reason it is necessary that you cut at the beginning, and remove all dead tissue, then apply the cauterization or the burning medicine;
et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens:	and let it be covered until it becomes large, if it is hard, of dark color, with little sensation;
si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide;	if you do not touch it with iron, for that is an incised abscess, because when one cuts into it, great evil comes to the patient;
et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	and if the abscess is of soft touch, not of dark color, and you see that it can all be covered, then warn the patient and cut with caution, and treat the wound with drying and constricting things.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	when the nose is cut and sewn
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	Be aware that when a solution of continuity occurs in one of these cartilaginous operations, it profits little, except for some men.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc;	It is necessary then when it happens to anyone, if one examines whether the wound is fresh with all its blood;
et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then adjusts the two lips of a wound to a suture, then cures it until it is healed;
et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet;	and if the lips are separated from one side to another, then it is necessary that you cauterize all the parts of the wound until they heal, then assemble the two lips in a suture, and strain it, and powder with powdered blood of dragon, and burnt incense;
et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	and put on the powders a piece of plaster of gum or other plaster holding strongly, and let it be until it adheres by itself, then cure with oil until it is healed;
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution:	The manner of the suture is that you assemble the wound:
ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre;	or with needles, as we have said in the suture of the belly;
ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	or by thread, as I have made you know.
des apostemes des levres	of the abscesses of the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant;	In some men there are dense hard abscesses on the lips resembling seeds of vines, and smaller and larger;
adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie;	then it is necessary that you pierce the lips, and make an incision on each knot, and take them with forceps and cut in each part;
puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	then apply to the wound after the incision a broth of vitriol, until the blood is stanched;
et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then anoint with oil of iris, and treat the wound with dry things until it is healed.
de la char des gencives	of the flesh of the gums
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»;	Many times there is born on the gums a fleshy growth, which the old call "albulus";
si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc;	if it is necessary that you remove it with pincers, and cut at its root, and let the gum or the blood flow;
puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives;	Then put on the limb a broth made with vitriol, or other powders which are astringent and drying.
et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize:	and if the wound reopens after the incision, and often happens, if the opening is a second time, and it must be cauterized:
si ne revient mie aprés le cautere;	if it does not reopen after the cauterization;
et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	and these are the forms of ulcers for a wound to close.
des sordens	of abscesses
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres;	Sometimes they gather at the head of the teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, and are rough and bitter wounds;
et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant;	and sometimes the tooth is black and yellow and worm-eaten, until the corruption reaches the gum, and the tooth is stinking;
si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien;	if it is necessary that you make the patient sit between your hands, and his head be in your lap, and take the teeth or the ulcers firmly, until nothing remains;
et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees;	and thus make from the blackness and the greenness, and the yellowness and the other stains, as long as they are moist;
et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin;	and if one removes that which is in the first layer, it is good;
se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis;	if not, then proceed with the second layer and the third, until you have resolved everything;
et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens;	and know that the tooth has a need for various forms of instruments to scrape, according to what the work requires, because the roots that one scrapes from the teeth have other forms than those that one scrapes between the teeth;
et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	and let these forms and others be prepared with you.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire;	It is necessary when you treat the tooth of its pain that you delay as long as you can, for one should not do it hastily;
car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	for it is a very high substance, so thus one has no excuse for hurrying.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	Therefore when the patient is constrained by the pain of the trait, it is necessary that you are certain of the tooth that is aching.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent;	Many times the pain deceives the patient, and they think it is in the healthy tooth, and makes the bad tooth ache;
et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors;	and yet the pain does not depart from that, as long as the bad tooth is extracted, for we have already seen it happen to these teeth;
et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars;	and when you are well certain of the tooth that is aching, it is necessary that you scrub around the tooth on all sides with strong spatula to guard the gum on all parts;
puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles;	then rub your fingers or the subtle instruments at the first spot and spot, until it is well cleaned, then I fix the instruments well;
et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	and let the head of the patient be in your teeth between your knees, and hold it well so that it does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	After extracting the tooth properly without breaking it, and if it does not come out by itself, then take one of these instruments and insert it gently into each part, and move it as you have done previously.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont;	And if the tooth is pierced and fragile, then it is necessary that you fill it with cloths, or where the perforations are.
et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre;	and if you extract it subtly with pincers, so that it does not break while extracting;
et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	and it is necessary to be very careful in working around the gum to avoid dislodging the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	And it is good to warn that you do not break it, and leave a part behind, and cause the patient greater pain from the root's wickedness than from the first.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit;	And beware that you do not act like the foolish barber, who through their haste and hardness sometimes break the instrument, and do not heed what we have told.
mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut;	But sometimes they come from the effect of that great disease through the roots that remain, or from the cartilage that it breaks, as we have often seen;
et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil;	and when the tooth is pulled, then wash the place with wine or vinegar and soap;
et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet;	and if a flow of blood comes from it, which often happens, then fill the place with burnt vitriol;
et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	and if that is not sufficient, then cauterize it;
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent;	The shapes of the instruments, which first stop the tooth, should be long and pointed and thick handles, so they do not bend when you pull the tooth;
et ce sont les formes:	and these are the forms:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And should be of thick metal so that they do not bend when pulling, and should be made of good iron, and should have teeth to hold firmly;
de la racine des dens	of the root of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou II, tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne;	When the root remains in the gum, it is necessary that you put on the spot a moist cotton in butter for one or two hours, until the gums are softened, then remove the tooth-aches which are called "algefri", from which the head seems to be ill;
et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	and let them be made dense like a file and this is their shape:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not want to come out with all these tooth-aches, it is necessary that you discover the flesh totally around the root, and put the instrument which is called "althali", that is to say a pelican, of which this is the shape:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin;	And let it be strong and large so that it does not break anything, and if the root jumps by itself, it is good;
se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	if it does not, then you will aid yourself with all the instruments, of which the shapes come here after:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait II rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if one aids oneself with this instrument which has two handles, because of its shape:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other instruments that are in front in the root of the teeth, and of this instrument which resembles large pincers, because of its shape:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont;	And let these instruments be strong so that they cannot break, and know that many tooth-instruments are;
et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez;	and also other instruments, which are not mentioned;
et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	and the wise masters find by themselves their instrument, according to what their work and the disease shows them, for there are some diseases where the ancient teachers did not teach the use of an instrument because of the diversity of ills and it breaks a part of the body or the other bones, or it corrupts, if they seek the instruments that they need, which I have told you, and aid with gestures, because of its shape:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster;	And let it be thick and well-held to hold the bone, so it does not break, but can hold it and remove.
et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	and then restore the limb with suitable medicines for that, and if there is decay in the bone, and it is small, then take all this instrument:
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer:	When the appearing tooth does not correspond to the natural body, and its shape is ugly, and likewise in women with shriveled breasts, then you must know if the teeth are born after the tooth, and it is not in the right place, and one cannot soothe or file it:
adonques lou raie;	then remove the bone
et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a I petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	and if it is stuck with the tooth, take this instrument which has this shape, and resembles a small beak, and let it be of sharp iron pointed at the end:
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And cut a little and a little with the forceps for the hardness of the tooth, and so that you do not move the others, and if it appears that one can file it, then take the file of a certain file as is its shape:
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles;	and it is as if the thread of the joint makes the needles;
et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece;	and in the joint of the tooth, little by little, it comes back lightly, so that it does not move until it heals;
puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	then the smoothness at the end of any roughness, and if the teeth are too sharp and they bite the tongue, it is necessary to file the roughness until it is even, so that it does not bite the tongue nor corrupt the speech.
quant li dent lochent	when the tooth aches
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut;	When the front tooth aches, either from percussion or from cold, and the patient cannot press on it because it hurts, and you apply curative medicines to constrict, and that is of no value;
si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques;	if it is necessary to constrain with a thread of gold, because the silver threads turn green and rot, but the gold does not move;
et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens;	and let the thread be moderate, neither too thick nor too thin, according to the quantity of the space between the teeth;
et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part;	and if you want to thread the teeth, take the thread and pass it double between the two healthy teeth, then put the thread between the rotten teeth, if there is one or several, until you come cleverly just to the other side of the healthy tooth;
puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point;	then reapply the covering just to the part where you started, and withdraw your hand subtly and cleverly, so that it does not move at all;
et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	and let your ligature be at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue;	Then cut the ends of the thread to one width, and assemble them, and push them between the healthy tooth, and put it in so that it does not bite the tongue;
et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil;	And then let it be constricted as much as it can remain, and if it comes undone, or the threads are broken, then constrain it with another thread;
si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	if it remains and serves in this way all its tension, and this is the form of the teeth and the shape of the arrangement of the upper teeth and lower teeth, as you see:
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit;	And when a tooth falls out, then reset it in its place, immediately, as we have said;
et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	and do not interfere with it, for it is not wise and painful, and sometimes one makes the shape of a tooth from cow bone, and puts it in the place where the defect is, and constrains it as we have said, and it remains and serves for a long time.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	of copper, the ligature of the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi;	Sometimes there are ligatures that come from under the tongue or palate, which one is born with;
ou par accident de plaie soudee;	from an accidental deep wound;
et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue;	and the work is such that you open the mouth of the patient, and hold their head in your hand, and lift their tongue;
puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement;	then cut the nerves of the tongue, as long as it is dislocated from its support, and if there is hardness or swelling, and it is due to a sudden wound, then cut the ligament and cut from the length that which binds;
et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz;	and beware that the incision is not too deep, because of the artery that is beneath;
et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin;	and when you have done this, raise the limb of a warm and dry cloth, or a cold one, then put under the tongue a piece of linen;
et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	and tie the patient's every night, so that their limbs cannot move.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet;	And if a flow of blood comes, then put on the limb a bandage of vitriol;
et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu;	and if it is not seen, then apply the cautery to the cautery of Lentigo, which is good for that.
puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	then treat with another treatment until he is healthy,
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre;	and if you see the flesh of a bad color or black or hard, so that the patient does not feel it, do not touch it at all, for it is cancer;
et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre;	and if it declines to a flux, and there is moisture, then he will vomit the phlegm, and make a subtle spatula, and deliver it from one side and the other;
et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer;	and if it is not seen in your work, then put on a warm broth of vitriol as long as it is constricted, then return to your work as long as you treat everything thoroughly;
puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	then raise the limb from clay and from stool, and treat with other treatments until he is healthy.
des apostemes de la gorge	of the abscesses of the throat
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde:	Certain times there come within the throat mouthfuls which are called "godath", and we properly call them the II manders, and when you treat them, as we have said in the division, and they are not healthy, take heed:
se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	if it is a hard abscess of small size and of dark color, do not touch it with iron.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc;	And if it is red and its root is thick, do not touch it with iron, also because of the discharge of blood;
mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi;	but let it be until it becomes ripe, and then you will cut it, where it would break apart by itself;
et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	and if it is of white color and rounded, and its root is subtle, then prepare the instrument for cutting, but first check if the abscess is warm and is at rest.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme;	Then make the patient sit in front of the sun, and his hands in your hand, and open his mouth and press the tongue down with all the instrument, so that this is its form;
et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	and let it be of silver or subtle brass as with surgical knives:
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues;	When you press the tongue with all this instrument, and you see the abscess, if you take the onion and the fig in the hand, and pull it far up more than you can;
et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces;	and pull anything from the tonsils with it, then cut it with the instrument, so that this is its form, which seems like a strong force;
et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	and all the way the head is curved, and one part to another, and are very sharp, and is made of iron or of steel;
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this instrument at hand, then cut the tonsils with scissors, so that this is its form:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom;	And let it be cut from one side, and named from the other.
et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	and when you have cut one of the mandibles, cut the other in the same manner, and after the incision gargle the patient with warm water, and water and sitz bath, and if there is discharge of blood, gargle the patient, or decoctions of cooked pomgranates, or fumigations of myrrh, and similar things, until the wound is stanched;
puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	then anoint the cure as long as it is healthy;
et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les II amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les II amandres igament.	and sometimes there grow in the throat other abscesses besides the two mandibles, then cut them thus as the two mandibles equally.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens;	And I treated a woman for an abscess that had grown inside her throat, to be sure the abscess of small size;
et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	and it had completely closed her throat, so that the woman could not breathe through the passage that was blocked, and she could not eat or drink, and would have been dead if she had stayed like that for one or two days.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	And the abscesses were so high that they had put out two wounds through the two openings of the nostrils.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe;	I delayed then so long, and fixed in one of the shoulders, then pulled out the arrow, and with it a large portion of bone;
puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue;	then I reset the other part through the other opening of the nose, and I opened her mouth and I pressed on her tongue;
aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc;	after I fixed the shoulder in these abscesses, and I cut away a part of it, and from it came out only a little blood;
et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens;	and thus the passage of the throat was unclogged for the woman, and she began now to drink water and then wine, and I did not cease to cut away at that abscess for a long time;
et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros;	and the abscesses reopen often, and fill the place that I had emptied, as long as it swells very large;
adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge:	then I strangled it and cauterized it within the throat:
ensi demora sens croistre;	unless it stays without growing;
et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	and may I be separated from these parts, and may I not be but what God made after me.
de l’uve	of the egg
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»;	When humor descends to the egg, and it is inflamed and it is long, then it is called "perpendicular";
et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	and if it is irregularly thick and round, then it is called "egg".
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes;	When it is purified as we have said in the division, and the purification does not profit me, and you see that the painful abscesses are alleviated, and it is subtle, then it is necessary that you cut it;
et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe;	and that which is rounded and assembled is not too long;
et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	and it is bloody or of a dark reddish color or black, then you should avoid the incision of it.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	For there is great danger to the patient.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant;	It is necessary therefore, when you see it, according to the manner that I have said, of its whiteness and length, that you make the patient sit in front of the sun, and press the tongue with the instrument which we made mention of previously;
puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	then insert the needle into the hole, and draw it back, and cut with one of the two instruments that I mentioned in the incision of the two mandibles.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil;	And it is necessary that you do not cut except for the superfluity which is beyond the natural limit;
car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle;	for if you cut too much, you will harm the voice and the speech;
et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and after the incision, make use of what we have said about the treatment of the two arms, and treat it until it is healthy.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	And if the patient has pain in the navel, then you must use a needle for the cauterization of the painful area.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	And the manner of the cautery is a sharp point.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere;	And it is that the patient puts his head in your lap, and then you press the tongue with the instrument that we have mentioned in the chapter on cautery, and constrict it with a living needle, so that it is not too thick nor too clear;
et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	and fill the cavity of this instrument, according to its shape:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve;	And have near the head a cloth where medicine is put, like the contents of a spoon, and put the instrument with all the medicine on the wound;
et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece;	and the patient should sit on their side, so that the saliva and the mucus running from their mouth of the medicine inside, so that it does not descend to the throat, and the abscess;
puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie;	then hold your hand on all the medicine and press it onto the abscess, for a quarter of an hour, until you see it become numb and the irritations of the medicine are alleviated;
et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve;	and if you see it, take cotton and wrap it around any instrument, and moisten the cotton in the medicine, and put the instrument with all the cotton on the skin above, until the cotton adheres to the abscess;
et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés IIII jors ou V.	and do this often, until the cauterization is complete, then let it dry, and apply a plaster afterwards for 3 or 5 days.
Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine;	And if you have need to repeat the cauterization of the medicine, then repeat it, and after the cauterization spread cotton around the abscess, in butter, and cleanse that which is around the medicine;
et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	and let it be treated with cold water, and let it be cured of gargling as long as it is healthy.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere;	This treatment is safer than the incision, nor is it like the cautery;
s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en I pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir;	if it is treated with fumigation in this manner, take calament and hyssop and origanum and rue and chamomile and arvnne and similar herbs, and assemble them all or some of them in a pot, and put it to boil;
et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait I estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	and the pot should be well plugged with strong clay, and in the middle of the pot there should be an instrument made in this manner:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie;	And let it be of silver or of copper, and let one of the ends be placed in the mouth of the patient so that the vapors rise to the eye through the reed, until the eye is numbed;
aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent;	After the recovery often happens, as long as the abscess is dry, and beware that you do not cause this at the beginning of the treatment of the hot abscess, for many things happen;
et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	and do not apply heat except at the decline of the hot abscess.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut;	And if a suitable instrument is not available, then take a cane and put inside the top a tuft of wool, so that the mouth of the patient does not have too much heat;
car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	for the tuft of wool does not let the hot vapors harm the mouth, and it is a good remedy together with salt.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose;	Many times it happens at the throat or spine or fishbone, or some other thing;
si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose;	so it is necessary that you pull out what you can see, and press the tongue to the sun with all the instrument, so that you can see the thing;
et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac;	and that which does not appear and is thrown back into the throat, it is necessary that you make the patient vomit so that the food is cut in the stomach;
par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement;	by chance if the thing passes through the vomiting;
ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou I morceil de pain sec;	or the patient swallowed a piece of sponge, or a piece of navy, or a root of lettuce, or a crumb of dry bread;
et lie a l’esponge I fil, et puis la transglutisse;	and tie to the sponge a thread, and then swallow it;
et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer;	and when it comes to the level of the liver, if it sticks, and then pull it out with force;
et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren I estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	and if it does not come out from what we have said, take the instrument of a plum in this form:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit;	And let the instruments be curved at the head so that it can more easily enter the throat, and have the head raised high;
et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens;	and beware that you do not touch the diaphragm, lest all of it comes, nor do you perforate the inside of the bone;
et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse;	and it is good that the patient should expel the mucus, because it will be better for them or the thing will be easier;
si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	if it falls downward, or it pulls equally throughout the entire instrument, as long as it is outside;
de la sansue de la gorge	of the blood of the throat
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines;	Each time the blood is treated with medicine, as I have said in the section, by the treatment of remedies;
et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	and when this does not profit at all, then look in the throat of the patient to the sun, then press the tongue with the instrument that I have told you;
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	And if you see the blood, if it pulls to the smallest finger, or to the subtle tendons that are worth this;
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	And if that is not effective, take a heated iron, and insert it into the patient's throat, then apply the iron to the tonsils, and do this often.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	And if the patient has a high fever every day.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent;	then take a full draught of cold water, and open the mouth, and let it run down the throat, and move it with the hand often;
et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	and if the blood vessels feel the cold, then spit.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve;	And if it does not spit as we have said, then fumigate the patient with assafoetida, through the instrument that I mentioned in the fumigation of the urine;
fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	do this many times, for it will discharge without delay.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument;	And the manner of the fumigation is that you take a pot where there are hot coals, and it be covered with a perforated cloth in the middle, and through this hole be the head of the instrument;
puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue;	Then give fumigation, and the patient puts the head of the cane in his mouth, and closes the mouth, so that the smoke does not go out, but comes just to the wound;
et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois;	and the wound will heal now, and if it does not heal, then resume the fumigation many times;
et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue;	and let the patient fast, and abstain from salty and foul things, and not drink any water;
et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	and then it will be useful for the fever to be expelled through this treatment.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge;	And the shape of the instrument with which one treats the wound, is, when one can see it, similar to curved tongs by means of which one enters into the throat;
et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier;	and has resemblance to a hawk's beak, and has roughness of a file, so that what it takes, it cannot release;
et vez ci la forme:	and see to the form:
li chapistres des apostemes	the chapters of the abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille;	Many kinds of abscesses are, according to what memory recalls hereafter in this book, and they differ in perforation and in cutting;
et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	and it is in two ways of which one is in its own likeness, and that which it holds moisture.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	And the second way is for the limbs where they are on the body.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	for the abscesses of the head are different from those of the foundation, and the abscesses of the flesh are different from those that come in the joints, and each has its own judgment in the work.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement;	And if an abscess one should not pierce, as long as the bone is measured according to its completion;
et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	and if there are such that it is necessary to pierce when they are swollen, and do not measure according to their completion, like abscesses which are near the joints.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	For when abscesses come from the joints, and one lets them be for as long as they are enclosed within, by chance if the ligaments and nerves of the joint are corrupted, which is the cause of contraction in that limb.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil;	Or when the abscess is within the main limb, and you delay the perforation until it becomes ripe, then it will harm the main limb;
ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs;	or if it is in the foundation, one should pierce it as soon as it is ripe;
et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule;	and it is necessary that you pierce the abscess after complete digestion, unless it is the one that is in the foundation, so that it does not become putrid deep within, and be enlarged inside, and a fistula develops;
et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	and cannot heal in a short time.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes;	And it is necessary that you know the time for perforation of the abscess which is ripe according to completion, and this is when the pain is eased, and the departure of the fever, and the lessening of the pain and of the redness, and the decrease of the swelling and of the anguish of the head of the abscess, and other signs;
et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues;	and it is necessary that you make a seat for the perforation or more dependent on the abscess, and where it opens wounds;
et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	and let the perforation be of the length of the body, and if the abscess is in the hands or feet, or in joints and veins and arteries, and in all equal places where there is no point of plethora.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	In those that are full, according to whichever member.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	And when the abscess is in the carnal part, it is of use to let the perforation as long as it is confirmed in complete digestion, as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure;	For if you make a hole before that, the body will be fed by its own venom, and it will be full of much filth.
et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	and they ulcerate the lips and the depths of it internally.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	And if on any abscess that are pierced according to the width of the body, according to what the limbs need.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus;	And it is necessary that you put small plasters on small abscesses, small perforations;
et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme;	and on large abscesses, large perforations, and many cuts according to the appearance of the size of the abscess;
et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper;	and if in such abscesses where it is necessary to shave the head, and cauterize;
quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes:	when it has become jaundiced like the liver, and is numb, then it is necessary to do as one does for buboes:
et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres;	and if of such ones that are cut into three angles, and if of such ones where one cauterizes like the spleen, as abscesses of the entrails;
et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	and if of such ones where one makes a round incision, and other incisions and similar cauterizations.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement;	Those who have no head to the abscess, like a superficial abscess, it is necessary that you pierce the skin plainly;
et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie;	and it is necessary when the abscesses are large, and they collect much pus, and you will pierce, but do not drain the entire pus at once, rather drain a part of it;
puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief;	then stop up the abscess with a poultice until the next day, then drain some other thing of its own kind;
fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute;	do this many times, a little at a time, until all the pus has come out;
meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	especially if the patient is of weak virtue, or a pregnant woman, or small children, or old and decrepit men.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	For the blood vessels are sometimes torn with the issue of the pus, so that by accident the patient dies, and you do not perceive it.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite;	Finish this chapter with great caution, and when you have pierced your abscess, if the wound is small, and look to see if the wound of the abscess is small;
et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton;	and if it's a flat incision, then apply bandages of linen or cotton threads;
et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre;	and if it's a large abscess, and there are many openings, then it is necessary that you put a bandage on each one so that they touch one against the other;
et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor;	and if you have cut into the abscess a part of the skin, and you have shaved around it, then it is necessary that you fill it with old cotton or with linen wrappings without moisture, and bind it tightly for three days;
puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	then anoint it, and treat it with oil until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	And if there are evacuations of blood in your work, then apply cold and watery water, and wet the cloth, and put it on the affected area many times.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut;	And if the hemorrhage of blood persists, then apply governance and treatment, and the powders that I mentioned in this book, and if it is in the time of winter, and the limbs or abscesses are very nervous, then it is suitable to put on tents and moist dressings with wine and hot oil;
et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit;	and if it is in summer, and the limbs are fleshy, then it is suitable to put on moist dressings with water and oil, or wine and cold oil, until the third day, as we have said;
et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then unwrap the abscess and the dressing and the treatment, as it is suitable, until it is healthy.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes:	And this is suitable to know universally in treatments of abscesses:
or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	that I have said how one should proceed before the treatment of abscesses, and see it in this chapter.
des soros	Of the sores
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	Or there are small abscesses coming from the head, and they are manners of us that are in tiles, just like the joker of a dice, and many have similar appearances.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz;	There is some fat and such things where there is moisture, just like in poules;
et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	and if there are such things that are hard and stony to cut, and there is no point of doubt that the artery is not made contrary.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	And the work of the cut is that you will test all the instrument which is called "incising", from which the shape comes after, whatever thing it contains.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	For if it contains moisture, then it will be done by those from the length.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien;	And when the moisture is evacuated, then one scrapes without leaving anything the skin which contains that moisture, for it returns immediately when one leaves nothing;
puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens;	Then plunge cotton into Egyptian ointment, if it is present;
se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor;	if not, in the vein and in the wax, and apply to the wound, and leave until the next day;
et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	and cauterize those who have remained with nightly discharge.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit;	And then replace the cotton, as before, on the second day, and the third, until you know well that no discharge remains;
puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat the wound with ointment suitable for it, until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc;	And if there are abscesses that hold in fat, then cut around it in this manner, from the length;
et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist;	and cut your lancets, and scrape all around, and put all your treatment to draw out the pus where it lies;
et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	and if the artery has made a constriction, then do what I have told you after;
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	And do the same for the abscess if it is stone-like, and to cut and to cure as I have told you.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	And cut into the stone-like abscess and the moist one, if it is lighter, for they are of little blood.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme;	And if in some of these abscesses or head where there is no moisture, and of these abscesses that I treated on the head of an old woman;
et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier;	and found the abscess as hard as a rough, harsh and white stone, and could not break it;
et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	and if one had struck it with iron, one would have made a wound as from a stone.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe;	In other abscesses coming on the head, that is those which come on the heads of children and at the roots of the ears, the opening should be so always dependent on the bowel, because of the proximity to issue the mouth;
et les cure si com il covient.	and the treatment if as it suits.
des scrophules	of the scrofula.
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	Many times there are abscesses on the neck, and below the shoulders, and in the corners, and sometimes they come to other parts of the body, and are many, and are stuck together one with another.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit;	And each scrofula is properly within its own area, as the nut and the abscess of the head, as we have said;
et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	and there are many similarities among these scrofulas.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	There are some that contain moisture, and some which are malignant that do not want to obey health.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde;	in that one then you see of good disposition in the body, and is similar to the color of the body, and moves from each part and does not numb the shoulders nor the arm nor the artery nor the vein, and is not deep;
si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief;	If it happens that you cut through the skin, and strip away each part, and the two lips of the wound are like a razor's edge, you are in this profession, as we have said concerning abscesses of the head;
et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	and you touch a little and a little, and be sure that you do not cut the nerve or the vein, and it is not suitable for the spatula to be cutting, lest the hands tremble, and do not go too far, so that you do not cut what you should not.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie;	And if you cut the vein or the artery, and that does not stop the bleeding, then put on the wound vitriol ointment, or some powders that staunch blood, and bind the wound;
et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	and let it be until the abscesses are relieved, and the wound is softened, and begins to decay.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses;	And when the blood is stanched, it returns to your work, until you complete it;
puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	then look at your hand to see if there remain small scrophulas, and cut and mend them.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement;	And if there is a large vein in the root of the scrophula, it is not advisable that you cut that scrophula at its root, but rather tie it with a strong double thread, and let it drop by itself, without harm;
puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	then fill the wound with old cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, then the cure.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	And if you cut out the entire scrophula, it is advisable that you bring together the two lips of the wound, and sew them now, so that there is no remaining excess because of the size of the scrophula.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	it is advisable that you understand to cut at the root of it, and pull out strongly, and sew as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure;	Those scrophules that hold a suppurating flux, pierce it where it appears most open;
et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption;	and pierce it as was said beforehand, in dependency, then I will apply tents with ligatures and similar things, so that it corrupts that which remains of the corruption;
et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and when the wound is well cleaned, then apply the treatment of ligature greasing with charcoal, until it becomes healthy.
de squinance	of the ankle
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge;	The old ones spoke and talked about the cutting of the throat;
mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	but I never saw in our land anyone who did it, and it is the writing of their word.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee;	For those who have a fracture of the ankle, it is necessary that the fissure of the throat which is called "epiglottis" be examined;
et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en II amandres.	and one should not make aid by that, because all the veins and the tumor of the disease are in those who have an abscess hot in the mouth, or in the throat or in both arms.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the disease is in the channel of the throat, it is necessary to operate on the epiglottis to prevent the loss that comes from strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige;	It is necessary, then, when we want to cut the epiglottis, that we make a small incision of three or four circles, or through the quantity of the incision of the surface, between the two circles, or by the quantity of the incision of the membrane, not in the cartilage.
et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	and those places are suitable for the section of the epiglottis where there is no point of cartilage, and the vessels are long with it.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil;	And if the master is fearful, it is necessary that he stretches the skin of the throat to its full length, then cuts the tissue as far as it comes to the gullet.
et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit;	and guard against the blood vessels, if you see any thing, and then cut the surface, as we have said;
et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix;	and it is demonstrated by the cut of the vein of the kidney that the blood jumps through the limb which is broken, and by the deficiency of the voice;
et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	and let the wound be covered with a dressing.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les II levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige;	And when the hour has passed for which one doubts the strangulation, bring together the two lips of the wound of the heart, and sew them entirely without touching the cartilage;
puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then administer medicines that make flesh grow, until it is healthy.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Do not give this treatment as long as the throat is completely obstructed, and the patient is judged to be at death's door, and the defect is in the spleen.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort;	Then cut through the epiglottis for that which the patient cannot swallow, and he breathes through the wound, and thus is guarded from death;
et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee;	and therefore the old ones command to leave the wound open until the evil of the disease has passed, and it passes in three days or in four, and then they command to cauterize the wound and treat it, until it is cured;
et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	and I will tell you what I have seen.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon;	I saw that a young woman took the knife, and stuck it in her throat, and cut part of the tendons from the forearm;
et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	and I was called by the healer, and found her as good as dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I discovered the wound, and found the blood that had flowed from it, and saw that she had not cut a vein or a pipe except for the throat, and the veins had burst outside through the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee;	I hurried, and sewed the wound, and treated her until she was healthy;
et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition;	and it happens at the lady's fury that she was hoarse of voice, and returned afterwards to her condition;
por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	for two days that in the cutting of the epiglottis there is no pain.
de la grosse gorge	of the large throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes;	This abscess is called "throat hernia", and it is a big abscess in the color of a jaundice, and it is very common in women;
et est selonc II manieres:	and it occurs in two manners:
naturez, et accidens;	natural, and accidental;
ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	or natural does not have a clear origin.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere;	And the accidental is in two manners, one of which is similar to fatty tumors, and the other manner is similar to an abscess that comes from a vein artery;
et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire:	and it does not cause pain, and it is not necessary to make fire cauters except in that which is small, and prove and examine the entire intestine:
se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point;	If you treat it thus with a greased cloth, and do not apply to any vein, if you cauterize, as one cauterizes the nails, and touch everything with its wrapping, if there is not a point in it;
et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	and press well everywhere, and treat it as it requires, until it is perfectly healthy.
des nous	of the nails
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances;	Many kinds of nails are, about which I will speak all the similarities;
et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	and therefore it is necessary that I say the entire difference that exists between a nut and an abscess.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture;	I say that an abscess is heat and fever holding, as long as the ebullitions have not passed, and are accompanied by decay;
adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	then the fever and the heat subside.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros;	With a nut there is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and it contains ichor, which is its own special humor, and is according to the color of the body, and grows like a cyst, and becomes large;
et sont selonc II semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	and they are according to II similarities, or hot, or moist, and many colors are as I have said in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	It is necessary, when you come to the treatment of the wound, that you examine and inquire first about all the instrument which is called "entromissoire", according to what its form will be or chapter that follows.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme;	And the manner of inquiring about the abscesses of the wounds is that you take the most moist part that you find in the abscess, and turn your fingers little by little, as long as you know that the instrument has pierced the core, then it is according to the size of the abscess;
puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	then extract the entromissoire, and take heed in that which the blood escapes.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes;	If moisture runs short, which color it has, thus do as I have said regarding other abscesses;
et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout;	and after the intermuscular area comes moisture, be aware that it is fatty, then make an incision in the form of a cross, and take the pincers, and lightly scrape each part and observe the skin where you think you should draw it with the needle;
et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	and if you cannot draw it with a thread, then draw it by pieces so that nothing remains.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois;	For if anything remains, it comes back to us many times;
et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	and if a little remains, and the blood does not stop, then fill the wound with some sharp corrosive powders, and hold the wound, and apply hot apostumes to calm it, and treat it with other treatments until it is healthy;
et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	and if the wound is large, then sew the two lips of the wound, and treat it with those things that promote scarring.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet II jors ou III, tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc;	and if the veins are beating in a contrary or other manner hasten and apply the vitriol ointment to the limb, and let it stay two or three days, until the wound suppurates, and the evacuation of blood occurs;
puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	then return to the copper vessel that which has been left from the new.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres:	See here the forms of the entromisaire instruments, and they are of three kinds:
grans et moien et petit;	large and medium and small;
et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres:	and there are three kinds which are called "albarets", and one which is called "breb", and they are of three kinds:
grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule;	large, medium, and small, for investigating the abscesses of fistulas;
et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule;	and they are also like the needles with which one cuts the splinters, and they are of citrin or iron, or silver, and those that are tawny are worth more, and are more tested for probing the cavities of fistula;
et sont de III manieres:	and they are of three manners:
grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the width of the wounds.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci:	The forms of the ulcers are of many similarities, as you see here:
grans, moiens, et petis;	large, medium, and small;
et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi;	and if there are ulcers that have two concavities of three kinds also;
et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres;	and if there are ulcers that have three concavities, and they are also of three kinds;
et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres;	and if there are ulcers that have two concavities, and ulcers with only one concavity, and they are of three kinds;
et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	and all this is necessary in their body.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf;	The head of these, which one makes, are cutting, and of such that do not cut more than from one side, from which one scrapes the knots, because one does not touch the vein nor the nerve;
et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes;	and of these internal abscesses are the ulcers responding to treatment, so that the patient does not perceive the opening of the abscesses;
et sont de III manieres:	and they are of three kinds:
grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois;	large, small, and medium, as you see;
et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus;	and one does not make use of more force than in the flesh of a nut, such as thighs, and arms, and shoulders, and limbs, and similar places;
et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	and sometimes one makes another small instrument, resembling the scraper of a fistula, according to this form, with which one scrapes blood:
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	and one puts it sometimes at the place that bleeds from cutting of veins, and arteries, and sometimes they break according to this large form:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme;	Sometimes the shoulders of some men become inflated when they begin to be corrupt, so that they seem like a woman's shoulders;
et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	and let them rest and become inflamed, and whoever wants to cure them, if it is necessary to follow this form of the following line, up to the end.
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	then scrape off the fat, and fill the wound with medicinal gum arabic, then bring together the two lips of the wound to suture, and the treatment until it is healed;
et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures;	and if the breast hangs low, and is swollen due to its size like it happens in women, if there are two costal prominences above, through two similar fissures;
de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.;	because one holds the other at the end of one and the other, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form, from this line .b. to the line .g.;
puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then scrape the skin that is between the two lips, and remove the fat, and apply what we have said about suturing and powders, and what is necessary for the treatment, until it is healed;
et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif;	And if it is not healed, or the incision is not entirely made, because the patient does not want to rest, or due to the decrement of blood, then you must fill the wound with moist cotton in a corrosive ointment.
et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	And let it be until it reaches the mucus and the fat, then treat it until it is healed.
des apostemes des asselles	of the abscesses of the armpits
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	These abscesses that occur under the armpits are kinds of hard tumors or knots, and in which there is contained moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Those therefore that contain moisture should be cut according to this form, from line B to line G:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the whole boil that is in the abscess is emptied, then fill the wound with old cotton, and let it be until the next day, then remove all the cotton, and treat with pleasant ointment as much as is needed until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscesses are similar to scrophula, they make them as we have said in cases of scrophula, and if the wound is deep, apply cautery as we have said before.
de la routure de l’artere	of the rupture of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme;	When the artery is ruptured, and the skin that is above it becomes swollen, then often come abscesses, and similarly it happens to the swollen vein and abscess;
et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont;	and if one knows that it is because of the artery, then the abscesses are long and deep;
et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement;	and when you feel it with your fingers, feel for the strangeness;
et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans;	and when it is because of the vein, then the remedy appears clearly;
et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	and it is foolish to cut this abscess, and likewise when it is beneath the shoulder and arm and near the neck and in many other places, and it is very serious.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc;	It is necessary then to avoid the treatment of iron, and he who is in charge must avoid it also, and in the one who has an arterial hemorrhage caused by a blow from above the skin for a long time;
puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte;	then make an incision at the groin of the wounded, and carefully separate the artery from the tendons, until it is exposed;
puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples;	then push a needle through the wound, and have it pierced to the other side, and constrict the artery with a double thread in two places, according to what I have taught you in the extraction of the two arteries that are in the temples;
puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme;	then touch the limb that is between the two threads of an intermediary, as long as the blood flows from it, and let the abscess be opened;
puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient;	then bring together the edges of the wound that gape, until the thread holds;
puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then cure the joints having reached this point, as long as it is healthy;
et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit;	and if the abscess is the size of a vein, then you must hold in your hand what you can from the abscess to all the skin, then push the needle under the skin that you hold in your hand, and make it pierce, and have a double thread, so that you pull it from the other side;
puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil;	then sew up the abscess, as I have told you, or tie one of the two parts with two threads around the head of the thread;
et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus;	and if you doubt that the thread will not come loose, then rethread another needle with all the thread under all the abscess to the incision of the first needle, and pull the threads in four places;
puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez;	then cut the abscess as long as the superfluity goes out, then cut the superfluous part of the skin and leave what is tied;
puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then put on a dressing of warm wine and oil, then apply treatments of bandages and bindings until it is healthy.
des apostemes des ners	of the abscesses of the kidneys
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	As abscesses come into the artery and in the vein, abscesses come to the kidneys when they are injured, or from too great exertion, and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor;	And this often happens in the joints and in the fingers and in all the limbs where there are joints, and it is a grievous abscess, and its color seems like the color of the body, and is in many cases without pain;
et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur;	and when one extracts it forcibly, the patient feels pain, and it is not in the depth of the body, but rather near the heart;
et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer:	and it moves well in all directions, and does not go either forward or backward, nor up nor down, and that which is in the joints does not need to be cut with iron:
par aventure i vanroit contraction;	By chance it comes to contraction;
et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	and those who are at the head or at the forehead, make the skin spatulate.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine;	If the abscesses are small, if you hold them with tweezers, and cut at their root;
et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if it is large, if you hold it with forceps, and scrub it, then you wash and bind the wound to the suture, and cure it until it is healthy.
des grosses boces pendans	thick hanging cheeks
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros;	Sometimes it happens in the belly and not in any other part of the body, and it is an illness which is called "fungus" due to its resemblance to mushrooms, and its root is subtle, and its head is thick;
et en i a de petis et de mout grans;	and it has small and very large ones;
et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	and I saw a man who had two in his belly which looked more like mushrooms than anything else, and there was no difference, and they were white, and had thin roots, and were slightly split, and they corrupted continually with moisture.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine;	I cleaned and found in one eighteen ounces in weight, and in the other six ounces, and the work of cutting if it is that you examine the patient's moisture, and the color of the joint is white and moist and of subtle root;
si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	if he applies the spatula to the large wound, and in his presence is the cauterization by fire.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer;	For in the cutting comes often too much flowing of blood, and if it does not stop itself, then you should hurry to cauterize;
et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors;	and if you see the patient is faint and fearful of the incision with iron, take a well-made thread, and tie the joint as we have said, and let it be for two days;
et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail;	and then restrain it, and do not cease to tighten the thread of the splint as long as it covers the joint, and holds it without effort;
et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne;	and if the roots are thick, then fear not to cut through the middle for the belly, but you can well cauterize half of it, then the cautery so that it does not grow back;
puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	then cure the wound, and beware that you do not cut the tendon which is of fixed color and of little sensation and of slow regeneration.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For this is an enlarged abscess, and I will come to the treatment of cancer later.
quant li boude ist fuer	when the navel is ruptured
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit;	If the appearance of the navel comes from a cauterized wound or a crack in the skin, and it is on the belly and in some of the navels, as it happens in other ruptures, or of blood that flows from veins or arteries according to what is before, or of windiness;
et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	and if it is through the rupture of the skin and the exit of the navel, then the color of the abscess is similar to the color of the body, and is a light thing without pain, and open to various discharge.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is due to the issue of the intestine, then it is even more serious, and when one presses on his sides if they bulge, and then return, and by chance if it closes, and greatly increases the pain of the bath and through strong labor.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie;	And if it is due to moisture, it's a light matter, and it opens well when you press on it with your hand, not constraining anything;
et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit;	and if it is due to blood, then it opens through these signs of a large and hard abscess, and is fixed according to a quantity;
et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	and if it is due to flatulence, then it is enough to touch, and the work is such that you consider its appearance by the blood of the artery, or of the vein, or flatulence.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	It is necessary that you leave the treatment.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	For there is doubt and fear, as I have said to you in the chapter on abscesses, for the artery and for the vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude;	And if the appearance is in the intestine or the navel, then it is necessary that you instruct the patient to stretch his belt, and be entirely straight, then sign from the bottom all around the navel;
puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine;	then instruct him to sit comfortably between your hands, then go around the place that you have signed with all the spatula, then stretch half of the abscess upwards with all the large uncle;
puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz;	then bind him around with a strong thread, or with a cord of strong chain firmly, and be the one who holds the bound limb;
puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine;	then open half of the abscess stretched on the limb, and thrust your right index finger, and touch the intestine;
se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre;	if you find it taken by the limb, then untie it, and thrust the intestine to the bottom of the belly;
et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit;	and if you find the bowel, take it to the ankle, and cut away the excess.
et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier;	and if the artery or vein makes a counterincision, then go gently within, next return to your work and take two needles, and push two threads, and put the two needles within what you have made in the shape that you make perforate;
puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi;	then strain the abscess in four places under the needles, and if you see, remove the needles, and let the limb alone until it forms a scab, and separate the dead flesh by itself;
ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit;	or cut it when it has become thin and formed a scab, then treat what needs treatment, and drain the abscess as we have said;
et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	and strain the blood or moisture that you find, then treat the limb for what it needs, and bind the limb.
dou chancre	Two sores
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer;	We have spoken in the division of the similarities of sores, and how one should operate with medicines, and how one should choose the treatment with iron;
et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement;	and let us say that the sore is born in the marrow, and there is great caution in the treatment, and the ancients said that when a sore is in the blood or where one can raise it like a sore which is in the limbs, and in the thigh, and in similar places, and it must be completely removed when it is at the beginning;
et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner;	and when it is large and old, it is not necessary that you approach it, for I have never known any healthy outcome;
ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	nor did any of them heal in my presence.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire;	And the treatments, when it is in the blood or where one can remove it, as we have said, is that you should purge the patient of black bile;
puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide I boin leu por faire l’ovraige;	Then make him sweat if he has shown retention, then prepare the patient's body for the operation;
puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier;	then cut his tumors or cancer, and shave him completely, and strip the bone of everything on all sides leaving nothing behind;
et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	and let the blood flow freely, and squeeze the body well with your hand or with something, and if the flow of blood is against the incision of the artery or vein, cauterize it as long as the blood is stagnant;
puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	then heal him with another healing until he is healthy.
de ydropisie	of dropsy
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer:	We have already said in the division the symptoms of dropsy, and in what manner the gathering of the fluid is made, and the signs of each symptom, and the treatment that is done with medications, and that which is treated with iron:
si est eclites soulement;	It is broken only by the ankle;
et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances:	and one must not touch iron to these two similarities:
c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose;	it is to know, tympanites and yposarche, for it is mortal things;
donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses;	then when you apply medicine to this similarity of dropsy which is called "broken" of medicines, and the cure does not benefit, if consider that the patient is weak, or if they have another disease besides dropsy, such as a tumor and a solution of stomach and similar things;
si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance;	if one does not touch it with iron, for it gives doubt;
et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer:	and if you see the patient with strong virtue, and they have no other disease except dropsy alone, and they are neither too young nor too old, then you should thus proceed:
lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	raise the patient upright on your hands, and let the attendants press the stomach inwards curving the needle to the lowest part of the chest, then take the spinal instrument spiny according to this form:
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	And let there be a cutting of two parts.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier;	to the point, and the intestine should not be so entered that it can come just to the intestines when one puts in the needle, and it cannot be stopped;
puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines:	then look if the dropsy is turned towards the intestines:
si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil;	if it is necessary that you split into the belly three fingers deep just above the navel;
et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois;	and if the dropsy is from the illness of the liver, let the incision be on the left side of the belly three fingers;
et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu;	and if it is from the spleen, let it be on the right, and it is not necessary that the patient put on the incision that the superfluities do not run to that weak place;
puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor;	then pierce all the skin with the instrument, and the belly, and raise your hand to all the spatula between the skin and the inner layer as in scraping according to the quantity of a nail or an inch;
puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	Then pierce the skin as far as the spatula will reach to the empty space, and it is the place of the needle, then pull the thread, and I throw this instrument from which this form is made:
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus;	And it resembles a thin chain of silver, and is made from fine iron or brass, and has on the lower part two small perforations;
et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus;	and on one side, three perforations;
et II d’autre part, et I d’autre;	and two on another side, and one on another;
et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	and the head is cut like a quill, and it is the shape of the incision that the scribes sharpen the quill:
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument;	at its tip is the needle, so when the thread comes to the needle, it descends now onto the instrument;
vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort;	guide it then to the middle or the third part, for if you guide more than is necessary at that time, by chance the patient may die from the resolution of his arm's spirit, or he becomes pale, or he approaches death;
mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz;	but in emptying according to the quantity of its virtue, and according to that which the dispositions of the virtue of the disease signify, and its pulses;
puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere;	then draw the instrument and hold the needle, and it is held now by the cord that stops up the perforation which is on the surface, of which I have spoken, that you pierce according to this manner;
puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit;	then introduce the instrument on the other side, if you see the patient suffering thus, and draw from the needle a small quantity;
fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	make it on either side, and guard yourself from touching as long as there remains only a little of the needle.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre;	And if you doubt regarding the patient, and you leave much of the needle, if the treatment of the tomb or abscess is hot, and by very sweating or bath and in the sun, and if it tinges with a black color;
et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	and the treatment of drier medicines as long as it is healthy, and cauterize on the stomach and on the liver and on the spleen after the extraction of the needle, as I have said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	of the stoppage of the flow
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	Sometimes children are born who do not have an opening in the penis, or the opening is small, or it is not in its place.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	If it happens that he has to pierce through the entire diaphragm with a very subtle instrument according to this form:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet;	then put in the hole a fine tube of lead, and tie it with thread, for three or four days, and when he wants to urinate, let the hole be opened, and let him urinate, and then put it back;
et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	and by accident it happens that there is no stop, because the urine that comes out does not allow it to be closed.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	Those with small wounds, it is a medicine of pennyroyal clay, as we have said, which will widen them.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut;	Those who do not have the wound in their body are crippled, because none can urinate who have the wound at the head of the penis, for they cannot urinate before they lift their penis up high;
et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	and they cannot have an erection because the material cannot come to the marrow, and it is a very bad disease.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient;	And the manner of the work is that the patients sit on their back, put their hands under the head of the penis and the thighs like the width of a penny, so that the wound gapes in the middle, as it ought to be;
et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	and beware of the effusion of blood that comes many times, and if it happens, stop the flow of what flows blood, and treat the wound until it is healed.
des pustules de la verge	The blisters of the penis
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide;	Many times a cyst appears on the penis, and it is an appearance of painful flesh;
et en i a malignes et non malignes;	and it has both malignant and non-malignant types;
si covient que tu les preignes a I oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien;	if necessary, you should take them with a subtle onion, and cut and cleanse all of them, then apply cotton moistened in Egyptian ointment;
puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat with ointment of diafoin until it is healed.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	And if the cyst on the penis is malignant, of foul color and putrid, then you should apply a cauterizing agent.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier;	When you have cut it, and the cyst is on the penis, and has one part inside the skin and one part outside, then you should remove the cyst that is inside first;
et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	and when it is removed, then treat the outside.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion;	For when you treat them together, if the head of the rod is not secured so it is not perceived, and blackness and corruption come in the rod and in the body.
si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is necessary to remove all that is black and corrupted, then apply on the plaster made of honey and flour which is made from the crust of green raisins and figs, then treat with other treatments until it is healthy.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	And if a flow of blood comes from the ulcer, then apply the lunar cauterization according to this method:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble:	The cauterizations help in two conditions together:
c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption;	that is to say, for the flow of blood, and for the corruption;
et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi;	and if the head of the rod is corrupted and withdrawn, then it is necessary that you put or conduct on the rod a chain of lead, and urinate the patient amidst;
et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars;	and when the skin is pulled up to the head of the penis in those who have not been circumcised, or it has been due to a wound or an abscess, then you must scrape it with a sharp instrument, until the veins are loosened and the head of the penis is freed from all sides;
et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil;	and if it is a grievous thing to divide this, then you must scrape it with the spatula of some iron at the head of the penis and of the skin;
puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	then separate them gently between the two, and put a subtle cloth of linen moistened with cold water, so that it does not adhere to the flesh.
de la circoncision	of circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies;	Circumcision is not a separation of continuity like other wounds;
toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	in every way when we do this work of our will, and especially with children, it is necessary that we do the best work, and the lightest for their health.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancients did not mention the circumcision of their children, for they did not use it in their law, and we have no more than what we have acquired through experimentation.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor I dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule;	For I have seen the greatest part of the masters and surgeons who performed circumcision near my home, with force, and to everyone it was a novelty;
si fuioit li keurs car il i a II toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	If the heart was affected because it has two titles, and by chance if one takes from above and remains below.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre;	When copper is recovered, and the pain is double, and in the purification that is given from there it is not assured the point of the member;
et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	and in the purification of the nail by chance the iron is sharpened, and the work is run, and many times it happens that they have no need for purification and I have seen it.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	From the purification that is done with force to everyone, I have found the goodness of the experiment, for the forces cut just as well from above as from below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens;	For when you press your hand, if you cut it evenly throughout all the tissue;
mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir;	but that the thread should be well pulled inside the skin;
et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	and let the method of the first work be that you make the child think, if it understands, that you do not make it think to tie the thread inside the stick so tightly, and then you make it come out in all the ways that you can;
puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens;	then you make it stand straight between your hands, and you press the fractures between your hands or under your feet where the child cannot see them, nor any of the instruments;
puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens;	then you put your hand on the stick and blow into the wound, and pull it upwards as long as the head of the stick is inside;
puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien;	then you clean it well of the pus that has accumulated, then tie the limb securely with a double thread, then tie it under one knot to another knot;
et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge;	and pull it with the two fingers by the second finger on the thumb and the index finger, and between the two tendons, then lift the heart of the hand upwards slowly and draw the head of the rod;
puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres;	then let the blood flow little by little, for it is the remedy;
et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and put powder on it and on the powder a plaster made from a mixture of egg whites cooked tempered with water rose, jammed with rose oil good and fresh, and let it be until the next day, and treat with another treatment as long as he is unhealthy.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste:	The form of the dressing for the wound healing is this:
li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	the two sides be even and be cutting, and the sides be as large as the same width;
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision;	the defect of the healing is when the heart of it falls to the incision;
donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme;	Then it is necessary that you stretch it to your finger, so that the limbs make an abscess;
et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	and cut it evenly, and if you cannot hold it with your finger, tie it with bandages, and then cut it.
Et s’il trespassent III jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement;	And if it lasts for three days, and the swollen area beneath the bladder is inflamed, let it be until the abscess that is to be drained is ripe, and the crust is lightly scratched;
si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	if you cut it as you can move, and guard against the area of the bladder, this will not harm him much.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point;	Heal then the wound of things that are burnt with powder, which we have said to treat with powders, and if one cuts beyond measure, and it goes to the sinews, it will not harm;
cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Heal then, as we have said, until it is healed.
dou retenement de l’urine	Retention of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division;	The retention of urine is due to obstruction of the stone, or of congealed blood, or of the bowel, or of dead flesh, or similar things that we have mentioned in the division;
et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz;	and if the urine is not discharged, and you see that the retention is due to the stone which is in the neck or collar of the bladder, then it is necessary that the patient be bent over on his knees;
et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet;	and his feet should be placed on a support and his belly should be stretched from the back to the upper part of the back, and the patient should restrain his arm as much as he can;
et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e;	and then the neck of the bladder is constricted by the pressure of the stone from above, for which reason the urine is discharged;
et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme:	and if it does not come, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then it is necessary that you administer an extraction with all the instrument called "syringe", of which this is the form:
et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil;	and let it be of subtle refined silver, like the down of a bird;
et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	and let the length be a palm and a half, and let it be subtle at the head.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue;	And the method of the emission of urine is that you take a double thread, and tie at the head a small ball of wool or cotton, and put the head of the thread inside the syringe;
et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede;	and cut the excess of the wool and shape it just to the head of the syringe, then anoint the syringe with oil or butter and with egg white, and make the patient sit on a seat, and rub the bladder and the rod with moistened oil of olive and of rose and of sweet almond;
puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude;	then gently put the syringe in the rod, until it comes to the root of the rod, then bend the rod upwards towards the buttocks;
puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors;	Then push the syringe up to the bladder, and let the patient feel it approaching the empty space, and this is not done according to this order unless because what conducts it there goes awry;
puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine;	Then insert the thread into all of the wool little by little, and the urine follows the wool, then extract it outside, and make the urine flow;
et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	and continue with the syringe until the bladder is emptied, and the patient is relieved.
des maladies de la vessie	of the diseases of the bladder
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When crusts or blood come into the bladder, or decay is assembled, and you see distillations of sharp things and medicines, thus make all the instrument which is called "clyster", and this is its form:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus:	It is closed, and has three openings:
II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois;	On one side, and on the other, as you see;
et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est;	and the limbs are shaved by which the medicine is cut so that it strikes the stick well without addition, if one can then pull out the moisture, and strike when necessary;
et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens;	and when you see that your medicines are in the bladder, put the head of the cauterizer into the moisture, and pull to the pulling one that is inside;
si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens;	if you pull the moisture with the cauterizer, and then strongly strike the pulling one inside;
si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira;	if the moisture enters inside, and comes to the bladder now, so that the patient will feel it;
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie:	and this is the form of the subtle syringe with which one injects into the bladder:
si est ci:	it is thus:
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut;	And it is of silver or gold, and the head is higher;
et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet;	and touches to the brain where the ligaments are;
puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu;	then take a sheep's bladder and put the moisture that you want to use to clean the bladder, then tie it between the two breasts forming a double thread of wool, and heat this moisture on the fire;
puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie;	then put the end of the cleanser in the rod, then stretch your hand on the bladder to extract all the moisture completely, until the patient feels that this moisture has gone into the bladder;
et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor;	and if you don't have a bladder, then take a piece of parchment, and make a circle with it, and pierce it all around;
puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument;	then put a strong thread through these holes, then join the circle as one joins a bowl, and put inside what you want of oil and moisture and water, and tie it with the instrument;
et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	and do as you have done with the bladder, to press with your hand until the moisture comes to the bladder.
de la piere	of the stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines;	We have already spoken in the division of the ways of stones, and extraction together with medicines;
et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille;	and have said the difference between the stone in the kidney and in the loins, and all the symptoms, and in which stone one should open with a cut;
et en la vessie, et en la verge;	and in the bladder, and in the rod;
et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	and I will tell you openly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit;	I say that the stone which is formed in the bladder often occurs more frequently in children, and it's a sign that the water of the bladder escapes similarly to water in its subtlety;
et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist;	and it openly hurts, and scratches the patient's rod, and it pinches many times, and then becomes numb;
et a mout de ces saut li fondemens;	and at the bottom of these wounds the foundations
et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont IIII ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece;	and the healing of children is light until they are 4 years old, and it is very grievous in the elderly, and it is like the middle age, for those who are between youth and old age;
et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	and the treatment is lighter for those who have a large stone, than for those who have a small one.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	And when we come to the treatment, it is necessary first to cleanse the patient with a purgative, to expel all the filth that is in the intestines.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	For it sometimes hinders one from passing the stone.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut;	Then take the patient by the feet, and bend and move to the bottom, so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, and sometimes comes out from the high place;
puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval;	then make him sit between your hands prepared, and his hands be below his thighs, so that the bladder is entirely declined downwards;
puis la quier et la touche dedens;	then touch the wound from the inside;
se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	if you feel it in the spinal column, hasten now to cut into the stone.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis;	And if it does not gush out on touching everywhere, anoint your right index finger with oil from the left hand, if the patient is an old man, or your right middle finger, if the patient is a young adult;
et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie;	and put it in its foundation, and touch the stone, and when you feel it with your finger, if it leads to the neck of the bladder;
puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	then press on with your finger, and put it in the depth where you see fit to cut.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille;	And instruct the assistant to press the bladder with his hand, and command him to stretch out with his right hand the intestines upwards, and with his left hand hold the skin which is beneath the intestines in the area where the incision is made;
puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	Then he wraps the spatula with a bandage, for that is its form:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre;	And make between what is between the intestines and the fundament, not in the middle but on the left side of the navel;
et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans;	and let it be straight on the stone, and its two ends be either at the navel or fundament, and let the width of the strap be such that it is wide outside, and narrow within, according to the quantity of the stone, not too large;
par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail;	by chance the press so that its end which is at the fundament, it goes up without effort;
et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges:	and know that there is a piece of stone where it has edges and margins:
si est griés a issir;	thus it is prepared to exit;
et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	and if the piece which is under, resembles a pebble, and is round, of which the discharge is light.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant;	In the area where there are angles and margins, make the incision larger;
et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe;	and if it does not heal, then you must drain through the bandages which are as tight as a lime on the head, to squeeze the stone so that it does not burst;
ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief;	or you apply underneath the subtle curved instrument to the head;
et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole;	and if you cannot introduce it thus, then enlarge the hole a little, and if the blood does not come out, then squeeze with the glass tube;
et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	and if there is more than one stone, then put the largest first in the neck of the bladder, then cut above, then pull downward, and the smaller ones afterward if there are several;
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	And if it is very large, then you must operate, and make a larger wound.
Car II choses avienent au malaide:	For these things happen to the patient:
ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder;	Where it dies, or the urine comes repeatedly through the leg because the kidneys cannot filter;
mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces;	but you exert yourself to pull, or to tear apart the tendons, until you pull it by pieces;
et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut;	and when you have completed your work, then fill the wound with incense and balm and dragon's blood, and strain it, and apply on top a moistened cloth in oil and wine, or in oil and rose water and cold water, to appease the hot abscess;
puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	then raise the patient up onto his neck, and do not untie the bandage until the third day.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you untie it, anoint the limb well with oil and water, then treat it with ointment of galbanum and ointment of basil, until it is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine:	And if abscesses and ulcers come in the wound and corroisons of blood in the bladder, and urine is retained by this means, which is retained in such a way that without exit with the urine:
boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit;	Then put your finger in the wound, and extract that blood, for if it remains, it will corrode the bladder, and rot it;
puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then elevate the wound from water and from pus, and help it in all the ways that you know, until it is healthy;
et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	and it is necessary that all the treatments you administer to him, you tie the two thighs together, and apply the medicines on the wound.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir;	And if his skin is small, and it is conducted by the penis, and stuck in, and the urine cannot exit;
si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	If the treatment of what I say thus, that you often cut it, is excused from cutting because of this treatment.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	I have already proved it thus.
Pren I foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a III angles fichiees en I tison:	Take the iron instrument in this form and let it be with three angled points fixed in one piece:
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie;	Then take the thread and tie it around the edge of the stone, so that it cannot come back into the bladder;
puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere;	then push the instrument into the edge gently, until it reaches the stone;
et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part;	and turn the instrument with your hand in the stone little by little, until you can pierce the stone from the other side;
si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	if urine comes out, then press your hand on the part that remains of the stone which is inside the edge.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides;	If it is thus broken, and the stone comes out with the urine, and the patient is cured;
et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie;	and if you cannot do it for any reason that prevents it, then tie the thread under the stone and the other above, then make the edge approach the stone between the two threads, then pull it out, and untie the thread, and clean the congealed blood which is in the wound;
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and heal them as long as they are sick.
de la piere des femmes	of the gallstones of women
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por III choses:	It rarely happens that a stone forms in women, and if it does happen, then the treatment is grievous, and is forbidden for three things:
l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge;	one is that by chance the woman is a virgin;
et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	and the second is that one cannot find a woman who is well-informed and knows how to hide her flaws, especially when she is chaste.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains;	And the third manner is that by chance one cannot find a woman who is well-informed in this art of hands;
et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil;	and the fourth manner is that the stone of the woman is deeper than the stone of the man, because it requires a deeper and larger incision, and there is great danger in it. And it is necessary to have a well-informed and skilled midwife, and to take the one who has a good touch, and if you do not find one, then seek out a chaste and subtle midwife;
et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere;	and it presents a woman well-versed in the life of women, or a woman who knows a part of the art, and instructs her to do what you instruct regarding the treatment of the stone;
et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge:	and consider very carefully if the woman is a virgin:
adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere;	then you must put your finger or foundation and seek the stone;
et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	and if she finds it, if the stone constricts beneath her finger, and instructs her to put her finger or with the patient, and seeks and presses her left hand on the belly firmly.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse;	If she finds it, then it is necessary that she moves it gently from the entrance of the belly down, as far as it comes to the root of the thigh;
puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie;	then cut into the stone at the root of the thigh against the middle of the womb, where it is moved and appears, and feel the stone in that area;
et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite;	and does not move his finger from the stone or the anvil, and let the first toe be cut;
puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont:	then put the heat in the cut, if you feel the stone with a growing wound so that the stone can be expelled, and know that there are many kinds of stones:
c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	it is to know, small and large and rough and smooth, long and round, and those that have corners.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	if you know the similarities to understand the discharge.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	And if the blood is lacking, then put on the limb a warm broth, and hold for an hour until the blood is stanched;
puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre;	then return to your work, until the stone is expelled, and have instruments that I have told you about in the extraction of the stone suitable for you to help with your task;
et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide;	and if the blood is lacking, and it is from the artery that is cut, then put powder on the limb and bind with bandages and with splints, and do not recommence this, and leave the stone and do not try to pull it, lest by accident the patient might die;
puis cure la plaie.	After the wound has healed.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of the blood is relieved, and the limbs are strengthened, it returns to its work, as long as the stone is not broken.
de hernie carnouse	of a fleshy hernia
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef;	Rumor aqueous is nothing other than an accumulation of moisture or whiteness that is outside the heart of the intestines, which contains the egg;
et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit I autre oef;	and it is called "syfac", and sometimes it is properly in the web of the egg, if one thinks that this is another egg;
et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit;	and it is the skin of the intestine between the white syfac that we have spoken of;
et ceu n’avient se poc non.	and this does not happen often.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the generation of this humor is from weakness that comes to the intestines, and spreads that material.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors:	And sometimes it comes from a blow to the intestines, and this moisture has many colors:
ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus;	or it is yellowish in color declining to jaundice, or it is without redness, or black, or pale watery, and this happens more;
et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	and these are the signs to recognize this condition, for if it is white like we have said, then the abscesses are ready, not very long like the shape of an egg, and the skin does not appear, for there is moisture all around.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef;	And if there is moisture in the actual tissue, then the abscesses are ready with part of the egg, and therefore one thinks that it is another egg;
et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien;	and if the moisture is between the skin of the intestines and the white tissue, then it smells bad;
donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	then when you want to know the color of the moisture, examine thoroughly all the interior quarters, from which the form is thus before.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to what comes after the intermission, judge what is inside.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors;	And when we treat them with iron, it is necessary that the patient be healthy according to his power and the replenishment of his body;
puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz;	then put him on his back, on something a little high, and put many cloths under him;
puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions;	then sit on his left side, and instruct the minister to sit on the right, and extend the rod to one of the two ribs near the navel;
puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir;	then take the left spatula, and cut the skin of the groin in the middle of the thigh up to near the navel, and let the incision be straight, dividing the skin of the groin right up to the white skin, and scrape subtly according to his power;
puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont;	then pierce the thin skin of water at one large opening, and extract all the water, and then put your nails, and stretch the skin upwards;
et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement;	and do not touch the area of the intestines, but only the surface;
cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue;	cut all or in pieces the membrane surrounding it subtly, that if you do not cut it well wisely, the fever will return;
et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac;	and if the humor rises to the top of the work, then reset it in its place when you have completed the work of the surface;
puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then assemble the two lips of the intestine's membrane to a suture, then treat it as with other wounds, until it is healed.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc;	And if you find the humor corrupted by another disease, then it is necessary to ligate the vessels that are suspended, in fear of the effusion of blood;
puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	then cut the intestine with all its suspensions, and extract the humor, and treat it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices;	And if the shoulder is assembled in two parts together, know that these are two roots;
si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset;	if you cut the other part just as you did the first equally, then suck out the blood, and put on the wound a wet linen cloth with rose oil;
et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	and put on another wet linen cloth in wine and oil, and put on the two hips, and put double blankets, and tie it up with all the linen that is according to this form:
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil;	Then take two blankets, and fill them with linen pads according to this likeness and let them be assembled by sewing on the throat of the arms, and one of the hands hold it at the base up to the back, and the other at the part of the groin;
et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier;	and the other two ends on the shoulders, and let it be all assembled the restraint in the loop of the arm;
et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers;	and sometimes this medicine of cauterization is applied to the iron in the fire, and it is that you should take the subtle cauterizing tool, and cut the skin of the intestines, and be heated as we have said, so that the white crust that contains the pus is uncovered;
si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	if you take the cauterizer in this form, and pierce that crust as with needles, and scratch it with this subtle hot cauterizer:
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout;	And cut in all the ways that you can, until you scrape everything;
et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef;	and beware that the fever does not touch the eye;
et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve;	and know that this work is more salvage;
et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille;	and beware of the flowing of blood, and doctors who are ignorant of the works of surgery;
et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	and if nothing makes you contravened, or hot abscess or flowing of blood or other thing, then cure that which makes you contravened, according to what has been said before.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit;	And if the patient is fearful, and does not want to undergo this treatment due to its horror, then suggest a perforation, as I tell you, and it is that when you are well assured by the signs that we have mentioned that the cure is at hand, then make the patient sit on a raised seat;
pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors;	Then pierce the abscess in the lower part of the entire spatula, and make the perforation as long as the body allows;
et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer;	and let the wound be wide, so that all the pus can flow out;
puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee;	then put cotton on the wound, and bind it, and let the remaining pus flow out, then treat it until the wound is healed;
et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant;	and if the white cloth does not allow the pus to exit from the mouth of the wound, then it is necessary that you push a probe or instrument through which one treats the pus of dropsy, whose shape is described before;
et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	and enlarge the wound a little, and know that the edge returns, and is assembled after six months or within a year, and when it is assembled as before, then the patient will recover their days.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the intestines
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse;	Know that in the cutting of this branch there is fear in many ways, for which it seems to me that moving it is worth more than leaving it.
et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	and I will tell you the work and the symptoms of the abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions;	I say then that many abscesses come to the body, and likewise to the intestines;
et c’est par mout de cas.	and it is in many cases.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion;	It is to know by the overflow of bitter and sharp humor, which is spread to the intestines, or from a blow;
et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors;	and the color of the abscess is according to the color of the body;
et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief;	and does not find a point of pain, and it is a grievous abscess;
et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	and by chance is an abscess that is rough and rock-like, and of a putrid color, and sometimes comes from a swelling of the artery, or from inflammation of a vein.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois;	When it is from a swelling of the artery, it is recognized by the feeling of a warm abscess, when you press on it with your fingers;
et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	and it does not matter that you touch it.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars;	That which is made from inflammation of a vein is recognized by its appearance to the touch of the fingers, and one can well perform the cutting on this likeness, and on the other similar things;
et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	and it is that you cut the skin of the intestines, then the vein is on high, and the fat tissue appears white, and delivers the suspension from all parts of the vein.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope;	If the vein is already swollen with these new wounds, then it is necessary that you treat the vein, and cut it.
et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	and if it is near the surface, or in that which is within the vessels, then it is necessary that you deliver the entire tendon, and cut it thoroughly.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the birth of the wound is in the rear of the body, then it is necessary that you cut it entirely, and extract the vein, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your tasks are completed, then apply the plaster of wool and oil to the wound, and treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the entrails
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait;	This is an abscess enclosed in a covering resembling a tumor, with the softening of the entrails, and the patient complains grievously when he walks;
et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	and the treatment of this disease is as well known to be fearful as it was before, and nonetheless we will tell you the work of it, according to what the ancients did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment;	It is necessary that you make the patient sit on a seat or a bed, then tie the suspender of the thighs below to your fingers, all the vessels that are near to the privy parts, and pull the master arteries, and stretch them firmly;
puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples;	then cut with the spatula knife broadly through the skin straight across the vessels, as long as they are uncovered, and then scrape each part, as we have said in the extraction of the arteries that are in the temples;
puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief;	then stick a needle where it has a double thread, and tie it to the first place or where the vein has come, and tie it again at the other end;
puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues;	Then cut the cupping glasses straight, according to the length of the body, and remove the corrupted humors;
puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions;	Then treat the wound like the others or where a bow is inserted, so that no vessel ruptures which would nourish one of the intestines;
car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz;	For from this comes no evil, and if all the vessels come to an end, then it is necessary to drag the intestines out through all the vessels;
si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	so that the eyes do not lose their nourishment due to the incision of the vessels, and wither and cannot be helped.
de la routure dou syfac	of the rupture of the spleen
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions;	The coming of this flux is by the section that comes from the spleen, or the extension to the belly in the part of the loins, because the intestine descends from that rupture to one of the intestines;
et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes:	and this curvature is of the hip, or of the extension of it, and come these two manners from many causes:
ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses;	or from a blow, or from a jump, or from a fall, or from the lifting of heavy loads, and from similar things;
et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement;	and the symptoms when it is an extension of the hip, are that they come gradually and slowly, over a long period of time, and do not come suddenly;
et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	and the abscesses are even up to the depth, because the hip presses on the intestine.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the symptoms are when it is a dislocation of the hip, that it causes sudden severe pain to appear, and there are various abscesses showing beneath the skin, and it is because of the issue with the intestine and the body at the joint of the hip.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And sometimes the intestines slip with the intestine, and are retained there, and cause great pain to suffer for the patient, especially when it is pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these iron treatments there is fear, because it makes them want to urinate.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir;	And the manner of the work is that you instruct the patient to push the intestine back into its place within the wound, if it can be returned.
puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes;	then let it be supported on his neck, between your hands, and lift the hips;
puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc;	then stretch the skin upwards, and cut all the skin of the intestines along the length;
puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir;	then put within the liver of the waist, twelve inches according to that which you have in your craft for opening the wound, and let it be such that the abscess can issue out.
puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars;	then scrape the surface that is beneath the skin of the intestines, until the white surface appears uncovered on all sides;
puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac;	then put your two index fingers in that which guides the intestine, in that which is between the white surface that is beneath the skin of the navel, and between the second surface, and separate that which is behind the navel, and between the second surface;
et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille;	and then move to the right hand inside the heart of the intestines, and let the white skin be high on your left hand, and lift the use to all the skin towards the waist;
et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement;	and instruct the minister that he stretch the use upwards, and untie what is tied behind the binding;
et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz;	and ask your fingers if there is a point of the intestine enveloped or white skin hardened, and if you find any thing, then push it to the bottom of the belly;
puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions;	then take a needle where there is a thick thread made of threads, and push it into the back part of the skin, which is after the skin of the intestines;
aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz;	after the waist, then cut the heads that appear with threads, as long as there are four threads;
puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars;	then assemble them one on top of the other in the manner of a cross, and tie the skin with a strong thread of two parts;
puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne;	Then envelop the heads of the veins, and bind them firmly in two places, so that none of the vessels that nourish them can enter into them, lest the abscess that is there may grow.
et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi;	and put the third string according to the first string long two fingers from that one, and after these two strings leave two spaces which is two fingers from the heart of the body the size of a finger;
et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte;	and after all the other according to the roundness that the swelling makes;
puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant;	then cut in the part that is near the skin of the body, as far as the blood and the bone, as we have said before;
puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	then put a moist bandage in oil, and apply it to the wounds, and I will apply the string that we have mentioned.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And sometimes the white skin that we have mentioned is cauterized after the incision, due to fear of excessive blood flow.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui;	For this happens often, and let the urine flow as long as it can by itself;
et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece;	and if it delays in coming out, then apply warm aromatics, and put on what we have said, until it flows;
puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	then heal the wound with another treatment, until it is perfectly healthy.
de hernie carnouse	of a fleshy hernia
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this condition I never saw anyone who dared to perform the treatment with iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz;	And the old ones said that it is made like the branch which is next to the bladder, in such a way that you tie the vessels, after the cut above the testicles lightly with a thread;
puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient;	then cut in the middle, and treat the abscess of what has burst, until the vessels heal;
et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and heal it as we have said, until it is healthy.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus;	Sometimes a dislocation occurs in the joints, as we have said, and it opens the limbs;
et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres;	and does not touch the intestines at all, to the liver, and if it touches them, it's a little, and repairs all hours;
et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent;	and in any case if it stays too long in this spot, the wound or catarh grows, until the intestine touches;
et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert;	and this happens due to the extension of the catarh which is in the joints, as we have said, because it is stretched, then softened and swollen are the limbs and opened;
et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit;	and the cure is by cauterization, as we previously said;
et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere:	and sometimes it is cured with iron in this manner:
et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois;	and it is that the patient puts his back between your hands, then cut the limb of the dislocated joint swollen with a large quantity of three fingers;
et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac;	and then extract the abscess that is beneath the skin which becomes apparent, then take the razor and place it on the apparent abscess;
et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre;	and press to the depth of the belly, then cut the two apparent abscesses on the head of the razor, and cut one and the other;
puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines;	then extract the head of the razor, and do not touch any part of the abscess nor extend the use to another thing, as I have made you know in the treatment of the ulceration of the intestines;
puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	then heal it by the treatment of wounds.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when you touch the threads, if it is infected and treat the wound, until it is healed.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The abscess is constricted, and has no appearance in the routing, and the cauterizations are gentle on this spot, and closer to health.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	of the softening of the skin of the intestines
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir;	Many times is softened the skin of the intestines in some men, because the guts that are inside are softened, and it is bad to see;
et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil;	and it is necessary, when one wants to cure it, to make the patient lie on his back, and to cut the skin that is softened on the natural skin;
puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a III costures ou IIII fermement;	then bring the two lips together to a seam, and if you see, first cut away the excess of the softened skin to three or four stitches firmly;
puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	then cut between the stitches, and cure it like the other wounds, until it be healed, and tighten the thread.
dou chastrement	of punishment
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre;	Punishments are forbidden in our law, and therefore it pleases me that I do not speak of them in this book;
et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres:	and there are not necessary forces except by two means:
dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure;	where one is that the physician responds in writing when asked, and writes the treatment;
et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	and the other, because we often have need of the assistance of certain beasts to aid us, such as goats and rams and cats and other beasts.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres:	I say then that chastisement is made in two ways:
ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	either by traction, or by incision.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant;	In the one that we do by traction, we make the beast sit in warm water, as long as the bowel is softened and hanging;
puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	then take them with your hand, until they are put back and you do not feel them anymore.
Du chastrement de taille:	Of the treatment of the cut:
covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez;	it is necessary that you hold the beast, and press the skin of the intestines with your left hand, then tie it above, and cut above each hoof with a blow, when you have well scarified them;
et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz;	and let none of the thick skin and the subtle skin which is on the vessels;
et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure;	and this manner of punishment is worse than that which is done by traction, because with traction there remains by chance some thing from the gut, for which the beast desires luxury;
puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	then heal the wound until it is healthy.
des hermofrodites	of hermaphrodites
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes:	Hermaphrodite is a being in two manners, male and female:
l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	one is that between the two hips open as well as the figure of the nature of a woman, where it has hair, and sometimes the urine comes out.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	And the other manner is in women, and has on the genital area like a penis and two hips.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies;	And the treatment of the man and the woman is that you cut the joined flesh all together, and treat it as other wounds;
en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	In the second manner, of men whose urine jumps through the skin of their intestines, if there is no point of cure.
de la tentigene	of the tenderness
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir;	Tenderness is a sore adjusted on the natural part, as it is too shameful to see;
et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	and some women have it so large as a hand, and this is the cure.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement;	It is necessary that you take the excess of the tenderness in your hand or with shears, and cut it lightly;
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	and do not go too deep, lest an effusion of blood does not come, then one cure does not hinder another cure as long as it is healthy;
et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	and there is another sore that grows at the mouth of the marrow, and the filling, and by chance breaks out, and it looks like a cow's, and for this reason the old ones call it "cow disease".
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If it is necessary to cut it, as we have said the tenderness, and the treatment until it is healthy.
de erratique	of erratic
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis;	Erratic it is when the nature of the woman is not perceived, or the passage is small;
et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est;	and it is natural by birth, or accidental by disease that has come to her;
ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit;	or it is by charming adjusted, or of the spleen subtle or sharp, and it is made deep in the liver, or in the sides, or below, or wherever it may be;
et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir;	and prevents conception, and childbearing, and by chance causes the flow to have;
et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	and the knowledge of this thing is through the examination of the urine.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	If the swelling appears to be near the thigh or in the back.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi:	If it is of the spleen subtle and sharp, and it is near the liver, then hasten, and bend the knee:
met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes;	Put your two thumbs together, and the woman should be on her back, spreading her legs;
puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens;	then press the two fingers firmly, until the subtle skin surface becomes round, and is above the swelling;
puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	then take the vein, and the mole in oil, and put it on the body, and give the woman a house remedy each day, so that she cannot suffer.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	And if the skin is hard and thick, then it is necessary to cut it with a spatula similar to a knife blade.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope;	If the swelling is of fleshy tissue, then suck on the abscess and cut it;
et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef;	and have the blood-stanching medicines, such as hematite, dragon's blood, incense, mixed with rose water;
puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder;	then apply a bandage of wide cloth, so that the wound cannot suffer;
et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec;	and thus let it be for a long time, and put a bandage of dry flax.
puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	then let him be cured by other treatments until he is healthy.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	And when in the marrow comes a new flesh, if it covers according to this manner, then it is not an ulcerous abscess.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	For the ulcerated abscess that is in the marrow, one should not touch it with iron.
des emorroides	of hemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul;	Hemorrhoids are overtures of veins which without hardening habitually, and when hemorrhoids are old they become thelul;
et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	and we have already said in the division the similarities of them, and the signs, and I will say here those which receive a cure.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	I say that hemorrhoids and thelul, when they are deep in the marrow, and do not appear to feeling, if it is not the cure by iron.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	Those who are at the mouth of the abscess, one can feel, are those that one can cure.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses;	It is necessary then that you put the woman in a cold house, then stop the discharge of her menses, and cut it off at its roots, then powder on medicines that restrain blood, such as birthwort and dragon's blood and incense, and similar things;
puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide;	then let her feet soak in the bath for an hour, then put her in a cold water;
et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	and if a discharge of blood comes, make her sit in a decoction of sumach and the bark of pomegranate trees and gall and similar things, and then take flour of barley, and mix it with honey and vinegar, and make a plaster to put on her back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	And if it dries, it is good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir;	If that is not so, then have cauterized the ventoses on the back and the same for the breast;
puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	then take the wool, and anoint it with juice of plantain or with juice of aglentier mixed with old wine, and cauterize the body.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	And when the abscess has burst, then treat the body with ointment as long as it is sore;
et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul;	and that which is called "albathir" is red, and resembles the rough head, if it is necessary to scrape as I have said the tumor;
et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then treat it until it is healthy.
des apostemes de la marris	of the abscesses of the marrow
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	Many kinds of abscesses come in the marrow, such as cancer and cold abscess and herpes and eczemas and fistulas and hemorrhoids and hot abscess, and many other diseases that I have mentioned in the division.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe;	It is necessary then to describe in this treatise the hot abscess that comes in the marrow, which is not among the abscesses that fall into a mass.
et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	and if you want to know the work of iron, look at the abscess when it begins to come, and full of heat and fever, and if it becomes red you can see it.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie;	Then do not hurry to pierce, but make me wait until the pain is eased;
et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe;	and then make the patient sit on a seat, and let him have two small seats or where he can lean, and support himself on his back and bring his feet together as far apart from the thigh;
et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien;	and let his thighs be spread, and put his arms under his knees, and tie them well with a tight band;
puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme;	then suck the abscess towards the right side, and introduce the instrument through which one sucks the marrow, from which afterwards comes the pus;
et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide;	and it is necessary that when you want to administer this instrument, that you first insert the rod to know the depth of the marrow, so that what enters from the instrument does not come more deeply than it should, and that it does not harm the patient;
et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve;	and if the instruments are larger, then it is necessary to cover the depth of the marrow with cloths, so that the instruments do not harm them;
et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	and it is necessary that he places the point of the instrument upwards, and that he holds the instrument.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit;	And when the abscesses open, and one makes an incision with a soft hand, then it is necessary to cover the head with a spatula or a plaster.
et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec;	and when the wound is empty, then it is necessary that you put in the wound moist dressings with rose oil, or with green dry oil;
et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites;	and put the tent or dressing of strong fabric at the bottom of the wound, and put over the wound and on the bandage a clean moist cloth in water or evil humors that are cooked;
puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then the treatment after 2 days of application having come to that point, as long as it is healthy;
et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites;	and sometimes raise the dressing and the wound with a cluster of water and honey, and then with water or roots of lily and aristolochia that are cooked;
puis reveigne a l’oignement.	then return to the application.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	And if the wound has grown back onto the dressing, then it is necessary that you beware of iron cauterization, but rather treat it as we have said in this section.
de l’enfantement	of swelling
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar:	It is suitable first to teach the midwife that she recognize the natural signs of the swelling, and the symptoms are when you see the woman press down below, and desire to smell the air:
adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir;	then the sinews of the infant hasten to come out;
adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui;	and then one knows that these infant movements are according to natural design, and the issue is under its head, and the second with it;
et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost;	and when you see these signs, then you must gently press his belly, so that the intestines protrude out;
car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification;	for when it descends upon its head, the secondine goes with it, and the mass of its superfluities is purged by good purification;
et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	and that which comes otherwise does not come naturally.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises;	For it comes sometimes upon its feet, and comes out of the body or the head, and the hands, or it comes upon its belly, or penis, and is turned by accident over its neck, and by other bad postures;
si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	so it is necessary for the healer to be wise and subtle in these things, and beware of error and deception, and I will show you all the postures as one ought to help with them.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent;	If the infant comes out naturally onto its head, and the woman gives birth grievously, and the strength of the womb is weak, then make her sit on a saddle, or the women hold her;
et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	and let its natural oil or rennet be cooked, and then put the bath between its two legs the little spatula of which this is the form:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers;	and cut the second skin, and cut to one nail as much as the moisture that is in the corpse fingers;
et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament;	and press the woman's belly until the infant descends, and if it does not descend, then it is necessary to clysterize the woman with massage of rennet with oil of cypress;
puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre:	then make her press and rub with condition, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour:
si istra maintenant l’enfes.	now the infant will come out.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc;	And if the two hands are dislocated, then you must reset them lightly, a little at a time;
et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut;	and if they cannot enter, then put the woman on a seat, and raise her feet up high;
puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement;	then remove the seat from the ground, and hold the woman, so she does not fall during the removal;
et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	and if the hands cannot enter, and the infant is dead, then cut the hands at the joint that is situated here before, and extract the infant, and reset in the same way.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	of the issue of the infant on its feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut;	When the infant comes onto its feet, then it is necessary to throw upwards;
et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz;	and then turn it little by little, until it is straight;
puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	then take one of the feet and stretch it little by little.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi;	When the skin is healthy, if it is ordered to be pressed, and it is stretched from its natural condition;
si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	If health is lacking, God will provide.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it is not lacking as we have said, then turn it little by little, until it is according to the natural shape.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For then it is lighter.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier;	And if it does not come as we have said, then take the muscle of the wing, and oil of cedar, and melted gum, and crush all in a mortar;
et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz;	and apply this mixture to the woman's nature inside and outside this treatment, then have her sit in hot water until the hips are sweating;
et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre;	and when she is moistened from below, have her wear a girdle of myrrh, and put it below, and leave it for an hour;
puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	Then make her sit on a seat, then make her stretch out and constrain her mouth and her nose, and press her belly lightly, for the infant is coming out now.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	from the issue of the infant upon its knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc;	When the infant comes in this manner, thus one puts the basin of its hands little by little;
puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit;	then it should be laid on its neck, and its feet hanging down, and it should be placed on the bed;
et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval;	and one folds its hands little by little, and then presses its hands on the belly, and lifts the cushions from beneath, until it is prepared below;
et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains;	and if the infant does not come out, one takes its feet and moves them forcefully, then moves the belly upward, then one pushes the hands;
et ewe l’enfant poc et poc;	and brings the infant little by little;
et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	and instruct the woman to grasp herself as much as the infant comes out.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	from the exit of the child who comes out with one hand while
I covient engignier a ramener la main:	It is necessary to bring back the hand:
s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler;	if you cannot bring it back, then make the woman get up and walk;
s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment;	if she cannot walk, then make her sit on the bed, and separate her legs forcibly;
puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit;	then anoint the muscle that I have described;
et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main;	and if she does not deliver, then make her sit on a seat, and prepare to bring back the hand;
et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	and turn the child according to its natural position, and make her exert herself, and instruct her to grasp herself as much as the infant comes out forcefully.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	of the issue of the child on its neck, and having expanded its hands, and its face turned towards its mother's back.
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement;	It is necessary that the barber holds his hand, then turns it little by little, and lifts the eye lightly;
et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc;	and when it is even, put on the natural muscle of the thigh and heel, as we have said, then instruct her to move it little by little;
et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne;	and when you have done this, make her sit on the seat, and instruct her to take it;
et la fai esternuer.	and make her stretch.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	in the same manner for the second toe
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie;	When it comes to this manner for the second toe, cut the second toe from one nail, until the mucus is emptied;
et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes;	and if it swells up on its face and on its neck, cut it from the swelling, so it is not retained, and move the swellings;
puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois:	then put the child inside, as long as you have placed it as it is necessary, and instruct the woman to take it at least once:
adonques si istra legierement.	Then one must treat it lightly.
de l’issue des gemelz	from the issue of the twins
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent III ou IIII;	It is known that twins are born many times, and sometimes three or four are born;
et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	and this is not a strange thing, and it happens rarely.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom;	Two are a strange thing, and do not live, with few names;
je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude;	I know that they are multiple, and are divided by the spleen which divides them, which is tied to the navel;
et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	and sometimes they come out naturally like one entire piece, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait;	And if they come out with difficulty, then the treatment is as we have said, and let the subtle bath, and make all that it does gently;
et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	and do this as it is worth for health.
de plusors enfans	Of many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient;	Sometimes they are formed in the womb I or II or III or IV or V or VI or VII, or many up to XV, and all are perfectly formed in the shape of a child by the measurement of the wise glorious sage, and it is necessary that the wise woman knows all this, for by chance similar things happen;
si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	thus do according to what is needed.
de l’enfant mort	of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains;	When you treat the woman of the dead or stillborn child, as I have said in the section, and it does not come out, and you are forced to perform a manual operation;
si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort;	it is necessary that you know if the woman is of sound virtue, and has no accident or fear of death;
si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees;	it is necessary that the woman be leaning on her back, and her thighs be bent downwards, and her legs be lifted;
et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant;	and let the nurse place the tie of two parts, where it is tied to the bed so that it is not treated for the dislocation of the child;
puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges;	then rub the mouth of the marrow with oil made from nutmeg and fenugreek and flaxseed, then anoint the patient's hands with these oils and these rubbings;
puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief;	then gently push into the marrow, then choose the place where it pushes the ankles that are suitable for this, and take care that the sinews are prepared so that they come down from the head;
si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes;	if it fixes the ankles in his eyes or in his neck or in his mouth or in his palate or under the beard or in the jaw or near the ribs, and if the dislocation is downward towards the feet, then fix or prick there and the tender ribs;
et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide;	and it is necessary that he pulls the elbow to his right hand, and puts the curve between the two fingers of the left hand, and bends all his hand slightly, and inserts the elbow into any of these places that we have mentioned, until it comes to the empty space;
et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	and this is the shape of the elbow:
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz;	then insert against the other elbow, or the third in your craft, so that the extractions are equal;
et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	and then stretch equally by moving from one side to the other, for muscles to exit, and let the elbows be held by muscles, as this is the shape:
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie;	And if one part remains, then anoint the joint with oil from his fingers, and bend it towards that part, and pull the other part;
et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	and if there remains a point, then put this elbow or higher place, and do that until all of it comes out.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote;	And if one hand comes in front of the other, and it cannot be brought back due to constriction, then you must wrap it in a bandage, until it becomes whole;
puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	then put the cup on the joint of the sole or the heel, and thus you must do on the other hand, and on the two feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue;	And if the head of the infant is large and it is constricted in the birth, or it has the head assembled with the shoulders, then you must put the spine between your two hands, and make the head and extract the shoulder;
ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui;	or you round it with the instrument called "almidach", from which the shape comes with the instruments or chapter that follows this one;
et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment;	and thus same make the infants with large head naturally;
et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer;	and then pull the bones to the tendons, and if the head is sound and it constricts with force, it should be split, until the moisture that is in the foot issues out;
et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues;	and if it cannot exit, then cut it by pieces at the mouth that you can;
et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	and if it is inflamed in the belly or below the ribs, then it is necessary that you pierce it as long as the humors flow.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if the inflammation is on his feet, then the attraction is light, and the remedies applied to the mouth of the abscess are light.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main;	And if it is constricted in the belly or in the chest, then it is necessary that you extract it with a cloth wrapped around the hand;
et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre;	and bind the belly or the chest, as long as the humors which are there flow;
et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris;	and if the other member is swollen, and the skin remains, then put his hand in the depth of the abscess, and pull it right up to the mouth of the abscess;
puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer;	then boil one or two onions, and rub them on the area;
et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses;	and if the mouth of the abscess is constricted by hot aposteme that has come to it, then it does not need to be lanced, but instead treated with moist and greasy things;
et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	and apply plasters, and put on soft, moistening and soothing applications.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif;	And if the navel is on his side, and you can make it even, then treat it with what we have said for a living child;
et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	and let no hair remain, then rub it on in pieces, and leave nothing of the second layer.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris;	And when you have done this, treat it with what we have said for hot abscesses that come in the flesh;
et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	and if discharge of blood comes, then apply a restrictive dressing, and treat with other cures.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut I autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman whose belly had an infant that had died, then she conceived another on top of that, and the other died.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time, there came to him an abscess in the navel, and it swelled so much that it burst open, and began to suppurate greatly.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called to the cure, and I thought for a long time, and I could not suture the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I put on a plaster of strong attraction, and from it came out a bone, and after some days another one.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I marveled greatly, because that which has a belly has no bones in it.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	I thought that they were the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point;	I searched the wound, and extracted many bones, until the woman was in a better state;
et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu;	and I watched over the woman for a long time, and she coughed up at times a little bone from her body;
et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	and I have not recounted this chapter before because of that, when the masters find a strange thing, they know how to put aid.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	to bring the hammer back to its place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres;	Then comes the shape of the presser, where one puts the pounds;
et a II tornans as II chiés des II liiens.	and to two turnings at the two heads of the two tendons.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux;	In any case, the horns should be more subtle than the restricter, and should be made of ebony or boxwood;
et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi;	and the mouth of the fist should be two fingers wide, and the margin of the trees should be two, and in length a palm and a half;
et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus;	and between the two limbs there should be two adjustements of this same fist, which should be fixed on one and on the other, a half palm in length or a little more;
et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	and this adjustment is thrust into the mouth of the hammer for opening when one turns the two horns.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles;	Another form, in its likeness more subtle and lighter, should be made of wood of ebony or boxwood, according to the likeness of the tongs.
et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large;	and it has two arms, two adjustments, as you see, one palm in length, and two fingers in width;
et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes;	and when you see to open the device with all the instrument, make the woman sit on the bed, the feet hanging and the legs spread, then thrust the two adjustments joined together in the device, and hold the head of the instrument between her thighs;
puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	then open your hand with all the instrument, as you have made the tongs equally, according to the quantity that you want to open the mouth of the device, until the ball makes what she wants.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances;	These instruments are all elevated, and are multiplied according to their similarities;
et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	and when the surgeon has them prepared, then they are more ready for the work, and higher in price to men according to their quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	Do not despise the instrument that you do not have prepared, for their necessities are not excusable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis;	When the secondine is retained in the infant, then you must instruct the patient to retain her breath, and then make her spit out the mucus, and hold her hands at the mouth and nose;
et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	and if she coughs through that, it is good.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire;	If not, then take the pot, and make a poultice or plaster, and put in it herbs that can open the mouth of the throat, such as calamen, rue, anise, chamomile, cassialigne, and centory;
toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu;	All these herbs, or some of them, are cooked or placed in water over the fire;
puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris;	then put a cane or stick through the hole of the pot, and the other end in the mouth of the mare, and pull until the vapors come out from inside the mare;
puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	then make it spew, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If the second intestine is injured.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine;	And if it remains after this treatment, and is not purified, instruct the woman to soak her left hand in oil of sesame or in mastication of althea, and then put it in the nature, and massage the intestine;
et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction;	and when she has found it, if she takes it and stretches it little by little straightly, so that the intestine does not tear at the extraction;
mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie;	but first move it lightly to the right and to the left, and then pull it;
si venra et se desaerdra.	If it comes and becomes disordered.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes;	And if the mouth of the stomach is constricted, we have spoken of the treatment of purging, and of the fumigation of herbs;
et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire;	and if it is not any of all that which we have said, beware that you do not falsify the treatment;
mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon;	but it is suitable that what is at the mouth of the stomach, you should apply to the hip of the woman, then anoint her with a fourfold ointment;
si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer;	if the abscess bursts and breaks, and a fever comes;
mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	but nevertheless, when it bursts if there comes bad smell to the stomach and to the head, and bothers the patient.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu:	If then suitable fumigations are applied to this:
aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	some of the ancients have experienced fumigation of cresson and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The shape of the instrument by which one purges the woman of the retention of the flowers and of the secundine is this:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu;	And it is to be seen similar to a chain, and put the thin head in the nature, and the large feet on the fire;
et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	and let the purging be on the coals, and the string until it is exhausted, and recommence another.
de percier lou fondement	to pierce the foundation
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac:	Many children are born who do not have the foundation pierced, yet the upper part is stopped up with subtle sap:
si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche;	so it is necessary to the nurse that she pierce that upper part with her finger, and not pierce the thin membrane of the spine, and guard the ligament so that she does not touch it;
puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	then put on the moist wool in wine and in oil, then the treatment of anointing until it is healed.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it will not reset, then put or thrust a cane of plaster, and leave it there for several days, and let the swelling subside before going into chambers.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme;	And sometimes there comes sudden swellings from a wound or an abscess;
si covient coper celui soudement:	if it is necessary to treat that swelling suddenly:
si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	it should be treated, as we have said regarding the plaster cast.
de la fistule dou fondement	of the fistula of the foundation
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors;	Fistulas that come from the bottom are an affliction, and worse than those that come from the bottom of the bowel, or in the space between the two parts, either to one fistula or several;
et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans;	and when that affliction is ancient, it operates, and increases moisture with white or subtle bowel discharge, and sometimes these fistulas are persistent;
et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	and they are known by this, that there is vomiting or flatulence when the patient makes evacuation, and by chance in jumping or sudden movement.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge;	And if there are fistulas that reach to the bladder, and to the middle of the penis;
et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	and they extend to the joint of the thigh, and to the top of the hip.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant:	And then one knows if the fistula passes into the fundament, and does not pass through:
et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	and it is that you apply your right index finger to the fundament, and insert a thin needle of bronze or iron into the fistula when there is no twisting.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit;	And if it has twisting, then you insert a thread of thin flax, or a horse hair, until you feel the thread or the hair at your finger;
et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit:	and if you do not feel it, and it does not come through by evacuation or flatulence or by vomiting, as we have said:
saiches qu’elle ne perce mie;	Let it be that she does not perceive anything;
si te haste dou curer.	if you hasten to cure.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula is next to the bladder or next to the passage of urine, if it hurts the urine, and cannot be soothed by medicine.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu;	If it is pierced next to the joint of the thigh, then the tendon comes near the bone;
s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement;	if there is no twisting and the invention of pain within, then it is that it has thus swelling, and not worth medicine nor soothing by application;
et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	and in these fistulas next to, there is no cure except for work, and vanity of foolish surgeons who get involved.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos;	In one that is not next to and is not ancient, there is hope of health through iron, as I have experienced, and it is that the patient puts between your hands on their back;
et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre;	and he lifts his legs up to his thighs, and has his thighs inclined towards his stomach;
puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	then he pulls out a tenderness of the groin, or of the loin if there is a twisting, until you know where the tenderness comes from.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet;	If the patient feels it in their gut, then you should put your second finger in, and then feel that the tenderness has been penetrated;
et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans;	and if it is discovered where you feel between your fingers the liver or the flesh, then know that it is perforated;
si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	if one does not work on it, then it cannot be healed.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc;	One can indeed heal some people well with it, but it happens rarely;
et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit;	and the aid that one gives, if it is the cauterization subtle according to the width of the fistula, as it was previously stated;
et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement;	and thrust all hot into the fistula, as long as it comes from beneath the foundation;
et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil;	and do this two or three times, until you know that these fatty tissues are burned, which resemble a feather of a bird;
et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	and then treat with wet tents in butter, until that fatty tissue is strengthened, then treat with a greasy ointment, and cauterizing and soldering.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If it is thus healed, it is good.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez;	This thing, nothing else can be healed;
et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur;	and if it has a tent between, and does not perforate just to the finger which is at the foundation, and between your finger and the tent a thick covering of flesh or of skin, and you see the fistula in this which shows the covering of the gut;
si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente;	if you cut at the beginning of the fistula, and thrust beforehand before the tent, and then cauterize afterwards, until it comes to the head of the tent;
et sera delivré li tente, et cherra;	and the tendon will be freed, and will fall;
puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	then I will show you those fallen and worn-out tissues that seem like a fragment of bone, and nothing remains.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if the blood comes to an end, and cuts between you and the work, then cauterize it with fire or with a medical instrument.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses:	For the fire cauterization assembles two bony things:
c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor;	it is to know, the joining of these fallen tissues, and the stoppage of blood and the drying of the moisture;
puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe;	then treat the moist tendons with a poultice or in broken pieces, as long as the limbs give a sign, and force out the fallen tissues from the body;
puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	then treat the wound of the dislocated joints with a dressing of hard material, and these are the dried medicines.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it is restored, then it is healthy and does not relapse.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if a fistula comes near the bottom of the foundation, and it is separated from the body, then one must apply a poultice to the bottom or foundation, and inquire about that.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres:	If you feel the tension, and between two is the web or the skin or flesh, or it is ready to pierce, if there is not a way of relief and hope, by the administration of one of the three methods:
ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier;	or you cauterize it as we have said, or you cut near the bottom, or if you can put tents and cure as before;
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit;	and do not go too deep in the bottom, so that you do not cut the tendons that hold the foundation, and let the evacuations proceed according to natural intention;
puis le cure, si com nos avons dit;	then cure it, as we have said;
par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé;	by chance it will be healed, or you remove that covering and cleanse it after it has been cut from the bottom, either with a tent or with another suitable instrument;
puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues;	then anoint the wounded area with the fat that is in the wound, as much as you can;
puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement:	then study how to restore the wound, and to stop the fistula in the part against the foundation:
si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	if it is a lighter thing for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere:	And some wounds are fistulas in this manner:
et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	and it is when you push the tent into the fistula, and it is or touches the bottom beneath the skin from above, if a thread takes hold at the head in this form:
Et i boute I fil tort en II, et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And I push the twisted thread into II, and push the tent with all the thread into the fistula until it is at the head.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement;	If it passes through the margin of the bottom from within, then pull out the thread from that which has passed, so that you push your needle at the bottom;
et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II;	and pull the head of the thread, and bring the two ends together, and hold one to the other, and let it go for a day or two;
et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent;	and restrain it several times, until the thread cuts through the flesh that is between them, and separates them;
puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	then treat the wound until it is cleaned and healed.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not penetrate, then make it penetrate in all the ways that you can, if the elbow is not too deeply affected.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it is not suitable to make an opening through the joint if it is too deep, and then treat it, as we have said, until it is healed.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans;	The shape of the spinous spongy bone from which one makes the fistula is very sharp on one side and cutting;
et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	and on the other side not, because one does not cut what one should not cut, as you see here:
des emorroydes	Of the morbidities
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres:	Morbidities are of two kinds:
ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement;	or they are within the foundation, like a grain of resin, and there are small and large ones, and sometimes with blood, and there is one or several, and they are at the bottom of the foundation and at the head of the foundation;
mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors;	but those that are on the outside have little moisture, and sometimes with a bit of yellowish citrine or a bit of blood, and they have the color of the body;
et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz;	and the treatment for those who have them within the foundation, is that you instruct the patient to squeeze himself to urinate in chambers, until the foundations issue forth, and the threads appear;
si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines;	if you hasten, and hold it with forceps, or you hold it on your nail, then cut it at its roots;
et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot;	and if the ulcer cannot hold with its own moisture, then take it with a cloth, or a swab, or a piece of chamel cloth.
et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere;	and pull them apart with the hands, then cut them, and sprinkle above some hot powders that are suitable for cauterization;
ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	or you will cauterize them as it is said in the chapter on cauterization, then treat them with other treatments until they are healthy;
et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement;	and if the foundations cannot be evacuated, then give the patient a harsh and bitter suppository to wash out what is in the foundation, so that it can come out openly;
cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere;	when the sickness has taken hold, and its roots are deep in the foundation, then the treatment is difficult;
et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	and it is that you should take them with your nail or tongs, and cut them, then treat them as we have said, until they are healthy, and fear not the incision by iron.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere:	If it happens that you must treat the burn according to this method:
pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large;	Take the thread and twist it, and put it on a needle, and then pass the thread through and make the needle pierce from the other side, and turn the two parts of the thread around the needle, and let them be of equal length;
et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc;	and pull the thread firmly, then knot the thread, and withdraw the needle, and do thus for all the others, and leave one to stop the excessive flow of blood;
puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose;	then put on the bottom a moistened cloth dipped in oil or in cerate, and apply it to the bottom, and instruct the patient that he should rest;
et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then let it be until it adheres, and when they will have adhered, then treat with oil and other treatments, until he is healed.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	Dryness of the feet or foundation
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Many times there is dryness of the feet in the intestine, and by constraint of nature, and when the illness is old and medicine is not of value.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir;	It is necessary that you rest at the point of a spit or on one nail the dryness above, which does not let it be moist.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient;	then cure it as long as it is swollen as it is necessary;
et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez;	and if it cannot be swollen, then begin the rubbing again stronger than before, until it bleeds much, and is dry;
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	then cure it as long as it is bleeding.
dou fremit	of a tremor
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont;	Furuncle is a small faulty appearance in the body, and goes much deep within;
et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	and sometimes it pierces the flesh, and one feels it as if dead from a tremor, and it comes into the whole body, and more to the hands than other parts.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor;	And the treatment is that you take a vein from a wing of a goose, or a wing of a strong culture, and put that vein on the forehead, so that the circles surround the forehead entirely;
puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	then turn your hand around the vein so that you bind everything around the forehead, and put it in the background, and clear the forehead of its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see, make this from a vein of copper or iron in the same form, and let it be subtle beneath and drawn above;
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser.	Nor pierce, for it will cause pain, and cause pressure.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	And if you see, then cauterize the forehead, as it is described in the chapter on cauterization.
de la forme dou clistere	of the form of the cluster
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet;	Sometimes they make a cluster of silver or gold, or of melted copper or wire mesh;
et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	and sometimes they make some of these instruments small and large, according to what they are used for.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	These then are used in the treatment of children and those who are weak and suffering, and are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The shape of the small and large cluster is spread wide, where the belly is tied in this manner:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez;	and it has a separation where the belly is tied, as you see, and the flesh is pierced within;
et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I;	and it has on one of its sides two perforations, and on the other one;
et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre;	and the belly or bag is made with medicines of a beast's bladder or of parchment, and is pierced all around with many small perforations, and has between each perforation one thread of space, then sews into these perforations a strong thread of twisted cord in X shape or twisted around, and assembles the belly like a sieve;
et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize;	and when the medicine is inside, then apply a bandage in front with a strong thread, then give an enema;
et c’est li forme dou cercle:	and this is the shape of a circle:
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement;	And let the medicine be neither too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head of the enema with oil or with egg yolk, or a similar thing, then insert it gently;
puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet;	then press the minister's hands together, as long as it is all seen, then remove the enema, and lift the patient's legs to their chest, and if the medicine wants to come out, hold back as long as he can;
et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	and if he sleeps a night through, it is even greater aid.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you give an enema for a disease of bowel decay, and the medicine hastens to come out, then repeat it until he is healthy.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant;	And if the morbid matter is in the foundation, or in the abscess, it should be as subtle as for a child;
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	and this is the form of the subtle cluster where the skin is tight:
des plaies	of wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies;	We have already spoken in the section on the treatment of wounds;
or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	now we will tell you about the treatments with hands and medicine, according to completion.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse according to what they are made of, and according to the limbs or wounds that are affected, and of what they are made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses;	The things by which wounds are made are the throwing of stones, and the cutting of swords and knives, or of lances or clubs or arrows, or similar things;
ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres;	or that are made according to the limbs of the body, such as a wound that strikes on the neck, or on the head, or the foot, or the belly, or the liver, and similar members;
et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	and I will tell you the treatment of each wound, and begin with simple head wounds, for the memory will come in its chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut:	I say that when a simple wound comes to the head, and the bone is not broken, take care if it's an injury of stone or similar things, and the skin is entirely broken and the wound is large, and you suspect slightly an abscess of heat:
si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree;	if the wound is so much worse from the head injury that if it comes with a little blood from the wound, and the blood is on the contrary side of the injured part;
et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	and forbid the patient excess of wine and of coarse meats.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char;	And if he does not want to bleed, his food should be diminished, and he should not drink wine, nor eat any meat;
et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice;	and put on the wound, if abscesses or ulcers come, cotton moistened in rose oil or in tightening wine;
et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés;	and if there is no hot abscess, then put on the wound, if it is fresh with all its blood, and it has not been moved by air, powder, which I will discuss a little later;
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if the blood has been moved, then put on some ointments, as long as it is healthy.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large like that of a sword and similar, and the lips cannot be assembled by themselves with tape, then assemble them by stitching, as I will describe for wounds of the belly, concerning stitching.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope;	If the wound is uncovered to the bone, and it is narrow, and does not hold except for a little, then cover it;
puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	After the cure of the wound with medicine, and restoring the flesh on the skin, instruct the patient to eat coarse foods, such as toasted and roasted meat, like pork, and similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure;	And if you find decayed skin, and it does not adhere to the bone, then cut away all the decayed part, and apply force, then treat the wound.
et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil;	and if an artery is in the wound or vein, without cutting, and it cannot be staunched with medicine, seek out the artery, and if you find it dislocated, then tie it with a thread.
et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	and if this does not help, then cauterize it.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere:	And if these wounds are small and simple, then the treatment is light:
et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	and it is that you put in this powder which dries just as the arsenic treats the wound.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est:	And the method of the powder is thus:
pren encens une partie;	Take a part of incense;
sanc de dragon II parties;	blood of dragon two parts;
chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc;	living salts three parts, and powder subtly, and apply to the wound, and extract warmly, until it is well joined and united with all its blood;
et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle;	and then bind it well, and leave it unbound, so it does not swell;
car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	for one should not remove the medicine until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And sometimes one makes this with salts alone, when one does not have incense or blood of dragon, but that the arsenic has not moved the wound.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre;	And if the arsenic has moved the wound, mix it in this way, then do not put any of this powder;
mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe;	but put on some digestive ointments, or poultices of barley flour made with water and honey, until it is entirely healed;
puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then heal other healings as long as he is healthy.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz;	And if a bone breaks with the wound, and it is small, then extract it with subtle pinces.
et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	and I will tell you later about the fractures of the head.
de la plaie dou col	of the wound of the neck
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If a wound comes to the neck and it is simple, there is no difference between it and that of the head, but if the nerves of the neck or the artery is cut.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire;	If it's the nerves, do not attempt any other treatment, and do not apply anything constricting, for it harms the nerves and causes them to retract.
et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres;	and do not put anything cold on the wound, for the substance of the nerves is cold, and their connection is with the brain, which is the highest member.
mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	But let the medicine be soothing, as if warm water is poured into sweet oil, and mixed with rose oil, and warm water is poured also into sweet oil, and other stones of mines according to this manner, and moistenings are applied.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, then sew it with bandages, then treat it until it is healed.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu;	And if the wounds are deep and it is hairy and full of pus, then prick or pierce lower down;
et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est;	and if the artery is cut, and a flow of blood comes, then dissect, and ligate, and cauterize, it is the work of;
et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel;	and if the vein of the throat is cut, or the artery, and the conduits are blocked, through which the food goes, then sew the artery to the rope of the throat, and do not touch the throat but reset it according to its natural shape;
et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then hold it in place, and let it rest for some days, then treat it with bandages until it is healed;
et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier;	and if the wound has made an impression on the bone, thus the cartilage;
et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue;	and if it has broken bones, thus the fractured parts you will treat, and that which you cannot treat, leave until the wound suppurates, and is cleansed and freed of its discharge;
et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	and if the wound is fresh, then powder on the powder that I have spoken of.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there is bone in the wound and it has a fistula, then treat it as I have said in its chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	of the wound of a lance or of a knife cut
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne:	If it is a blow of a lance or of a knife, and the wound is deep, then consider from the wound what symptoms the patient has:
saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz;	Know then that the wound is mortal;
et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide;	and if it is not deep, and it is fresh with all its blood, do not put powder on it in the first hour, nor bind it with the blood that remains deep, and returns to the heart, and kills the patient;
mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor;	but I put on an attractive ointment, and bind it twice a day;
et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors;	and if you do not have ointment, put in the wound much cotton to suck out the moisture, and make the patient sleep on the wound three days, or four, or more;
si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne;	if there does not come a spasm, or trembling of the heart, nor strangulation of the limbs;
et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	and when you see the bones in their proper place, know then that the wound is healed.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Heal then the teeth and other healings, as long as they are sound;
et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule;	and if she cannot heal, and open, then know that it is a fistula;
si la cure si com on doit.	if the treatment is as one ought.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant;	And if the wound is an incision of a sword or a knife, and it is simple, or in the thigh or on the back, then the treatment of that which is in front;
s’elle est grans, de cousture;	if it is large, with stitching;
et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez;	and if it is small, with powder, and if it is pressed into the bone, and in a mass of fragments, thus cauterize the wound, and apply dressings if they are disjointed;
et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions;	and if they are not disjointed, then let the wound suppurate, which will alleviate the extraction;
et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	and for other wounds of other limbs, the judgment is as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	of rupture of the belly
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis;	The ruptures of the belly are great and soft and small;
de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus;	from the large wound often comes out the intestine, or the nerves of the intestines, due to which is the intrusion of the guts;
et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut;	and the stitching is more troublesome, and often worse than the small wound that of the large one, because one puts back into place the intestines with more care, lest they be put back in a state of disorder;
por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II.	because the intestine swells as soon as it feels the cold, if they are put back with more care, and for this reason the inner wound is worse, because one puts back the intestine to its place before the others;
Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres:	And it is known that the rupture of the belly is in four manners:
les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies;	the two common stitches have a place in the stitching of the belly, and the stitching of the other wounds of the body and the other proper stitches are common to the other wounds;
et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	and all of them are more prone to the injury of the belly, and I will tell and declare each one.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres:	I say that when the wound is small, and any part of the intestine comes out, and it's a grievous thing to put back, it is done by one of the two methods:
ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	or because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestine is weakened by the cold.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere:	And when it is chilled, warm it in this manner:
moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	dampen a sponge or the belly with warm water moderately, or you heat in warm water and decoction of cypress and thyme, and rub the intestine as long as the weakness is removed;
et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	and sometimes do these constraining wines, and it's wonderful that they relieve by disinflaming.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose;	And when you see the intestine departing, if it is mixed with water or oil and the wounds are poorly healed, for by this the entrance is alleviated a little of the thing;
et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes;	and if it cannot enter, then make a little wound at the instrument from which one takes the hemorrhoids;
et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait;	and the first treatment is to change the cut, that we should not cut without great necessity or need;
et c’est li estrumens por le fendre:	and these are the instruments for cutting:
si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	if it cuts within the body and does not cut outside, and see the shape:
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestine jumps out, then put it back in its natural place according to its proper form, if you have the power to do so, for this is of great value.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief;	When the wound is large, and it is in the lower part near the belly, then it is necessary that you make the patient lie on their back, and put their legs higher than their head;
et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre;	and if it is in the part below the belly, then put the head and the chest higher than the parts below, and also if the rupture of the belly is in one of the two parts then adjust it so that the injured part is higher than the other;
et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	and thus it is necessary to administer what I say in large and minor wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres;	For small wounds put that which is prepared on you, then take it between your hands and apply the ointment that you have made to all the rupture with your hand, and bring together the lips;
et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort;	and this is the common manner of stitches, and it is that you take a needle or several, according to the quantity of the width of the wound, then leave at the head of the wound the thread of two fingers, and attach a needle where it has a strong thread;
et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble;	and pierce the two sides of the leather with the two sides of the suture, which is beneath the inner leather, until you make it pierce from that part, and bring together the two ends of the suture to the four ends assembled;
puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille;	Then strain through a double thread within the needle of two parts, then assemble the two edges of the wound together, and then let the suture tighten, and fix another needle.
puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte;	Then thread the second thread as you did the first needle, and do not stop doing this according to your skill with needles, until the entire wound is restrained.
et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer:	and let the needles be moderate, between fine and coarse, for fine needles take all the flesh, and those that are too coarse cannot enter well:
por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes;	for this reason it is fitting that they be moderate;
et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure;	and it is not fitting to put the needles too far from the flesh and through the skin, so they do not take and open the wound before the suture;
et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee;	and then cut the heads of the needles, so they do not bother the patient while sleeping, and put tents or dressings on the heads of the needles to hold them in place, and leave them until the wound is healed;
et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II.	and this manner of treatment is more suitable for small wounds, for it only requires a needle or two.
Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien;	The second treatment is common, and it is that you should assemble the two parts of the skin and the two parts of the fascia together with a needle or that it has one strong middle thread;
et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras;	and when you have pierced these pieces all four together, then return the needle to the part where you began, in the manner that one sews clothes;
et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi;	and put a space between each stitch the thickness of a little finger;
ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	This stitching is suitable for a man, and I sewed a wound that a man had in his belly, which was injured by a blow, and the wound was more than a palm in width, and it gushed out intestines as much as two palms, and the wound was in the middle of the belly.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	I retrieved the intestine after it had been outside for 23 hours, and the wound was sewn up to the 15th day, and I treated it, and it became healthy.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle;	And the doctors had judged that he would die, and this was a miracle;
et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines;	and I did not treat him with ointment, because I was in a place where none could be found, nor any medicine;
et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	and I applied cotton to the wound more than twice a day, and washed it with warm water until he was healthy.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture:	Now I will tell you the two proper methods of suturing:
pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens;	take the needle, and pass it through the part from the outside to the inside;
quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer;	when it has pierced the skin from straight to straight, then leave the head of the thread at the suture or where you inserted the needle, and make it pierce another part of the flesh from inside to outside;
et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	and the understanding of this suture is that you sew as well as the felt maker makes the felts, and that you leave once the seam of one side, and take it up from the other, until the suture is entirely completed.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere:	The second manner of suturing, which the Gauls call their own, is thus: as some do, who assemble the two parts together naturally, and apply one edge of the seam to the other edge, in a similar way:
fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac;	Fix a needle or head of the thread to the middle of the flesh, and make it pierce that same flesh, and leave the two edges of the seam.
puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac;	Then turn the needle, and make it pierce from the upper part just to the inner skin, at the two edges of the seam;
puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit;	Then make it pierce one and the other from the upper part just to the inner skin, at the two edges of the thread that are on the other stitched side;
et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	and it is the worst manner of fracture and the most common.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune;	Galen says that if this symptom is shown, and no other is indicated, then one should cauterize the belly with two needles, where there is thread in each;
et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies;	and one must push one needle from one side, and the other from the other, in the manner of those who sew together torn things;
et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	and it is known that when the rupture is in the middle of the belly, then the stitching is more grievous than in other places of the belly.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies:	The judgment of the wound is such as the judgment of other wounds:
et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout;	and it is that when you find the wound fresh with all its blood, and the artery has moved, then put back the intestine, and the gut;
puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe;	then apply the powder of birthwort, and if the artery has moved, put on some ointment that is suitable, until the wound heals;
et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach;	and pull the thread, and let the vein be sucked, and the mucus;
puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then treat the wound as with the others, until it is healed;
et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	and if you have no medicine, apply on top, just as one begins to apply goose grease, cotton wool, and rub it in twice a day until it is healed;
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples;	For you have no need for other medicine in many treatments when the wounds are simple;
et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles;	and if you doubt that the wound will not become connected to the main members, then it is necessary that you soften the leg with oil of tempered warmth, or with rose oil, and apply it between the ankles, and detach from the armpits;
et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine;	and if there is pain or swelling in the belly, and it often happens, then they are given a cluster of black wine, and similarly if the swelling reaches the intestine;
et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	and it pierces within, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small one.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	The intestine which is called "jeune" cannot heal when it is wounded, and this is because of the abundance of veins that are there, and the delicacy of the entire body, and the proximity of its nature to the kidneys.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres;	And if the suture is healthy from the wound, then it is put back together like the intestine, while it is fresh;
et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres;	and if it is old and becomes turned towards black or blue, then you must take away the black part, so that the evacuation of blood does not come, for there are veins and arteries;
puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	then cut what is between the ligament, and put the two bones hanging from the part below the wound until the end to alleviate the extraction when the suture is made, and the wound is closed.
de la routure dou boueil	Of the treatment of the swelling
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance;	When the intestine is wounded, and the wound is small, it can be restored in some men, because I have seen that a man was wounded or pierced in the belly with a lance;
et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez;	and the wound was on the right of the stomach, and it became inflamed and developed into a fistula, and thus stopped the digestion and the flatulence;
je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	I applied a remedy according to what I could, and did not cease to treat subtly until he was healthy, and his limbs were sound.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre;	And when I saw him sound, I doubted that the sickness was not bad in his belly;
et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans;	and he had no pain, but remained in better disposition, and eating and drinking;
et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere:	and some experimenters said that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it must be bound in a certain manner:
pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus;	Take the frenum with large teeth, then assemble the lips of the wound, and when the frenum has covered the mouth, put it between the two lips, so that it constricts its mouth upon;
et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise;	and then cut the head, and this holds so that it cannot come undone, then put another frenum afterwards in the same manner as before, until the wound is all closed up;
et cout la plaie.	and cut the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere:	This head sticks in the intestine, and brings no harm to the patient, and one can tie the intestine with a subtle thread that is cut from the intestine of a beast, in this manner:
pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure;	Take the head of this thread of intestine that is very clean, and then tie to the head of this thread the thread of flax subtle twisted, then put the thread in the needle, and sew the intestine, and put it back into the gut;
et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance;	and this manner of treatment of fevers is not outside of the path of confidence and hope;
et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	and if the wound is great and large, especially when it is in one of the intestinal gravel, if there is no ingen or health, then comes subtlety.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	of a fistula or whichever it may be
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	Be aware that every wound or abscess, when it suppurates, is called universally "fistula", and especially when it is hollow and has a cavity.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil;	And a fistula is according to the true notion a false and hard and white node, where one does not feel pain, and is as hollow as the bone of a bird;
et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse;	and sometimes in a clear and hollow place, and other times in a thick one;
aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez;	sometimes little, and other times enough;
et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes:	and I have spoken about it in the division of wounds, that every wound that is not healed, and it has no cartilage, this is not except by one of the VIII causes:
c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors;	it is to know, through the smallness of the wound or the body;
ou por sa malice;	or because of its malice;
ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char;	or because it has hard cartilage within and on the lips, which does not allow cartilage to grow;
ou il i a trop de bowe;	or it has too much bone;
ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit;	or the limbs are rotten, and the material is of bad quality;
ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure;	or the medicine is not good in the treatment;
ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence;	or because the corruption is a kind of pestilence;
ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature;	or because the property in the region has slow digestion, and slow healing, and is weakened by nature;
ou il i a voinnes ou os:	or it has veins or bones:
et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	and I have already shown all these causes, and the symptoms, and the treatments of medicines in the division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	It is suitable that I make you know the treatment of fistula which is made by work of hands.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors;	Know that fistula has occurred in all members of the body;
car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez;	for there are fistulas that come to the large veins, and to the arteries, and to the kidneys, or to the diaphragm, or to the intestine, or to the bladder, or to some of the ribs, or to the spine of the back, or to any joint of the hands or feet;
et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	and if it happens that it comes to the property of the principal member, and similar things.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance;	And all the fistulas that are of this kind are of grievous affliction, and there is no lack of labor, and ignorance;
et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier;	and if it has any fistula that does not come near the place I have spoken of, and you have confidence in the cure, and you consider it, take a probe of iron or steel, if the fistula is straight, if it seeks;
et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit;	and if the fistula is twisted, seek it with a subtle probe of lead, because the leads bend easily around the twist;
et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie;	and if the fistula has multiple openings and you cannot well search it with probes, then cleanse it through one of the openings, for the mucus flows from one opening to another, and purifies;
puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent;	then feel it gently with your finger, to see if there is bone or nerve, and if it is excavated in the depth, and ask the patient well about the pain they feel when you press with your hand, and the place where they feel it;
et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens;	and when you truly know the place where it is, and if it is far from a joint, or a nerve, or an artery, or a vein, or in any of the places that I have told you, then cut according to what I have told you, and remove the faulty and corrupted flesh that is within;
et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons;	and then the cure as long as it is healthy, and if the fistula is well perforated straight through, then you must cut deeply as much as you can, then put moist tents with sharp medicine, and push them just to the head of the fistula, until the medicine corrodes the superfluous flesh that remains at the bottom;
et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then I put oil on healthy skin, as long as it is healthy;
et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	and if it is not healthy by that, then cauterize as we have said, and if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, then cut it.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit;	If a vein or sinew does not hinder or harm the principal members, as we have said;
et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez;	and if the bone is uncovered, and there is corruption and blackness, then remove it as long as the corruption is entirely removed, then treat the things that are gangrenous until it is healthy;
et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font:	and if it is not healthy, and an abscess bursts as before, know that you are not near a cure:
si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu;	if it becomes uncovered and seek as long as you are at the bottom, and remove all the corruption, then restore the limb;
et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	and if it is thus healthy, that's good.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir;	If this is not so, know that the corruption is too deep, that you cannot reach it;
si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature;	if there is no other remedy than to let nature take its course;
et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un;	and if there is a small corrupted bone, and you can draw it out with forceps, use an instrument suitable for this purpose, and if there are many bones, draw them out one by one, do not leave any behind;
et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	and if moisture makes it contrary, and there is no error or fear, then cauterize and moisten and heat, and release the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os;	And if you cannot remove them in one hour, then put on the wound a warm poultice, and let it stay until the limbs are rotten around the bones, and then they will be easier to extract the bones;
et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie;	and if it's a large bone, such as the thigh or leg, then raise only the rotten part until the blackness is all bony, then restore the wound;
et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os;	and if there is a large part of the corruption, and it comes just to the marrow of the bone;
si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez;	then it is necessary to cut and scoop out all the way to the corrupted part, and then treat it until it is clean;
et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	and I will tell you of a fistula that happened to a man in his leg, so that you may take example and aid in your work.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir;	He was a young man around thirty years old, who had a pain in his leg from a cause that came from inside the body, so that the humors came to the leg, and it became inflamed with a large abscess, and there was no need to open it.
mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors;	but the doctors in their foolishness opened it so much that the abscess burst open, and a lot of humors flowed out, and it became a fistula, and many openings came that discharged both bowel and body moisture;
et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors;	and many doctors treated the cure for two years, and there was no wise man in the art of hands, so that I was called, and I saw his leg and the medicines with which he was being treated, and what flowed out through the openings from his body;
et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	and the body of the young man became red, and had a yellowish color.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	I touched a tendon in one of these perforations, and then searched all the perforations, and found that one vein came against the other from all parts of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens;	I then hastened, and cut into one of the perforations as long as I discovered a part of the bone, and found it corrupted and pierced, and the corruption came just to the bone within;
je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai;	I cleaned that which appeared to me of the corrupted bone, and believed that there was no other corruption, except for that which I had removed;
et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder;	and began to treat the wound with soothing medicines for a long time, and could not suture;
et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu;	and then began again, and discovered the bone as before, and found the corruption continued in the bone, and cleaned it, and then removed it, and prepared to suture the wound;
mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines;	but I did not touch the inner part of the bone with my hand, and I pulled it back with all its mass, then I restored it with medicines;
et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	and it was healed and repaired quickly, and no longer needed to interrupt the work because of the weakness of the patient, who could not suffer, and because of the fear of death that I had for him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	For by the evacuation of blood often, but it was entirely healed, and a hard crust formed on the bone, and was of good disposition and had no nuisance nor discomfort from all of it, neither to eat nor to come.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere:	And if a bone is broken in any part of the body, then it should be treated in this manner:
pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut;	take the bandage, and hold the head of the bone that is dislocated, and instruct him to stretch it upwards;
et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char;	and put another bandage on the thigh thicker than the first one, and tie it above the bone that is outside the hip, and stretch the skin, so that you draw the corrupt flesh to the lower part, and discover the flesh on the limb where you see the sore, so that the sore does not touch the flesh;
et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue;	and put a piece of cloth or a pad behind the bone to support the corrupt flesh;
et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	and it is necessary to show as much as one can see and feel the corruption, and sometimes even more.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute;	And if the bone is corrupted and does not appear, and the corruption is in the middle or in one part, then uncover the entire flesh;
puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit;	then put a cloth behind, and then show from one part to the other the corruption, and let the surgeon be guided by the length of the corruption, as we have said;
et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part;	and if the corruption is in the joint, then cut out the corrupted joint, and be the bone or it contains from the other part;
et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper;	and if the corruption is in the connection of the two joints, then do not cut except for the part that is gangrenous;
et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert;	and if the corruption is in the knuckle of the hand, or in the knuckle of the foot, it is a very strong thing, but nevertheless it is necessary that you inquire into this corrosion, as it appears to you;
et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire;	and clean it in all the ways that you can, but so that the vein or the nerve do not make a counter condition;
et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce;	and know that the cutting and the bones to be cut are many, according to the size of the bones and the appearance of the bones, and their thickness and thinness, and their largeness and smallness, and their hardness;
et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument;	and for this reason it is necessary to prepare each instrument for its similar work;
et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies;	and be aware that the work will show you the instrument that you will need, according to the knowledge of this art, and the testimony of the manners of the diseases;
si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	if you prepare the instrument that you need according to what is necessary for it.
dou feu	of fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer;	The head may dislocate either from an internal cause or from a cause of heat;
et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre;	and when you have treated that corrosion with the cure of medicines, and they do not profit, then it is necessary to amputate that member up to where the corrosion comes, so that the patient escapes either from death or from evil, which is greater, the defect of the member;
et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors;	and the signs are that the members become black, as if they were burned by fire, and after the blackness, there comes a corruption of member into member, and it takes over the whole body;
si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	If you hasten to the copper, and it is due to the percussion of certain venomous beasts, such as the sea scorpion and viper and similar things, if the corrosion is at the head of the pain, then anoint the copper, and do not give space for coming near the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras;	And if it comes near the hand, anoint the copper at the joint, so that the corrosion does not reach up to the arm;
et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute;	and if it reaches the arm, anoint the copper on the elbow;
et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut;	and if it passes the elbow, it is death, and there is no remedy stronger than the quantity of its virtue;
et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet:	and do this for everything when the corrosion reaches the foot:
s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe;	if it reaches the first joint, anoint the copper after the next joint;
et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet;	and if it reaches the foot, anoint the entire foot;
et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil;	and if it rises to the knee, then cut at the joint of the kneecap.
et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort;	and if it comes from above the knee, then there is no other remedy except to leave the patient to death;
et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers;	and the manner of cutting or of sawing the member is that you tie it above and below, and stretch one of your servants with the lower limb, and another servant with the upper limb, and you cut the flesh which is between the two limbs to a spatula wide, until the bone is exposed;
puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	then cut or saw, and put on each part a dressing of linen, so that the saw does not touch the healthy flesh, and comes to the patient another injury and a new abscess.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans;	And if a flow of blood comes when you make an incision, then cauterize the flesh immediately, or apply some powders that restrain.
puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then return to your medicine until it is accomplished, then bind the injured limb with a suitable bandage, and treat it until it is healthy;
et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet:	and I will tell you what happened to the man in his dream:
il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet;	a blackness appeared to him which seemed to be a burning of fire, and this corruption first came into his right foot, until it had taken over the whole foot;
et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez;	and when the man saw the corruption, he quickly amputated the foot, and was cured;
et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions;	and long time after, the corruption returned to the right hand, and he came to me, and I applied to him things that push back after the purification of the body, and I could not stop the corroisons;
et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere;	and he wanted me to amputate his hand, but I refused, because I had hope of pushing back the matter;
et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible;	and I doubted that if I cut his arm, he would not die, for the virtues of the man were weak;
et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez;	and he despaired of that, and returned to his land, and hastened to cure his arm, and was healthy;
et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	and I have not seen it told elsewhere that because of this one should make another part, which is in the craft.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe;	Sometimes an abscess comes to the flesh and stays for so long that it makes a large gathering of pus;
et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz;	and then breaks and bursts, and out comes the pus, and stays in the body useless, like a vessel;
et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»;	and the skin that is detached is as thin as a delicate cloth, and does not touch the bone, nor the nerve, and such an illness is called "sain", and not called "fistule";
mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»;	but if it is so prolonged that it comes right up to the bone in depth, then it is called "fistula";
et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz;	and the skin is such that you must cut around the whole wound, and likewise when it is subtle, like a delicate cloth;
et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	and does not heal because of its corruption.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi:	And if you think that the skin will heal, and the corruption is not deep, and the skin is thick with flesh, then treat it with a cluster:
regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite:	look if the sins are large, and the belly that is in it is of foul odor, then administer the cluster of Egyptian medicine which is thus made:
prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel;	take aquillity, and oil, and litharge, equally, and put the wound in a vessel over the fire, until the medicine becomes red, and becomes as thick as honey;
et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus;	and then take from the seat according to necessity, and make it in a strait and in the middle, and narrow the body, and hold the buttocks;
et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant;	and let the medicine be in for 2 hours, then strain while squeezing;
fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor;	do this many times, until the breasts are reduced, and the pus is removed;
et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez;	and sometimes the straining is of narrowness from ashes, when this medicine is not present, and it is that you take ashes of the trunk of a vine, and throw narrow ones above, then filter, and strain, until you know that the breasts are well reduced;
et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet;	and if the patient cannot suffer it, nor the Egyptian medicine nor the narrowness of ashes, then strain with narrowness and middle where it has a little bit of powdered litharge;
ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain;	You anoint with honey and mixed wine, that the honey has properties of purifying and washing, and the wine makes the blood rise.
et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin;	and when you have done this, and you have ascertained that the blood is well purified, then you anoint with what creates birth of flesh in it, and you take a plaster made with definite gum, and make it with rose oil and wine;
ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens;	or you anoint it with certain medicines and oils, of which I have spoken the properties or treatment of the oils;
et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez;	and if the hole in the breast is small, and the cane of the instrument cannot enter, then enlarge it a little with a metal file, and put on it a string of Egyptian ointment or basilicon ointment, until it is enlarged;
et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	and if the wound is too large, then sew and leave only as much of it open as the instrument can enter, and if the hole that the bowel is in is above or below where it should be.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char;	For when the bowel is in the depths, do not let it protrude outside;
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere:	and if you cannot cover the belly as you wish, then prepare it in such a way that the bowel runs to the lowest place it is, for when the bowel is deep, do not let it protrude outside and if you cannot cover the belly as you wish, then prepare it in such a manner:
que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe;	that the bowel may run lightly downward, and do not leave anything of the bowel;
et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain;	and take consolidating medicines to put on the wound, and apply a linen cloth that covers the entire wound;
puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois;	then cover the forces of the wound on the right side of the belly a little larger than before, then apply ointment softly on another cloth according to the quantity of the wound, and put it on the wound of the belly to alleviate it, and do not remove the large cloth outside except after many days once;
et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste;	and he who is above the navel of the back, often breaks to break the bowel, and knows what comes from the bowel, if it is venom or poison or enough, or digested, or undigested;
et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez;	and take warning if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not, and when your medicine is extended in such a manner and you see the nature that moves above the navel of the back, then know that the sins are open, and approach the sinews;
et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	and then loosen it in the morning, or the third day, and when you loosen the wound, if you change the other dressing, and renew the application of oil.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the sins evacuate undigested bowel after many days, know that the sins do not open.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	And if subtle poisons cut after long tension, do not despair of the health, for the sinews approach.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire;	For there are men whose tardiness in applying remedies to their wounds, and of those who do the opposite;
et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie;	and if his navel is indigestible salt after many days, it knows that the breasts are not in agreement;
et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine;	and if the breasts are slow to agree, and it is prolonged, then we add dry medicines moist in substance and dry in virtue, such as diafinit ointment, for there is a large part of vitriol, and this is the last medicine;
pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance;	take diafinit ointment, and make it with rose oil, and the extract of old wine equal in substance;
puis le confit et en use;	then prepare the conserve and use it;
et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu;	and this same mixture makes a sweet cooked unguent, when diafinit ointment is not present, or you take myrrh and aloe and incense, and grind it, and powder it on the honey when it is over the fire;
et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire;	and then apply a plaster, and spread it on the breast, and sometimes administer to them a long aristologist, and roots of celestial herbs, which is as fine as flour of vetches and centaury;
et en use de simples ou de compostes:	and in the use of simple or compound medicines:
broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use;	grind them, and make into powder, and put on the honey that I mentioned, and use;
et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens;	and if the treatment is prolonged, and it is not cured by this treatment, then know that the corruption is deep-seated, and makes an impression on the bone, or on the hard members, or on the limbs;
si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	if it is a matter of treating a fistula, as we have said before.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	of the abscess on the finger
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois;	Painful swelling is an abscess that arises beneath the fingernail of the hand, or of the foot, or by accident arises in other toes;
et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute;	and when it is inflamed, and no care is taken, then an abscess comes, and a painful swelling that grows as much as it grows to the root of the finger, and by chance it corrupts the whole;
et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	and there comes corrosion to the bone, as far as there is foul-smelling pain, and the head of the sore is wide, and the color is dark brown.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	When you treat it as we have said in the section, and the treatment does not profit at all, then it is necessary that you cut with iron all the excess flesh that remains of the finger, then cauterize the wound afterwards.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne;	Cautery is great aid if the bone is healthy and the fingernail is sound.
et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout;	and if the fingernail presses on the flesh and causes discomfort, and swelling, then it is necessary that you put under the fingernail a pointy instrument that touches the flesh, and push upwards, and cut the flesh subtly and lightly, and apply to the remaining flesh burning and corrosive medicines to remove everything;
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then heal the joints as long as they are healthy.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner;	And if the corrosion is in the bone, chop it off, and apply force, for as long as the bone is corrupted, it cannot heal;
et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	and if you see the decay spreading, cut it off in the same way as it was said before, then heal it as long as it is healthy;
et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier;	and if it is broken and swollen, and it causes great pain, then it is necessary that you heal it first;
puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor;	then cut the narrow part of the spatula with a sharp cutting tool across, and beware that the cut does not reach the flesh that is beneath the nail, for the patient would feel too great pain;
et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	and if it happens, put something on it to soothe it.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	the pain of the swelling of the hand
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	The two bones that grow in the hands of some men by accident are all cartilaginous, and by accident one has them where there are bones, and sometimes one has a nail, and none of these grow from the root of the joint, or their growth is in some of the bones of the fingers.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet;	Those that grow on one of the knuckles do not move, and those that grow at the knuckle joint, by accident, do move;
la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere:	the size of the one that is cartilaginous is slight, in a thin manner:
taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	size it at its root to a wide spatulum.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer:	Those that grow at the root of the joint are grievous to cure:
si te tien dou coper.	if you hold it with copper.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	In that which grows on the knuckle of the last finger, it is necessary that you first cut away the flesh down to the bone, then cut the bone to a suitable size for that, then cure it until it is healthy.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The sudden condition that comes to both together comes from birth, or from a sudden wound, or from a burn of fire, or from similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz;	If it happens that you must treat the sudden condition, then you should repair it according to its natural forms;
puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent;	then put between two moist cloths or towels soaked in rose oil, so that they do not become inflamed;
ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	or you put between two subtle pieces of soft cloth, as long as the member is swollen, if it is necessary.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	If sudden swelling comes to one of them with the palm, then treat that swollen area as it is necessary.
des vils	of the ulcers
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors;	Ulcers are coarse, swollen veins full of melancholic superfluities, that come to many parts of the body;
et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	and they occur more often in the legs of those who walk and work and carry loads, than in others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	It is necessary then that you administer sometimes purging of bile, and then the blood of the basilisk.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres:	The treatment of iron is according to two methods:
l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir;	One is where they are cut, and the black blood is drawn out;
et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	and the other method is that you open the vein, and draw it all out.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere:	The cutting is according to this method:
arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil;	raise the first the thigh of a warm and very wet dressing, so that the thick blood becomes subtle, then pull the thigh of the patient from above the knee to the part above the knee joint;
puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir;	then cut the vein in one of the joints, or in two or in three, with a large incision, then elevate and draw out the black blood to your hand, from one end to the other, as much blood as the virtue of the patient can suffer;
et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire;	and then the liver, and instruct it to paint itself with black ink of gall.
et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	and recommend evacuation and bloodletting when the veins are full, and annoy the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere:	The elevations of it are in this manner:
reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes;	raise the leg of the patient, if it has many hairs, then put it in a bath, and raise the leg to hot water as long as it becomes red, and swell the veins;
et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville;	and if you do not have a bath, heat it with fire, and then apply it directly to the vein of the length at the head of the groin, or in the area below the knee;
puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent;	then open the skin at the ankle, and scratch the vein from each part, as far as it appears when one feels it;
et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche;	and then it becomes red and black, and when it enters the skin it seems also like a white cord;
puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois;	then cut the redundant skin, as long as it is elevated from the skin, and then anoint it lightly with oil, then cover it in another skin above, for three days;
puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers;	then scratch the skin above the vein until it appears, then lift it with the razor, as you have done, and anoint it with another ointment, as you have done previously;
puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille;	then cut another strip, or several if you are skilled in the profession, then lift it, and cover it with two fingers, then pull and lift it until the second incision;
puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope;	then extract it piece by piece, as long as it is completely loose, then cover it;
et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse;	and if you cannot pull and lift it, then thread a strong double needle with thread, and lift and pull it, and cut underneath the skin, and turn your hand from one side to the other, until it comes out;
et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide;	and guard that she does not stumble, for if she stumbles, one cannot draw it out or lift it, and it becomes harmful to the patient;
et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset;	and when you have drawn it all out, then put on the place of the wound a moistened linen in wine and in rose oil;
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and heal it until it is healthy.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie;	And if the skin is contracted and twisted and wrapped up together, and it is not straight, as we have said, then you should gently stretch it, but do not cover it;
et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	and treat it as we have previously stated.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne;	The shape of the iron with which one cuts the skin is curved, and does not cut, so that it does not cut the vein;
et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	and is of a thick curvature, for if it were thin, it would cut the vein, but it should be thick as we have said, and this is its shape:
de la voinne civile	of the civil vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor;	This vein is inflamed in the legs, in warm areas where no herbs or trees grow, and on land where there is no moisture;
et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	and by chance it grows in another part besides the legs, and this comes from the decay that rises from beneath the skin, just as it comes from within the body of creeping and worms, inflamed between skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	And the sign of the beginning of this vein is that it comes in the leg a great inflammation, then its place changes, and the vein starts to come out, just like a root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe;	When the wound opens, it is necessary that you wrap around a piece of plaster one and a half inches thick, and the knot, and leave the plaster on the leg, and every time that it becomes loose at the bottom, then rewrap the plaster, and the knot;
et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue;	and if it is too long, then cut off a part of it, and wrap the remainder, and do not touch it at its root, until it is completely removed;
car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie;	for if you cut it, then it enters into the flesh, and causes an abscess and putridness in the limb, and a very bad disease;
por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors;	for which thing it is necessary that it be treated little by little until the end, and nothing remains in the body;
et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse;	and it happens sometimes with this vein when it is treated for the disease of the lungs, or of the chest, and a man comes to me, from whom it issues from the chest, and when you cut it, then push the pipe or the perforation, and pierce it until the bottom, so that everything goes out;
et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	and let the matter that is inside be emptied, and apply to the limb medications that promote putridness for no day, then treat it as with abscesses.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains;	And often at this vein there are pains and aches, and similarly when it opens in the joint of the foot, or the foot itself, and many injuries come from it, and hence the pain increases;
cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	Cure the ills then as we have said before.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	of worms that are born between skin and flesh
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer;	This illness is called in our land "cattle disease", because it often affects cattle, and is a small worm that is born between skin and flesh, and travels throughout the body rising and falling, and can be felt well when moving from limb to limb, until it breaks through the skin where it appears, and causes fever;
et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre;	and is caused by purulence of certain humors, such as come worms and snakes and earthworms and intestinal worms in the belly;
et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil;	and one doubts its wickedness, for when it travels through the body, and it rises to the head, and it comes to the eye, by chance enters, and destroys the eye;
et ceu avient maintes fois.	and this happens many times.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait:	When you see it healed and treated, one cannot believe the way it was:
si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire;	it is necessary then that you tie the limb above and below with a strong string tightly, then cut above and treat the wound, and if the verse has gone deep into the flesh, and you do not find it, cauterize it with fire, until it dies;
et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit;	and the greater harm that it does, is that it corrupts the eye, as we have said;
et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer;	and if you see it coming near the head to the eye, hold back from him the eyelid strongly, then cut above, and treat the wound;
et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	and it is necessary to use on the patient a treatment of bodily medications that loosen the bad humid matters, and beware of greasy food which causes putrefaction.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	of the pain which comes from flatulence
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre;	This illness is called in our land "vakirir", and is a pain that comes in some members, and then moves from member to member;
et je vis ceu que je vos di.	and I see what I tell you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais;	I was called to a sick woman, and she showed me her arm, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm;
et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre;	and shortly after, I saw it move up as a worm to the shoulder, swifter than anything, like living silver when it moves from one place to another;
li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais;	the pain departs from that place, and settles in the shoulder, and then a little while after runs throughout the whole body, until it comes into the other arm;
puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	then she told me that it would turn often around the body, as I had seen it.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I was greatly astonished at how it moved from member to member, for I had never seen this disease in this manner.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme;	Nevertheless, I had seen many cases where they moved well with pain from one limb to another, but I had not seen it in this way, as I saw it in the woman;
et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte;	and I thought that it was because the woman had a dry body and uncovered veins, and for this reason appeared that constrained wind;
et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	and it did not appear according to this reason in those who are delicate, and who have moist bodies and full veins.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer;	And when you treat this disease, and the patient feels that pain, it appears as we have said, if the tongue is lifted up and down hastily, and then cut into it as long as that constrained wind presses on the liver;
et cauterize le leu;	and cauterize the limb;
et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	and if you do not see it with your eyes, then treat what cures the swollen intestines, such as foul-smelling pills, and pills of serpent's head, and similar others.
des saiettes	of the arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	The arrows are diverse, according to their appearances and according to the limbs of the body where they stick.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees;	The diversity of them is that there are some which have large points, and small, and barbed, and jagged;
et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces;	and of those which have two edges, and of those which are long, and of those in which there are fragments;
et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres:	and that which sticks in no member sticks according to two manners:
ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	or in a principal member it sticks, such as brain, heart, liver, lung, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and similar members.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent:	When it falls then in any place of these limbs, and the sign of death, which I will tell you later, appears:
si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions;	if it happens that you warn about the extraction of this arrow, because death comes after in many cases;
et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	and when a bad sign does not appear to me, and the arrow is not deeply embedded, then I extract it, and treat the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole;	And the sign of the brain when the arrow falls and pierces the bone, and jumps the thread which is on the brain, is when there is confusion and noise and vertigo and redness in the eyes, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasm and permixtion of understanding, and vomiting of bile;
et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles;	and by chance it is without force to the nostrils, or to the ears;
et par aventure pert la parole et la voix;	and by chance it affects the speech and the voice;
et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char;	and it jumps from the white moist wound resembling a boil, and it jumps also like a piece of flesh;
et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	and let this be a sign to you, if you hold back from the treatment, and pull out the arrow if it is not inside.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide;	The signs of the arrow when it falls to the heart, are that it is near the left breast, and it feels as if it was fixed in a hard thing, not in an empty space;
et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope:	and by chance the arrow moves like the boil, and cuts out black blood, and brings on coldness and a cold sweat, and fainting:
saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	be aware then without doubt that death will follow.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the signs of the arrow that breaks the thigh bone are that without great effort it jumps out of the wound, and the throat is swollen, and the patient changes color, and breathes deeply and seeks the cold air.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes;	And if the arrowhead remains in the covering of the thigh, then it is lodged between the small ribs;
et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire;	and causes great suffering and great pain and shortness of breath;
et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	and it moves all the members of the shoulders.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the arrowhead remains in the stomach, by chance, then it jumps from the wound some undigested thing of the flesh.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if the arrowhead remains in the belly, and it pierces a little through the intestine by way of the rectum, then there is no hope in the cure, nor in the extraction of the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor:	And if the arrowhead remains in the bladder, and the urine jumps out and comes to flow, and the patient feels strong pain:
saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	know that the wound is mortal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other members, such as the face and the neck and the throat and the shoulder and the joint and the spine of the back and the arm and the thigh and the legs, and similar members, are safe according to various conditions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in the nerve or artery, and it is not venomous, as I will tell you what happens to me, so that you do otherwise.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis:	It happens to a man that an arrowhead remains in the arm at the root of the nail:
je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	I pulled it out, and drew from another part below the fat of the ear, and was healthy without any mess.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles;	And I drew from a play an arrow that the fat of the shoulder below the nipple below, and the arrow was submerged, and could not be touched except with the point towards the bottom, and it was a large Turkish bow arrow, with all the iron without wings;
li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	The play was finished healthy, and no evil accident came to him.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles:	And I drew an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and it was an Arabic arrow with wings:
je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	I will shave the beards, and make them subtle as I treat them, and the Christians will be healthy.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit;	And I treated an arrow wound in the man, which had entered his belly, and thought he was dying;
et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition;	and since it had been thirty days, his condition had not changed;
je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	I cut around the arrow, and extracted it, and treated the wound firmly, and there was no bad accident.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus;	And I saw the man on whom a spear had fallen to his back, and the wound was swollen above;
et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	and the spear remained inside him, and he did not change his natural disposition, nor did I find any harm in any of his natural functions.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie;	And I saw another man, on whom a shaft had fallen to his face, and the wound was swollen;
et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor;	and therefore he endures without suffering great pain;
et mout d’autres semblans.	and many other similar things.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie;	And he pulled an arrow from the hand of one of the king's princes, which was lodged in his knee, and was slightly leaning to the right side;
et estoit li saiette toute reponue.	and the arrowhead was entirely embedded.
Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	I was called to the treatment after it had been lodged for three days.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	I found the wound very constricted.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie;	I touched it with a subtle thread, and did not feel it;
et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	and he felt a piercing and pain below his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast;	I thought it was from the point of the arrowhead I put on the place a plaster made with attractive and digestive ingredients, so that the flesh would not become inflamed;
et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	and the flesh appeared around the arrowhead.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis;	I put the plaster on the wound, and treated the chief injury, and stayed there with the patient for a long time, until he felt the arrowhead inside his brain;
et il le me dist.	and it came out of him.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu;	I put on the wound caustic corrosive medicine for a long time, until it was covered, and I touched it, and felt the head of the arrow which had adhered to the flesh;
puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement;	then I adjusted in the opening of the wound with that sharp medicine, until the head of the arrow appeared visibly;
et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir;	and it surpassed the limits within four months, and then expanded so that the wound which I had closed with stitches, and the flesh on one side and the other, could not come apart;
adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	then I did not cease to refine and contrive devices, until I took the arrow with well-made stitches, according to what its form will appear at the end of this chapter, as I will describe, and restored the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer:	And the doctors judge that the gristle of the nose cannot be restored:
je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	I then restored it, and the wound was soothed, and the patient was entirely healed.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre;	Now I have told you the quality of the extraction of certain arrows, so that you put your treatment on what I do not say, for books cannot grasp everything;
mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	but wise masters understand well only a little of great things, and on what is present and deficient, find new work, and new instrument, in the understanding of strange things that happen in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres:	I say that arrows do not issue from the limbs or are fixed unless they are in two ways:
ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part;	or through the flesh where they enter, or on another side;
et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	and that which shoots forth where it enters, is an arrow entering into fleshy flesh, and sometimes comes out now and then.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue;	And if it does not heal now, then let it be until the flesh is purified within, and the discharge is alleviated;
et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor;	and also if it is fixed in the bone, and it cannot exit, then let it be for some days, and move it each day;
et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	and then it will heal, and if it does not heal, then pierce within to the subtle forest, until the surrounding limbs are enlarged, and then treat it.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide:	And if the arrowhead is fixed in the bone of the head, and comes near to one of the vents of the brain, and some of the accidents that I have mentioned above to the patient:
si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	if you do not treat it immediately, but let it be until it is even after some days, for if the arrowhead comes near to the surface, it is death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	And if the arrow is not deeply embedded in the bone, and does not come close to the surface, and the patient remains for some days without a bad accident, then the injury will heal itself.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit;	And if it is deeply embedded and cannot be removed, then apply poultices around it, as I have told you;
puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat the wound until it is healthy.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente;	And if the arrowhead is lodged in the flesh of the body so that one cannot see it, then search for it everywhere;
et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble;	and if you feel it, then extract it with an appropriate instrument;
et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans;	and if you cannot due to the narrowness of the wound, and the depth of the arrowhead, and there is no bone or nerve or vein, then probe as far as the wound is large;
et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire;	and pull the arrow if you can, and if it has ears on the arrow where it is stuck, then remove the flesh that is stuck in two parts from the bone that you pull, and then break or crush the ears of the arrow, until you can pull it out;
et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	and subtly be careful that you do not break the arrow, so that you pull it out more gently.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot pull it out at once, then leave it until the surrounding flesh is purified, then pull it, for the extraction will be easier.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre;	And if the flow of blood makes you hesitate, then remember what we have said about the treatment in its chapter;
et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement;	and beware of the incision of the nerve and of the vein, and devise how you can pull the arrow without danger, whether quickly or slowly, or firmly or gently;
et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	and put the patient according to the shape it was when the arrowhead fell in, for that is the greatest aid that it should be, and if you cannot, then put it according to what the signs that they show you.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment:	The arrow that comes from another part, where it appears with something of it, or the skin is swollen in the area if one sees or feels apparently:
taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai:	cut then upwards, as long as the clamps can grasp, and then extract:
si saut fuer maintenant.	if it comes out now.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is held in the bone, turn your hand around, as long as it enters into the bone, and enlarge the bone, then pull it out.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer;	And if it cannot come out, leave it still, and then resume the extraction as long as it comes out;
et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust;	and if the arrowhead is in the flesh, push it to all the flesh;
et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument;	and if it is the wooden stick, and you apply a bandage, if you apply the instrument to the head, so that the point of the arrowhead enters into the flesh of the instrument;
et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	and then apply force, and if the arrow is deeply embedded, then you apply the instrument with a pointed end entering in, to ease the extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	And if the arrow is poisoned, then it is necessary that you cut out all the flesh around where the venom is, if you can, then treat the wound as it requires.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope;	And if the arrow strikes the foot or the thigh or the belly or the bladder or the ribcage, and it is protruding, and you can cut around it, then you cut;
et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est;	and beware of cutting the vein and the nerve, and then extract it, and then sew the wound, if it is necessary;
et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and the treatment until she is healthy.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The shape of the tongs with which the arrows are extracted resemble a bird's beak, and see here the shape:
Et en sont mout de manieres:	And there are many methods:
grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	The shape of the pointed instrument is like a bird's feather, for pushing to the point of the arrow, thus is the shape:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	the shape of the tongs for pushing and for extracting is this:
des voinnes dou cors communes	of the veins of the common body
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir:	The veins from which one bleeds are 31, of which there is a main one, to know:
II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»;	Two vessels that are behind the ears, which are called the two "herbech";
et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans;	and the two arteries that are in the two temples apparent;
et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»;	and there are veins in the arms of the eyes, which are called "aspirations";
et li voine que est emmi le front;	and the vein that is between the forehead;
et li voinne que est au chief dou neis;	and the vein that is at the head of the nostrils;
et les II guindeges qui sont ou col;	and the two sinews that are in the neck;
et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»;	and the two veins that are on the lips above the mouth, and these are the veins that are called "augeherich";
et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	and the two veins that are under the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras:	The veins from which one commonly bleeds are 5 in each arm:
l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»;	one is the cephalic vein, and it is on the left side of the head, and lay people call it "vein of the head";
et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»;	and the middle one is called "faste", and it is composed of the cephalic and the basilic, and lay people call it "vein of the heart";
et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	and the basilic vein is on the right side, and the lay people call it "vein of the belly", and it is under the ribcage, and it is the one from which they bleed, which appears visibly under the navel.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains;	And the salvatelle is the vein that is between the thumb and the ring finger, and it has two branches;
et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes:	and in the leg and on the foot there are three veins:
l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit;	one is below the curve of the left hip, and the second is the saphena which is at the knee on the right side;
et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei;	and the vein that is called "nescia", which is in the knee of the other side;
et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	and in the other leg there are three veins below those.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine;	The bleeding of the veins that are behind the ears helps with old catarrhs and with migraines;
et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre;	and the qualities of the blood, as I tell you, and it is that you reset the head of the patient, and rub the limb where the veins are with a coarse cloth;
puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief:	then constrain the patient's neck to a vice, so that the two veins appear behind the ears in the two limbs hanging from the head:
quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche;	bend your arms at your back, and where you feel the pulse beneath your back, make the sign of the ankle;
puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues;	then take the lancet, and push it beneath the vein right up to the bone, then lift your hand all along the vein above, and cut and the skin and the vein well, two fingers from the crossing, and make blood come out as much as you see;
puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee;	then constrict and bind, until it is without blood;
et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	and I have already spoken of the incision and the cautery in the first book.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz;	The blood of the two arteries that are in the two temples, is useful for migraine and old and habitual ophthalmia, and costiveness of the tears to the eyes;
et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis:	and the qualities of the blood are such as I have said:
et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement;	and it is that the patients strain their neck, so that the two veins appear openly;
et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche;	and feel the pulse at the bottom of the elbow, and then apply a sign of constriction;
puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit;	then lift the heart on the vein above at your elbow index, and push the lancet below, and lift the vein above, and cut it, as you have done with the other veins, and let the blood flow according to your necessity;
puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton;	then release the patient, and put your finger on the vein for an hour, then put on a dressing;
et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee;	and then form the abscess, and let it be until it is healed;
et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	and we have already spoken of their treatment and extraction, at the beginning of the book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor;	The vein of the forehead is as useful as the vein of the head for ancient facial diseases, and for migraines, and for redness;
et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere;	and this quality is that the patients strain their neck twisting, until the vein appears;
puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	then take the instrument which is called "incisor", of which this is the form:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues;	And put the point on the vein, and press with your hand, or another thing, and let the blood flow out according to the quantity that you see;
puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	then release to the patient the neck, and leave the vein until it is healed and sometimes close with a wide bandage.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus;	In any case, it is not suitable for the flames to be too sharp;
et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	and the vein is pierced across, because the bone is near, and by chance the flame breaks when it is subtle.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice;	The veins of the two arms which are in the two shoulders aid the eyes, and the tongue, and the redness, and the hearing in the ear, and the ailments of the face;
et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant;	and the quality of their vein is such that the patients stretch their neck twisting from one side to the other, as before;
puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	then the vein, and let the vein be pierced through, a little bit in length of flame a little wide, because there is no point to burn.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise;	And if the flames are subtle, by chance they break;
puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	then make an incision of blood, as much as you are able in your profession, and then bind it with a bandage, and bind it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene;	The blood of the vein that is born from the humor, and from the sweat, and from facial diseases, such as emigraine and redness that comes in the face, and mainly when it is ancient;
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre;	and the quality of the blood is such that the patient strains his neck, then strains his vein to his left hand, and takes the subtle flame long, and puts it in the lip in the space which is between the two nostrils, for the vein does not appear well, and the blood will now begin to flow;
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree;	and does not go too deep, and makes the blood flow according to necessity, then leaves it for a night, for it is much easier to restore;
et c’est li forme dou flaime:	and this is the form of the flame:
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes;	The blood of the two gouttes helps with the stretching of the shoulder, and with the beginning of mixer, and with many diseases, and with empetygine, and with corroding, and with herpes, and with istiomenes;
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit;	and the quality of the injury is such that the patient strains their neck to one side and the other, as we have said;
et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est;	and let the masters be at the head of the patient, and the patient sit on a seat, then feel the vein of the arm a little widely, then draw the blood moderately, as much as is necessary;
puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle;	then perform another operation on the other vein, then untie the ligature, and hold both veins moderately, so that the patient does not strangle;
et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	and let it be until morning, so that the wound may be healed.
de la sainie des leivres	of the injury of the liver
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The injury of the veins of the lips from above is identified by a hole in the mouth, and a corruption of the gums, and fissures of the lips, and pain in the nose and throat.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit;	And the quality of the blood is to make the patient sit before you, and hold his neck as I have said;
puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires:	then turn the lip, and look at the veins, one of which is on the right lip and the other on the left, and recognize them by the fact that they are black, and by the fact that near them there are small black veins:
cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	cut then one and the other, and if you do not recognize them, and you are in doubt, cut the largest of each side, and also make it so for the veins that are above and below, because it is a similar manner.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	of the blood beneath the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche;	The blood of the veins that are beneath the tongue helps after the blood of the head, and it is for the narrowing of the throat, and for the illnesses of the uvula, and for the illnesses of the mouth;
et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire:	and the quality of the blood is such that the patient sits between your hands in front of the sun, and lifts the tongue, and looks down at each side to see a dark vein:
saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	feel then one and the other, and do not press too deeply, for beneath are the arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres:	The veins of the arm that are commonly felt are felt in two ways:
ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»;	or by pricking at the whole flame of the blood, or with subtle olive as if cutting tendons, and it is called "aneuil";
et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	and are coarse and subtle according to the width and narrowing of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The shape of the flame of the blood is very well-known, and is large as you see:
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble;	And it is a task to open the veins with thick blood apparently swollen, and which contain thick blood and turbidity;
et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	and it is the form of the flame of olive oil:
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	and it is more subtle and pointed, and it is for purging the subtle veins, where there is subtle yellow blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre;	The purging of the basilica vein, which is one of these veins, helps with illnesses that are in the throat, and in the neck, and in the chest, and in the stomach;
et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	and it is necessary for the purger to purge wisely, and that he beware of the artery that is above.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit;	And if he cuts the artery, and a flow of blood comes, then it is necessary to staunch it, as I have said;
et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	and one should not be touching the flame, but rather cutting like a lancet.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre;	And if the basilica does not appear manifestly, then it is necessary that you dislodge it, and change to another;
ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras:	Or you want any vein of his, or you bleed from the vein in the arm:
elle apert manifestement;	which appears manifestly;
et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	and a blow to the flame of the candle, as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz;	And if you know the location of the blood, then it is necessary that you stretch the arm, that you touch the spot as long as you feel the pulse;
puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil;	then mark the place of the wound, and then stretch the arm, and strike the vein with the flame of the candle;
et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere:	and beware that you do not hit the artery when you see the spot swollen, for it is an artery:
eschui la donques.	beware of the donation.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere:	And if you see it spurt out high like the urine of a child, and the blood is red and subtle, know that it is blood of an artery:
haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient;	Hasten then, and put your finger on it for a long time, then remove your finger if it is without strain, which often happens;
se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides;	Raise the arm, and let it be, and do not move it, the patient;
et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	and let it be on a poultice, and do not move it until it is healed.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient;	And if it is not strained, and it will heal, and the medicine is not necessary to you, then cut the artery that is open, for the head of the retreat;
et estainche li sans.	and strain the joint.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor;	And take a splint of wood, and bind it, and take one of the halves and tie it well just to the other side;
se li sans estainche, c’est bien;	if the joint is strained, it's good;
se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc;	If not, then treat it, as we have said, with powders that constrict blood;
et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	and the stains are not grievous in many dispositions for the small size of the wound, and the position of the joint of the arm.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit;	The vein in the middle aids if it draws blood from the head above, and from the body below, because it is composed of the basile and the cephatic, as we have said;
et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner;	and it is necessary for the sinew that it be warmed by the nerve which is below, and if it pricks too deeply, and it cuts the nerve, and it swells and the sickness becomes grievous, and by chance it cannot heal;
et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil;	and this nerve appears many times, and if it does not appear in any men due to its subtlety, then it is necessary that you have the sinews of the instrument near;
et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	and beware of the nerve with your hand.
Et se il a voinne entre les II ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if it has a vein between the two nerves, thus the finger is of equal length.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz;	The bloodletting of the head helps, which pulls blood from the head, and helps the eyes;
et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	and it is necessary to bleed at the olive vein or at the martian vein, because it is the safest of all veins, for it has neither nerve nor artery.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence;	However, it is necessary to seek the lightest place, and not to touch anything that one must do for the first time, and then proceed;
et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	and by chance one touches the places of certain men, when one must do it for the first time, but it does not harm.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of the bloodletting is according to the thought.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir;	The first thing that you must know about bloodletting is that bloodletting is not administered for the purpose of preserving health, but to avoid impending illnesses;
et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute:	and let the bloodletting be done on one of the three veins that are at the elbow:
c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique;	these are to know, cephalic, median, and basilic;
et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent;	and one should bleed at the beginning of spring, and in autumn, and in April after eating, when the sign of repletion appears;
et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	and one should bleed on the first day or the third, after two hours or three times a day.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens;	The bloodletting that is administered for illnesses has no determined hour, but rather when need is of day or night, at all hours and at every tension;
et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	and it is not advisable to bleed children up to thirteen years, nor a woman carrying fruit for less than seven months up to four and a half.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez LX ans.	Nor should the old who have passed sixty years be bled.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz;	And when some want to purge themselves, in whatever manner that may be, it is necessary that they empty the intestines of a light Clyster, if there are many retained filths, so that the veins do not attract the superfluous and harmful filth from the principal members.
ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques;	nor does one purge himself if he is too full of food, nor if he is drunk, as long as he is furious, nor dropsical;
et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors;	and one must beware of purging after colic passion, and vomiting, and decoration of the belly, and multiplying of the travail to a woman, and from childbirth, from waking and from fasting, and that which is all virtue, or by thing of the arm or of the body;
puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir;	then refine the humors, if they are not gross, through foods and drinks and medicines, so that you have them in a low place;
puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit;	Then enter into the bath, if nothing prevents it, to subtly let the blood, and the sane from the vein of the foot enter under the third, as we have said;
et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses;	and protect that day from labor, and from point, and from dislocation, and from similar things;
et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans;	and be joyful and happy, and let the vein that is being bled be higher than the one being treated, and rub the arm two or three times, then gently pull the string upwards, for when it is too tight or loose, it cannot correct the blood;
et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on;	and then rub the limb with the hands, until the veins swell, and feel them;
puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	then anoint the vein with a little old oil, then put his right hand on the left hand on the vein below the limb a little where he wants to bleed, so that the vein is not empty and fails to strike.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus;	For there are veins that are as tender as cords in the blood, and if they are of those that are full of windiness, so that when one puts on the flame, it retracts from the flame, and cannot open the vein, and thus is one of these;
et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	and if it opens the vein, the wound is too narrow, because it is necessary that the blood vessels be advised in these things.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin;	And if the vein opens for the first time, it's good;
se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	if not, then still recommend a little more of that place or above hastily, if the limbs are not weakened.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras:	And if the limbs are weak, and the patient is frightened, then let be one or two hours, and do not lift the arm:
par aventure i venra apostemes chaus;	for it may come to be an abscess under the skin;
ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait;	Do not enter into a bath, then recommend the activity if it pleases them;
et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement;	and if the wound is small, or the blood escapes subtly and you doubt that not as much blood as you see comes out, then make this same wound right away with all the flesh properly;
et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez;	and perform it a little hastily, so that the limbs are not weakened;
car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	for this often happens, when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile;	If you see the limb weakened, do not recommend the activity, and put on a little of oil of rosé, for it alleviates the body's pain of blood, and is beneficial in this limb where the oil is;
et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc;	and then administer the oil in each activity that you perform when opening veins, to staunch the flow of blood;
et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu;	and this same action makes a triangle and bulge of the eyes, when one puts it on the back;
si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	if the sensation is subtle and sparse when it is too thick.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre;	And if a large abscess forms, which often happens, especially when it is not well cleaned except for the times when the opening of the vein is small, then hasten, and put on the back a moist sponge in water and in a little warmth, and extract for an hour;
et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie;	and it is necessary that you do this after the issue of blood from the vein, and if it remains on the back after some hours a black or green color, do not touch it;
et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	and if you want, put on something made of garlic or myrrh mixed with juice of calamint, mustard, or similar.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique:	And often there occurs an abscess and swelling at the wound of the basilic vein:
met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	then put your hand on it, and if you find the limb soft to the pressure of the hand, this is the bad swelling.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere;	Beware then that you do not put on anything of what we have said, for by chance the artery is cut short without warning;
mais li fai I emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	but make the plaster dry to harden the limb, then treat it with another treatment, until it is healthy.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And draw from each one blood according to the quantity of its virtue, and of the color of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges;	For if the blood is black, let it flow out until it becomes red;
et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez;	and if you see it thick, let it be until it becomes refined;
et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges;	And it is necessary for the one who is pale and weak, and has need of blood extraction, that a larger wound be made, and that the veins be made larger;
et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant;	and for the one who is weak, do the opposite, and it is necessary to bleed them little and often, and one should bleed them by cutting across, not by pricking;
et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	and this manner of bleeding is free from corruption of blood and congestion of nerves, and is better than the bleeding from the inside or from the depth;
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates;	And for the one whose body needs to be bled, it is necessary to give them a drink made with juice of bitter pomgranates;
s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	if they are bilious, let blood be taken three or four times; And if they are of a cold complexion, let them take before the bleeding a drink mixed with syrup made from honey and aromatics, such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chicory, and well-scented syrup;
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	And if it comes to the sauce, after the issue of much blood, then it is necessary that he drink broth of meat, and syrup of subtle odor, and use other things that we have said in the division or chapter on syncope, for the evacuation of the vein.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he wants to bleed from his arm, and bleed another time, then it is necessary, when he is weakened by great bleeding, that he bleeds a little and a little, according to the quantity of his virtue continuously.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine VII houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And he who wants to bleed from his arm after the first bleeding, and he has a strong body, then let him bleed seven hours after the first bleeding, or after the ninth hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And he who wants to bleed from another part, then he should bleed on the second or third day.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre;	For there is much blood within the body which is already heated and causes fever;
si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson;	If it happens to pull out a large quantity, and to widen the perforation so that it falls into the stomach;
puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens;	Then you inspect all the conditions of the wound, and put your hand on his belly when it bleeds, so that death does not come into the region of the stomach, and this happens many times, when the bleeder is negligent;
et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus;	and it happens not rarely that you see the arm become dislocated, and blood comes out a second time, and the perforation is closed, that you press firmly on;
ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz;	nor if it is curved, that he extends the arm suddenly, for that would be bad;
mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois;	but let it be until it bleeds a second time;
ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	or you touch the point of the flame, until the blood that is congealed at the perforation of the vein becomes liquid, and put on the poultice made with oil, and press lightly;
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein is swollen, let it be and do not constrict it, until the abscess has calmed.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if a second bleeding is necessary, let the blood be taken from the same arm, or from another vein, or from the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein in the middle of the arm is bled from the vein of the head because it is connected.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges;	And the manner of bleeding is that the patient puts their hand in cold water, until the veins become red;
puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc;	then it should be warmed moderately, so that the vein appears well, then let the blood be taken now from across, neither too broad nor too long;
et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez;	and let the incision be wide, and let it be bled well near the joint of the hand, and if the blood does not flow, put the hand back in cold water, and let the blood run in the water, until you have enough;
et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit;	and if it is in this state, do not put the hand in warm water, for they put it more into pain than in the state.
et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	and the blood vessel of this vein is safer than all other veins, for there is neither artery nor nerve.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere:	The blood vessel of the salvation of the right hand is useful for all diseases of the liver, and this is the method:
estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie;	strain the hand, and put it in warm water, until the vein becomes swollen, so that one can see it;
et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien;	and if it is a transverse blood vessel, and if you cut through it entirely, do not worry about anything;
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	and do not go too deep in the flesh, for the nerves are often separated from the skin, and then put the hand in warm water, if the blood is congealed in the wound, and cannot flow out.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have bled as much as necessary, put oil on the vein and seal it to stop the bleeding, and do this for each vein.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The vein in the left hand is useful for the illness of the spleen, and do everything just as I told you regarding the right.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	The vein of the spleen is useful for all the illnesses that are below the heart, such as illnesses of the liver, and retention of fluids, and illness of the kidneys, and of the thighs and of the old legs, and similar illnesses.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet;	And the quality of its vein is that it makes the illness go down into the cold foot, and rub on the vein until it perspires, and loosen above the joint of the foot;
et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains;	and the vein is at the ankle, and above the foot it goes to many kidneys;
saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	Know then whether the wound is of greater or lesser size, or at the shins, which is of most value.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant;	And if you treat the wound on the foot, beware of the tendons that are underneath, and the tendon which passes across as in a joint.
et soit li flaimes anesil.	and let the flames be anesthetized.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if the blood cannot issue out, put the foot in a sling, and let the vein be well emptied.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz;	And if the first dressing fails, recommend the second at a distance of a little, because the limb is salty.
ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	Do not doubt the nerve, as we have said, and thus make of the shin of the other foot equally.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The limb of the sciatic vein is at the shins of the thigh, and its dressing is worth the pain of the hip, when it is for hot blood.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne;	And the quality of his urine is such that the patient urinates between the thighs, and strains upwards from the shinbone four fingers in turning, for otherwise the vein does not appear;
et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant;	and if it appears, then urinate in all the ways that you can, and while passing through;
et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	and it is better that you take it, for the limbs are sound, and it is much put into the hands of men.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners;	And if you do not believe it, then urinate from the vein that appears on the back of the foot, and towards the little toe, and beware of the nerves;
et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint;	and make an issue of blood as much as you see, and then untie the ligature, and put on cotton and extract;
ele est maintenant sanee.	he is now bled.
des sainies de ventouse	of bloody discharges of the belly
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre;	Discharges are made from horns, or from arsenic, or from pitch;
et ventosation si est faite selonc II manieres:	and ventilation is done according to two methods:
ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	either by striking and extracting blood, or without striking.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres:	And this ventilation that is without striking is according to two methods:
ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu;	either it is with all fire, or without fire;
et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief;	and ventilation that is done by striking and by extraction of blood is done in thirteen places of the body, of which one is all on the summit of the head;
et li autres est emmi le col;	and the others are in the neck;
et II autres en II costeis dou col;	and two others in the two sides of the neck;
et li ventouse desoz lou menton;	and the ventilation under the chin;
et li ventouse des II espaules;	and the ventilation of the two shoulders;
et li ventouse sus les crupies;	and the ventilation on the knees;
et les ventouses emmi les II bras;	and the ventilations in the two arms;
et les ventouses des II jambes;	and the ventilations of the two legs;
et les ventouses des II chevilles;	and the fat of the two cheeks;
et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne;	and the fatty tissue does not release any blood, for it is from the small veins that are scattered in the flesh, and for this reason one does not become weak, as one does with the bleeding of a vein;
et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	and it is not necessary that it be administered, nor to apply heat or cold, in any disease that comes from excess, as long as the body is emptied.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens;	And if by necessity of diseases it is necessary to apply fatty tissue, or through habit, then let us administer it every hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and in the middle and in every tension;
car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief;	for there are some who, when they have need to apply fatty tissue, then have a heavy head;
et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz;	and there are some who experience excess and redness in their face, and in their head, and in the neck, and darkness of the eyes;
et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc;	and such as spit a mouthful of blood, and have their tongue swollen, and vomit blood;
et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	and if it is one of those who dream, and see in their sleep blood and wounds and death and similar things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés III houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, and especially when it is in the middle of the month, we command to bleed after three hours of the day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors;	The blood of the nose helps the grief of the head ... that comes to the eyes, and it is not necessary that it be after the evacuation of all the body;
et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement;	and this bleeding is in the place of the blood of the head, and it is not necessary that it be for one who is of a cold complexion or who has diarrhea, because these things cause them great harm;
et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	and for this reason it is not necessary for the old men to use it, nor those who have cold diseases of the head.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And he who often bleeds himself, becomes oblivious, and for this reason it is necessary to put the cupping glass a little lower due to the doubt of oblivion.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion;	Cupping on the neck is in place of the bleeding from the head and of the basilic vein, and for this reason it is useful for the constriction of the lung, and for the fissure of the chest of the pormon, and for the cough, and for repletion.
et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	and it is necessary to bind little, because if it holds too firmly, it causes oblivion or stomach and heart problems.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique;	Cupping on the two sides of the neck is useful for head pains, and eye problems and migraines, and for strangulation, and for toothache, and it is in place of bleeding from the basilic vein.
et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	and it is necessary that you instruct the bloodletter to press his hand on the spot, that he not cut the artery, and not cause a flow of blood.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche;	The evacuations of the mouth are good for diseases of the mouth, and for corruption of the gums, and similar diseases that are in the mouth;
et est en leu des sainies des II levres.	and it is in the healing of the sores of the two lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The evacuations of the shoulders are good for a disease that comes from heat and from fullness.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes;	The evacuations of the elbows are as good as those of the three veins of the arm, for it attracts blood from these thick veins;
et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	and instruct the bloodletter not to make too deep an incision, for the limb is near to the flesh, and has many nerves and arteries.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire;	The evacuation that is on the buttocks is good for hemorrhoids of the fundament, and for similar diseases, and it is necessary that the evacuation be large, and be of copper, so that it has the ability to treat well;
et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit;	and by accident, if it was fragile, it would break;
et i fai grans plaies.	and it makes large wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors;	The ulcers of the legs heal openly, for they attract blood from the whole body, and are worth the old pains of the kidneys, and of the liver, and of the bladder, and bring back the flesh;
et sont en leu des II sophenes, et des II chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	and they are in place of two hips, and of two knees, and completely weaken the body after long use, and bring about paleness in many conditions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc;	The way to apply the ulcer treatment is that you put it first on the wound, and suck moderately, and put it firmly, and rub equally, and do not stop doing this, until you see the place red and swollen, and appearing with the redness of blood;
puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez:	then do it, and put back the ulcers, and take warning in the condition of the body, for there are some who have such hot blood, and clear pores:
si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes;	If it is necessary to cauterize only once, and it is necessary to make large wounds, and a little deep;
et suce legierement.	and suck lightly.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir II fois:	And if the wound is large, then it is necessary to cauterize twice:
la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	the first time to subtily the passage of thick blood.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois;	And if the wound is very thick, then it is necessary to cauterize a third time;
et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	and when we want to extract a little blood and a little, then we are sufficient with only one time.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent;	And if we want much blood, then we repeat often;
et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif:	and if the wound is thick, then cauterize deeply, and terminate it only when the blood flow seems to be stopped suddenly, and it is necessary for one who has thick and hard skin, and who have narrow pores, that you anoint the limbs with oil of saxifraga and dissolving;
se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite;	It is an ointment made from violet oil, or from oil of sweet almonds, or from oil of cucumber seed.
et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	and it is in ivy, made from oil of cresson, or of lily, or of chamomile, or other similar things.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the superfluity is thick and cold, take oil of marjoram, or of balsam, or oil of anise, and similar things.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	And if the skin is tender and has large pores, it is not necessary to apply any oil, but it is necessary to wash it after the application of warm rose water, or cold water, or water of mallow, or cucumber water, or porcelain water, or similar things.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And for one who has a lot of moisture, raise it with aqua vitae, or water of myrtle, and sumach, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans;	And those who have thick superfluities rise with old wine, or with water of sew, or with a decoction of anise or chamomile, or other similar things.
et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II;	and it is not suitable to apply a poultice of warm water before the bath nor in the bath, but after the bath for one or two hours;
et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	and it is not suitable to sleep after the poulticing, and it is necessary that he be warmed, when he must be poulticed and when he is poulticed.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez;	And let those who are bilious beware, and if their blood is too sharp and inflamed;
si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses;	it is necessary that they take cold things, such as pomgranates and endives and lettuce to the stool, and similar things;
et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	and a little fat, and flesh of capon, and moist meats.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons;	And he who has a cold complexion, should take syrup of honey, and fragrant wine moderately, which is between old and new, and little nuts, and little pork and small birds and pigeons;
et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier;	and the more he is windy, the more he should drink than eat;
et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz;	and it is good to give to some men sometimes triaicle or nutmeg before or after the flatulence, to comfort the main limbs;
et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	and let the blood be subtle, but it is not good that those who are hot drink it.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne;	The flatulence that is put without piercing are those that are put on the liver, and on the spleen, and on the podagre, and on the belly and the navel and the loins and the thigh, for these members do not suffer from being pierced with a needle, and one does not make them bleed except to attract blood from member to member, as we put on the mameles when there is an excess of blood;
por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre;	To treat the viscosity which is in the limb, as we apply poultices on the belly and on the thigh to alleviate the limb;
et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu;	and remove the pain, when there is an obstruction or stone, so remove by its attractive power through adventure the obstruction, or empty the stone from its place;
et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement;	and let it be done when one applies it to the liver and to the spleen when there is retained viscosity, and these poultices are administered empty to suck as much as possible;
et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	and sometimes they are administered together with cautery fire, and sometimes plain or mixed with hot water, as in cases of pleurisy illness, and in such manner that one fills the poultice with warm water, or with water in which one has cooked suitable herbs.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The shape of the poultice administered to fire is this:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre;	And it has two fingers in width and half a palm in depth, and it has or costs on the inside of the middle a small perforation, just as if to push a needle, and let it be from the back so that it does not hurt the patient when putting it on the limb;
et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent;	and it has in the middle a rod of crossing made of iron or steel, to put a clamp on, and they are both large and small according to the illnesses and the expertise of those who use them;
car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	for the veins of children are different from those of the old, and of the thin from those of the fat.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre:	And one must then put this vein on the limb;
empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide;	taking the clamp of wax or the plaster, and putting it in the vein across the rod that is in the vein, so that the clarity is at the bottom of the vein so it does not burn the patient;
et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse;	and then put it on the member, and let your fingers be on the orifice that we have mentioned, so that when one wants, if the vapor goes in, and remove the ventouse;
et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	and take the lining as before, and recommend it often, if you have mastery.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement;	In the ventouse then which is administered in disease of the pleura, to any sharp thing, it has no edge or orifice, and is not administered unless when it is full of water, and is put on the member as gently;
et c’est li forme:	and this is its form:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus;	Without them being administered unless on members where one cannot put ventouses due to their smallness, such as lips and cheeks, and similar places;
et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans;	and in the bare flesh of the body, such as fingers or knees, and other similar things;
et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren;	and the quality of urine is such that when you find sweet and clear urines which are in narrow passages, take them;
et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres;	and put them in a narrow sweet tube, as long as they are familiar with it, and have nothing in their stomachs;
et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues;	and then be cured of vein and intestine, then rub the limb until it becomes red, and put on the urines;
et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	and when they are flat, and will discharge, if it is a good place or where one can put intestine, then put it, for it is worth much afterwards.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint;	If not, lift the place of the haunch, and then of the passage, very well, and then squeeze it;
et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés;	and if the places are too sore afterwards near the body of the urines, then wet a linen cloth in cold passage, and put on, until the urines are constricted;
et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez;	and if his blood is multiple, then put on a warm broth, or galen, and similar things, until it is stretched;
ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant;	or you put on the limb moistened warm fava beans, and let them be until they adhere to the limb, it will now stretch;
et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	and if you are in a state of greater expertise, then take other bloodlettings.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent;	And if the bloodlettings do not want to take, then rub the limb with fresh blood, or you stick an needle in as long as the blood comes out, and then put them on, and as soon as they feel the blood, they adhere;
et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	and when you see that they cling, then powder on a bit of aloe and of dried and ground cinder, or of ash, and they will now adhere.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	Here begins the book of fractures
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	These chapters are often necessary in the art of medicine, and are for the restoration of fractures and dislocations.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent;	Know, dear son, that foolish people reject this chapter, for they have never seen any of the ancient books, nor have they learned from letters;
et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin;	and for this reason the science is foreign in our land, because I have never found any good there;
et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie;	and I know nothing, except that by the science of ancient books, which I have studied so much that I have treated the science, and by experiment, and by the habit of my life;
et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	and I have described to you in this chapter what is contained, and I have abbreviated it at the end, and I have clearly shown the forms of the instruments that are needed, as I have done in these two chapters before.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	It is necessary then that we say in the prologue of this book the sum of the word and the chapters where the wise man puts his understanding, and remains on the truth, so that those who are experienced know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars;	I say that when fracture or dislocation or torsions or concussion comes to anyone, it is necessary that you hasten to anoint the patient on one side and the other, unless something prevents you from doing so, as weakness of the body, or infants, or old people.
ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois;	or if it is not too hot for him, nor too cold;
et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre;	and avoid cold and chilled foods, that is to say cold joints, and meat of goat and of pork, and do not drink wine, and avoid fatty and greasy foods, and do not fill oneself too much with foods that fill the veins with blood, until you are no longer in doubt about a hot abscess, or an accumulation of matter in the limb;
si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	if the patient returns to their previous governance, he will have used it.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken bone begins to mend, it is necessary that the patient be nourished with foods that promote fat gain, or have viscosity, such as cooked broth in water, and pork, and testicles, and feet, and calf liver, and eggs, and fresh fish, and strong wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For a warm nourishment will repair bones and will be very beneficial for the fracture.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans;	And know that the bones of the elderly and decrepit cannot well mend or reunite according to their nature due to the dryness of the members, nor those which are too tender, such as the bones of small children;
mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant;	but in order to heal, reset the bone that is broken and tie the large tendons which hold the member together, until it becomes strong as it was before;
et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	and not the whole point of his work, and for this reason it is necessary to nourish him with thick foods, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And be aware that fractures are diverse in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the fracture of the head is different from the fracture of the foot, or of the leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all the ways of fractures.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there are fractures that come from a blow, and another from a fall, such as the cut of a quill pen for writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if it is a fracture with a wound, and a fracture with only a small crack.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu;	And each manner has its own technique, and its proper instrument for restoration, according to what memory recalls in its place;
et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main;	and it is known that the fracture of the bone is by what the joints are twisted, and apparent through swelling, and heard when pressing with the hand;
et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure;	and when it does not have twisting in its touch, and the patient does not feel great pain, there is no point of fracture;
mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	but it can well have twisting, or a crack, or a small fracture.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	It is not necessary that you move the limb, but put on medicines that come to it afterwards, and then strain it now subtly.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne;	And know that the fracture which comes from a blow, and are the two parts disjoined, it is necessary now to put them in place equally, just as abscesses of the foot come to life;
et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez;	and if a hot abscess comes, then let it be until the abscess is appeased, without leaving any pus, as long as the abscess is calm;
puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces;	then put it equally in the place where you can set it lightly and wisely, and know that the restoration of it is easier than the restorations of a skull or where it has pieces;
puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	Then he tightens, as it is necessary afterwards.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main;	And if it breaks into pieces in the bones, depending on whether it's the hands or feet, or to your hand if it's small members, or to the tendons, or to one tendon and to your hand;
et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor;	and put the member according to its natural shape, so that when the broken parts of the member are reduced, reset by all means the additions in their places at the joint that you can, and beware that through your work there comes to the patient no injury or pain;
et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	and adjust well the two ends of the bones according to their proper forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien:	And feel it well with the hand if it seems to you that it is not quite right:
si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	if the dressing is gentle, and not tightening too much, nor pressing as those do who make it come through their work abscess heat and contraction to the member, as we have seen many times.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere;	And when the limb is at stake, instruct the patient well that they should not move it, neither while awake nor while asleep, nor while turning, nor in any other way;
et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	and take care that the limb is so secured that it doesn't feel any pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor;	For when it feels no pain, then it is not at stake, and it is necessary to put it in such a position that it feels no pain;
et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez;	and take care that it is placed straight, so that twisting does not come when it is restored;
et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	and the quality of the broken member is according to what I tell you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	Know that the broken members are diverse in smallness and in largeness and in shape.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans:	For there are small members, such as arms and fingers and similar things:
si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz;	it is necessary to envelop them with soft and subtle bandages;
et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe:	and those which are thick, such as the thigh and leg:
si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche;	if it is necessary to envelop with a large and hard linen bandage, because the wide bandages press the entire large member, and constrict all sides equally, so that there is no unevenness;
puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure;	then wrap lightly three or four turns according to the member, and constrict the hand a little on the entire bandage, then go above the fracture and constrict less, than the fracture, then loosen a little the fracture;
et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet;	and soften the bandage a little and often, as much as you press a large portion of the healthy limb, then take another bandage, and turn around again above the fractured limb;
puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus;	then return to the part below the fracture, and constrict moderately, neither too strongly nor too loosely, as we have said in the first bandage above;
puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	Then put between the lips of the wound a swab of linen or cloth, as long as it is even and equal, then tie everything with a bandage above, and then put your dressings well made on, if there is no abscess or swelling.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors;	And if there is swelling or an abscess, then put on a thing that appeases the abscess with heat, and which removes the swelling, and leaves it thus for some time;
puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	then strain on your dressings, and let them be of the humor of a large, wisely cut, cainne, or of the wood from which one makes the clubs, or of the roots of palm, and let them be according to this shape:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres;	but it is necessary that the dressing one puts on the fracture be a little thicker and wider than the others;
et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor;	and let it be as long as it is necessary for the size of the limb, whether small or large;
puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure;	Then hold it steady on the stelae as you did in the first lesson, then tie above a vein similarly as in the first lesson on the bruising.
plus estroit est ensus, adés moins;	The narrower it is tied above, all the less;
et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol;	and it is necessary that the thread be moderate, not too thick nor too thin, and be of soft flax;
car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	for if the threads are thick, as I have seen in the work of foolish people who make their ligatures with twisted flax cords, and it is a great error, because the ligature cannot be even if it is too subtle, and it is not necessary that it has between each steel less than two fingers of space.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is annoyed by the sides of the stelae after the constriction on their sound limbs, then put on them a bandage of flax or a piece of linen cloth, so that it does not chafe.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is with the fracture, and the chest is broken, I will tell you about the treatment afterwards.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And be aware that it's not necessary to strain these bones when all the fractured limbs are first broken.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant;	For when the limbs are large, it's not necessary to put these [bones] in place until after 5 or 7 days, or more according to the severity of the abscess and the swelling that occurs;
et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion:	and know this is the manner of the ancient plasterers for restoring fractures, dislocations, and sprains:
et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	and it is that you take the flour that holds at Paris from the mill, and mix it with warm water, and put this mixture, not too clear nor too thick, and use it, and this is the common manner of the plasterer restoring the fracture in many ways, and likewise for women and for small children, for it is neither too hot nor too cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion:	Another method of plaster for restoring the fracture and the dislocation and the sprain:
pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana X З.;	Take barberry and lasmine and enula and asafoetida and Arabic gum and moguet, an ounce or so;
mirre et aloes, ana V З.;	myrrh and aloe, an ounce and a half;
alechil VIIII З.;	of alichol eight ounces;
et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef;	and make into powder, and mix with oil of beef;
se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	if the temperament of the man is cold, use this plaster, for it is of good composition, and restores the broken bones quickly, and is of benefit to many men.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion:	Another method of plaster that is good for sprains:
pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.;	Take moguet and vismalve, an ounce or so;
mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.;	myrrh and aloe, eight ounces;
acaice VI З.;	of acacia six ounces;
bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Boil armenic, and bruise well, and mix with water or wine of vinegar, and administer.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure:	Another way to plaster the joints and the bones dislocated from their places, and appease the sudden pain, and the cut of the bone, and the bruising:
pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	Take a new wool, and anvil in oil and cooked, and put on the body.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	These plasters do not restore, but they are good for appeasing hot abscesses, and properly relieving the pains.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez:	Another way to plaster that restores the broken bones:
pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Take dried fig leaves, and earthy roots of plantain, and bruise them together, and make a plaster.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	Another way to plaster for the restoration of the bone fracture and to calm the irritation of the abscess.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie;	Take root of violets, camomile, flowers of violets, flour of peas, of each one part;
et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	and pound, and mix with wine, and if the limbs are swollen, mix it with water of moist coriander or with water, and use.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	Another kind of plaster stronger than the first, when hard abscess comes to the restoration of the limb.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie;	Take roots of violet, and seeds of flax, balaust, melilot, and sage, and flowers of violets and of camomile, of all one part;
et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	and pound, and mix with water of salt, or sweet water, or with wine, according to the heat of the limb, and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Hippocrates says in his book that one should not put on a broken limb for restoration of force except the paste made of wax and oil, and nothing else, and says it should be between two, not too soft nor too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems reasonable to apply to the broken member warm and slightly hot things, such as myrrh and aloes and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor:	Another way of applying a plaster that is good for an injury and pain:
pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Take mugwort and roots of decapitated homes, or feathers of birds, and wormwood, and equal quantities, and pound them, and make a plaster with the glue.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu;	And then undo it a little afterwards, and take care that the patient does not feel any pain, nor is the bone of their body injured;
si ne lou deslie par mains jors.	if it does not come undone by itself.
Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant;	And if pain or itching comes to the body, without rest or relief, then hasten, and undo it, and remove the plaster at once;
et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor;	And take a light cloth, and a sea sponge moistened, and plunge it in water, and lift it up to the limb, until the itching stops, and the pain is alleviated.
puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut;	Then let the limb rest for an hour, then apply to it a dry, or moistened in water or rose oil, linen cloth, and tie it with a nut, until you are sure of the aposteme's heat;
et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant;	and reduce the inflammation of the limb, and let the pain be eased, then apply a subtle plaster, and a little poultice, and do not constrain it as strongly as before;
et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	and treat it gently until it is healthy.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that the aposteme, heat and redness and pain and swelling are gone from everything, and you have need of poultice and of linen cloth, then apply it again, as you did previously in the same way.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII;	And if it does not come to the limb any of what we have said, do not force the dislocation for three or four or five or seven days;
et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus;	and sometimes let it be twenty days, according to what one sees, until the fracture becomes solid, and approaches the adjustment of the flesh together;
adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant;	then restrain it more than at first, and bind its vein, as I have said before;
et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir;	and if you see the limb drying out more than necessary, know that nourishment cannot come to it;
arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure;	raise then the cold and wet dressing, every time that you dislocate it, and let this be on the third day, and loosen a little the ligature;
par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement:	by this work then cut the nourishment to the limb, and amend immediately what foolish doctors do, who torture the member excessively:
c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	It is harmful, and such practices are to be feared, and I do not see anything other than giving pain and making things worse.
des diverses manieres de brisure	of the various ways of fracture
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees;	Many kinds of fractures exist, and there are various shapes, and the causes are distinct;
car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust;	for there are fractures made by the blow of a sword, and the bone is broken all the way to the joint that is next to the surface of the bone, as if done with an axe or club;
et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	and for this reason this kind of fracture is called "axing" or "hewing".
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»;	When the sword cuts the bone with a blow from below, and it is called this kind of fracture "absolue" or "cutting from underneath";
et est li plaie de ces II brisures grans ou petite.	and the wound from these two fractures is great or small.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if it has been struck with a blunt object, or cracked, or broken from a fall on stone, or fallen on stone, or similar things.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is a piercing wound, which approaches just to the web that is beneath the bone, or it is on the bone, and this is a wound whether large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»;	And if there is a wound that has grown into the bone as subtle as a goat's hair, and the fissure is small, and for this reason it is called this fracture "capillary";
et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres;	and if the wound is made by striking with a stone, or by falling, or a similar thing, and it causes the piece of bone to enter inward, and the limbs are twisted as the blacksmiths do when they strike on the anvils;
si entre li piere dedens.	if between the inner bones.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant;	And this happens more to those who have soft or moist bones, such as a child's head;
et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles;	and it happens in all these manners of fracture that small pieces are dislocated thus;
et je em parlerai en son leu.	and I will speak of its place.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And we recognize all kinds of fractures through the extraction from them, and the questioning with tents, and by the corrupted flesh that is upon them.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The resemblance of hair is known by that which when one discovers the bone, and one rubs upon it, then appears the black fracture.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the cure of the fracture, beware of accidents by the patient, and if you see any evil accident, such as vomiting of bile, and loss of understanding, and tension, and palpitations, and acute fever, and the eyes bulging out and reddening, and other similar things in many dispositions, cannot heal without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see a terrifying accident, and you expect health, then begin the cure.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the injury comes first to you, and it is in winter, then it is necessary to uncover the bone before the fourteenth day of the month that you can.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is in this state, then hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, so that the bone tissue does not become corrupted, and comes the accident that we have mentioned.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi:	And if the fracture of the bone reaches the membrane that covers the brain, then it is necessary that you suture the affected part thus:
et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset;	and it is that you take the head of the afflicted patient, and uncover the bone in all the ways that you can, and on the shape of the wound as gently as you can, and if a decrease of blood comes to uncover the bone, or a abscess falls, use what aid is necessary, and it is that you fill the hole with moistened cloths soaked in rose oil;
et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc;	and make the wound rest until the fallen abscess is appeased, and be assured of a decrease of blood;
puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige:	Then it begins between the bone and the flesh, and it is done according to two manners of work:
l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	One manner is that you cut at the narrow tail end in front, and that is its shape:
Et puis i boute I autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then you widen the other end, making it larger than the first.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde;	And the second manner is that you have a number of diverse ends, some narrow and others wide, and they are pointed, and they are made of iron;
et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	and in working lightly, so that you do not harm the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou I cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os;	And if the bone is strong and hard, it is necessary that you pierce through, in such a way that you administer ends with grooves, not so that they penetrate beyond the bone of the head, and must have on the end a margin or circle, which does not allow the point to pass beyond the bone;
et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test;	and it is necessary to have several, so that each one comes into his own place in the hope of the bones, so that you have supporters for all tests;
et c’est li forme des III manieres de tareres:	and this is the form of the three manners of supporters:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes I tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez;	The quality for piercing through the broken bone is that you put one supporter on the bone, and turn with your hands as long as you know that the bone is pierced;
puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures;	then put the supporter on another part a little afterwards, and thus do all around, then cut with incisions the space of the bone which is between the parts, and do this more subtly than you can, and gently, as we have said, until you draw the bone to your hand, or to any of the instruments that you have, such as tongs, pincers;
et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	and beware that you do not touch the brain nor the spinal cord.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire;	And when you have pierced the bone, and drawn, it is necessary that you restore the part that has remained of the bone to all other similar instruments resembling an incisor, but it is necessary that it be more delicate and more subtle than the other incisors;
et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens;	and if there remains nothing of the small bones, or any shells, then lightly touch the bones to one of the instruments;
puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	then treat the wound with tenderness and caresses that we have mentioned.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus;	And another manner of work is what the Gauls call, which is more familiar;
et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	and it holds very strongly, and this is its effect.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is necessary first that you discover a part of the bone, whether it be broken or bruised, so that when you have discovered that part, then you will put at the head of this instrument, which is called a lenticle, whose form is this:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os;	And do not cut on one side, and the affected part is in two edges, so that the cutting is towards the bone;
puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz;	then make with a small hammer above, so that you gently cut the bone all around, and take good care of the membrane that is beneath;
s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	if it is close to the bone, gently cut the bone, for one cuts well without harm, and without fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the break in the bone does not reach to the membrane, and the bone is cut just above, and it has small pieces, then it is necessary to render that asperity, and to remove the scales with a subtle rasp that you must have in different quantities, to apply to each place the most convenient, according to the work and the shape of the break.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	Use coarse rasps at first, and afterwards finer ones, and do not stop from doing this until it is well.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement;	In each of the other fine haircuts and subtle fractures, it is necessary that you make adjustments according to its thickness.
et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	and it is something that is not prescribed for one who has devoted their study to this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie;	And if the wound is deep, then you must take a cloth of linen, according to the quantity of the wound, and moisten it in rose oil, and put it on the wound;
puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil;	then take another double cloth, in two or three layers, and moisten it in wine and rose oil, and put it on the first cloth;
et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement;	and do this as gently as you can, so that you do not irritate the wound, then apply another linen cloth on top, and do not bind it too tightly, just enough to touch the wound;
et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses;	and let it be thus for one or two days, until the aposteme abscess is appeased, then undo it, and apply medicines such as roots of lily, and flour of vetches, and powder of incense, and aristolochia, and similar things;
et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication;	and of these things make powder, and put it on the wound, and administer at the same time medicines without mordication;
et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice;	and guard that the wound is immediately clean, so you do not leave in it the pus, nor leave to gather filth, for when filth gathers on the cloth of the brain, it corrupts and festers, and brings great evil to the patient;
car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	for when one puts on the affected part a cauterizing thing, it becomes worse through neglect.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Take heed then, that no evil accident comes to the patient, as we have said, if it is doubtful without doubt.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac;	And if blackness does not come forth for the medicine that one has put on, which has virtue, then it is necessary that you take a part of honey, and three parts of rose oil and in glue one drag, and put it on the affected place;
puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then for the treatment of manners of cures that are suitable, as long as he is healthy.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les II parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont II os;	It is known that sometimes both parts of the knee joint are broken, or one of them alone, because they are two bones;
et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	and this cartilage is cartilaginous, and does not break, unless it becomes swollen or twisted, and then becomes diseased.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil;	And if one of the two parts is broken, then it is necessary that you bind your little bandage or splint around the knee, and put equal to this break inside your bandage index, and in the pouchet by default, until the knee regains its natural shape;
et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	and do it lightly, and guard that the patient does not feel pain from your work.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the break is in the upper part of the knee, and the bone cannot come to its place, then it is necessary that you put it even at the head of a stick somewhat thick.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues;	And if the fracture is of two parts, thus make another, and hasten to restore the first joint, if you can;
se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	If not, after the seventh or tenth, when the abscessed place is cooled, then apply to the head of the fracture a poultice made with bandages of linen, if the fracture is in one part.
Ou tu boutes I autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est;	Or you apply to the other part, where the fracture is;
et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	and let the bandages be so thick that they fill the openings of the fracture.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	And some say one should moisten the bandages in butter, and change every joint.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin;	It does not seem to me that this is good, but rather that they should be moistened with a concoction of egg and powder of mallow;
puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	then leave the bandage on, until the bone is firm, and the cartilage hardened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a I souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi;	And sometimes the button of an abscess is opened with a needle, and if it is loosely wrapped in a bandage, and the fracture is held, and the patient breathes through.
or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	For do that which you see.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en I poc de dyaquilon.	And if abscesses come to the urine as you urinate, then put a little cotton moistened with rose oil, or in a pouch of hyssop.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis;	And if the abscesses do not come, then apply a plaster made from flour of cypress, and powder of incense, mixed with water, then put on light poultices, and do not tie around the kidneys.
et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu;	and if the fracture of the kidney is small, and it is broken into tiny pieces, then extract the excrements suitable for that, then sew the wound, and treat the things that cause inflammation and swelling, as with plasters and ointments suitable for that.
et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if it has no deep wounds, then the treatment of tents, and he puts bandages of plaster, as long as it is healthy.
de la routure de la mandibule	of the fracture of the jawbone
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jawbone is broken apart, and there is no point of the wound to be found, and the breaking is only slightly so, and it is not broken in two, unless the bone is corroded within, then one examines it lightly.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide;	It is necessary, if the breakage is on the right side, that you put your right index finger in the mouth of the patient;
et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	and if the breakage is on the left jaw, then put your right index finger, and gently push the breakage from within, and hold the other side with the other hand from outside, and make it even.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en II, si covient que tu aministres extension de II pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the breakage of the jaw is separated in two, then it is necessary that you administer extension to the two parts, until it is even.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus I drapel double;	And if the teeth are shaken by a rupture, or a fracture, then hold them back with a thread of gold or silver or silk, then put on the broken jaw a kerchief, and put on the dressing twice;
et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	and put on the dressing a large staple well made, or a piece of leather equal, long and wide according to the jaw, and tie it around the mouth that you can, and instruct the patient to rest, and eat light foods.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet;	And if you see that the fracture is changing, then untie it on the third day, and then put back in place what has changed;
et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote;	and apply a plaster on it, made from powder of millstone with egg white or flour of oats, after you have applied the kerchief;
et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez;	and put on a light linen plaster, and if the plasters stick, and the condition of the patient does not change, let it be until it is healed;
maintes fois est sanez en III semainnes.	Many times it is healthy in three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if abscesses that come, then we will treat them as we have said many times.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee;	And if it has a fracture and wound together, restore the nude piece of bone in being bone;
si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	if subtlety of the bone the extracted fragments reunite with that.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, then enlarge it with a flame according to necessity.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus I des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have bones all these pieces, and none remain, then sew the wound, if it is large, and put on it some plasters united to that, to bind flesh, until it be healthy.
de la forcele	of the fracture
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc III manieres:	The fracture breaks many times before, towards the shoulder, and the break is in three manners:
ou elle est brisie et desevree en II, et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer;	Or when it is broken and dislocated in two places, and there are fragments, and it is more difficult to restore;
ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	or where there is a break with a wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies II ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie;	And the work is such that when the break is without a wound, you should have two attendants, so that one holds the injured area where the break has occurred;
et li autres estende lou col vers la partie;	and the other stretches the neck towards the affected part;
puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	then put the break equally between your two hands, so that the shape is as it should be, and there is neither appearance nor deviation.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit;	And if you need to extend it further, then put on the shoulder of the patient a round sphere made of cloth, or of wool, and let its size be according to your necessity;
et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	and stretch and lift the injured area, and hold the sphere in your hand, so that you put the break in its proper place;
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule I oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot pull the head of the shoulder out of its joint, because it comes from deep within, then it is necessary that the patient put his hand on his hip, and place the middle of the shoulder on the tip of the elbow, and turn the lower end of the shoulder downwards, until the bone of the shoulder is raised.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus;	And then take the fracture in your hands, and if you pull it straight, it is necessary that you cut into;
et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as;	and pull the pieces gently, and if the bone cannot join due to any swelling, then cut according to one of the incisions that you have;
mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	but that you put on the shoulder this instrument, to guard the skin:
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre;	and resembles a spoon, and is not too narrow, and should be as wide as it is necessary, according to the size of the bone and the thickness of the tissue;
et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os;	and it has two parts, as you see, and let one be large, and the other be narrow, just as is the condition of the wound that you have made when you treated the bones;
et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	and when you are assured of a hot abscess, cut the wound, and if the condition is small, or you doubt the abscess is hot, then fill the wound with dressings and tents, according to its quantity.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille I drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if a hot abscess comes, then moisten the dressing in oil and rose water and vinegar, and apply it.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier;	The strengthening of the bone, when it is without wounds and without surgery, is that you apply to the bone a plaster made from powdered mallow and egg white, and apply light bandages, and put a splint under the dressing, if you have the skill;
puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre;	Then take a very wide bandage of a palm's length, then put a double cloth on the swelling, and apply the plaster.
puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant;	Then take a thin stick of three fingers in width and length, and wrap it around the bandage, so that one end of the bandage hangs down.
et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide;	and put the stick on the fracture, and turn the bandage around the neck, and undo the healthy shoulder, and undo the diseased shoulder;
et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint;	and reset each part, and when you see that the ligaments hold the fracture firmly, and you clearly see that the stick does not move on the broken bone, then check every day, and when the ligaments are relaxed, then restrain it.
et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut;	and make the patient lie on his back, and put when he sleeps a small pillow under the shoulder, to raise the joint upwards.
si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors;	If the fracture of the upper arm is reduced by the reduction of the shoulder, or you tie the arm to the neck, and no bad accident happens, until twenty days;
puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez;	then reapply the plaster, if you see that it is needed, and hold it in place and let it be, until it is restored;
et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	and it is most often restored in twenty-eight days, and in less than eight weeks.
de la brisure de l’espaule	of the fracture of the shoulder
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement;	It happens that the broken or dislocated shoulder does not heal in the middle, and it is not felt to be out of place except by the touching;
si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	if the bandage conforms to the shape of the fracture, and the dressing conforms to its natural form, in all the ways that you can;
puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double;	then put on the wound powder of millet with a little water, and light dressings, and put over it a double bandage;
puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment;	Then put on a wide and thin stake, a little wider than the shoulder, and if the stake is dislocated it moves in no place of the shoulder, unless one uses a poultice of hot linen, so that the stake becomes straightened;
et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor;	and then bind it all with a large bandage firmly, so that the stake does not move from its place, and look at the linen every day;
et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit;	and every time it becomes dislocated, bind it, and put the stake straight as it was out of its place, and let the patient lie on their side;
et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en XXV.	and the shoulder is restored in 20 days or in 25.
Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	And when this number of days is accomplished, then untie it, and be careful, for it is not good to keep it tied too long.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a piece of bone protrudes forward, and pushes against the heart, then make an incision, and the oste, and do what we have said in the breaking of a false abscess of hot aposteme.
de la brisure dou pis	of the fracture of the foot
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc;	The feet are sometimes fractured in the middle, but this happens rarely;
mais il brise sovent au defuer.	but it breaks often at the toe
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	And when it is fractured in the middle, it declines to the toe, and the patient feels great pain, and lack of strength, and weakness, and by chance vomits blood, and opens the bowel in the broken bone, and loses his senses.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met I cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des II costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient;	And the restoration is that the patient often places on his back, and puts a cushion between the shoulders, then presses the shoulders, and brings together the sides of the two ribs with his hands, and subtly adjusts to make it even in all ways that you can, so that the shape of the bone is as it should be;
puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en I drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve;	then put on plasters and stoppings above the subtle splint of salt, or another light paste, and wrap it in a bandage, and tie it to the broken bone, so that it does not move;
et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint;	and turn the linen bandage around the back, and tighten it firmly, and rewind each hour the bandage, and if it becomes loose, then tighten it;
et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures;	and if it becomes necessary to loosen it, due to corrosion or itching that comes to the wound, or pain or abscess, then hasten and loosen it, and render the plaster, and address what has come from various methods of treatments;
puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	then reset the plaster, and tighten it as long as it is healthy.
de la brisure des costes	of the fracture of the ribs
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses;	It is known that the fracture of the ribs does not come from a blow except when there are large blows on the back, and on the inner chest, and do not cause pain except because they are swollen;
et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	and the pain is especially bad at the time of urination.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And the restoration is such that you put even the fracture, as it is necessary.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	And then apply the plaster, and hold it with a stick, if you have this in your profession.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile;	And if the fracture of the ribs declines inward, then the patient feels great pain and puncture, as with a case of pleurisy, for the bone pierces the membrane;
et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	and sharp pains, and coughing and vomiting a great quantity of blood, and it is a grievous condition, and the old men have given much advice.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if it is one of those who say that it is necessary to administer foods which inflate the stomach, in order to push out the fracture.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not make this, because a hot abscess does not come, if it has not come.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if it has come, thus let it be.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison;	And they say that none of the veins should be cut on the body to suck out the humor, and this seems reasonable;
toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	Nevertheless, there is doubt that the veins do not attract the excess humors of the body due to the weakness.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And they say that one should cover the body with a warm woolen cloth soaked in hot oil, and put tents between the ribs to equalize the flow within, then it will be cured by the treatment of the cure of pleurisy, of diet and of medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac;	And if the patient feels great pain that they cannot bear the pressure on the bone which points to the lung, and there is doubt in the patient, then it is necessary to cut into the body of the broken rib, and it is necessary to put an instrument inside to guard against the damage.
et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then one must cut the bone, and shave lightly, and then sew the two lips of the wound, if it is large, and apply a dressing to it, until it becomes healthy.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu;	And if a carbuncle appears, put on it a moistened cloth soaked in rose oil, and apply it to the body;
et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and treat the place from which it comes that gives rise to the carbuncle, and apply poultices to the affected area where it should be, until it becomes healthy.
de la brisure dou col	of the fracture of the neck
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie;	Sometimes a fracture comes to the bones of the neck, and it seems that it will break;
et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	and also to the spine of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	And when it happens to anyone, and you want to know if they will be healthy or not, take heed if you see their hands softened and swollen and deadened, and they cannot move or stretch them, and when you prick them with a needle, they do not feel it.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	Know that it is mortal in many conditions, and if they move and feel well when one holds them firmly and tightly, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and that the patient will be cured, if one applies a cure.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit;	And if a similar thing comes to the spine of the back, and you want to know if it is healthy or not, then take heed if the feet are swollen, and if the accidents that occur are in the hands, and on the back there is sweating and vomiting without desire;
et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	and when one has it seated on their stomach, then there is vomiting without desire.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	And when it is seated on its back and it wants to sit, then it cannot.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz:	Know that it is mortal:
si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	if one does not work at his cure.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this accident does not come to them, then the thing is lighter.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez;	And the treatment is that you apply if there is a hot abscess, put on the spine oil of rose or oil of mallow's root, until it is appeased;
puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer;	then apply one of the comforting and drying plasters, and bind it with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest;
et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	and do not sleep on that side where he feels the pain, until he is healed.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur;	And if some bone becomes dislocated, then it is necessary to sew over the heart;
et oste l’os, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and reduce the bone, then bring together the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with a suture, then treat the joint with gum arabic, until he is healed;
et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier;	and if the head of the bone is broken, which is called the "head of the elbow", you thrust your fist into your left hand, and place it even with your other hand on your shoulder, then apply the plaster and set it straight, if you have skill;
puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	Then hold it back, and if there is a bone uncovered, make an incision above, and on the bone, and treat the wound until it is healed.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	of the fracture of the bone of the thigh
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief;	It happens that the bone of the thigh is fractured, and if it happens, then there is not much help from a little manipulation at the head;
et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	and it causes lengthwise pain, and decline to the patient, and comes to the sick person pain in the leg, and sharpness, and swells what is broken.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure;	And the restoration is that you put your hand on it, as long as you are above the fracture;
et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li;	and you should know what the breakage and its shape are;
et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	and if the fracture is at the head of the bone, then put equal to that fracture, as long as it is in its natural shape.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the break is of long duration, or it declines inwardly, then have the patient lie on their stomach, until the restoration of that break is apparent.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve;	And when you have made it even, put on a plaster, then put on a splint of wood or of leather, and hold the break steady, so that it does not move;
et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	and anoint the limb below the ribs, until the injury is even.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And instruct the patient that they should sleep on their sound side, or on their back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit;	And if hot abscesses come, do not touch them, until the hot abscesses are alleviated, and put on what we have previously mentioned;
et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident;	and then return to the restoration, and hold it as is necessary, if there is no other bad accident;
et c’est li maniere.	and it is the manner.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	of the fracture of the shoulder
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des II manieres:	The joints are what is between the elbow and the head of the shoulder, and if it is broken, thus one must restore it according to one of the two methods:
dont l’une est que tu pren I fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	one of which is that you take a wooden splint of moderate thickness, in this form:
Et lie as II chiés II liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus I siege;	And tie the two joints the two bands, and bend them upwards, and sit the patient on a seat;
puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval;	then put the arm with the broken bone on the splint, until it comes to the elbow, and have in the middle a curve of wood, then tie above some heavy thing where the minister extends downwards;
puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	then put the mire the fracture even with his hands together, so that the fracture returns as it should.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a II ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout I liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And the other manner is that one binds the patient to his bed, and ties his hand to his neck, then instructs the servants that one of them takes what is on the bruise in his hands, and the others take below all the linen, and stretches each to its part.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	And if you see that the extraction is more forced, then hold the linen below the bruise and on the bruise, and stretch each of the servants to his part.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure;	And if the bruise is near the head of the shoulder, then it is necessary that you put one linen under the armpit, and the other towards the elbow, under the bruise.
et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute;	and also if the bruise is towards the elbow, then it is necessary to put the linen lightly, without pressure, until the bruise is even on the limb and on the elbow;
puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	Then put even the fracture, if it is necessary, and hold it steady, so that abscesses do not come to the wound.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a VII jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez;	And if abscesses do come, then do not hold it tight for seven days, and put on a moist cloth and oil of roses, until the abscess is reduced.
puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein;	Then hold it steady, and the manner of holding is that you put a plaster on the fracture, then assemble the arm with the shoulder, and put your hand on the shoulder or on the back.
et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	and put on a bandage, and hold to the shoulder, and to the arm, so that the arm is in its place, if nothing can dislodge it, or if the bone is not moved.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele I doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure III dois de chescune part;	And if you doubt that the bone will not move, then use splints, and put on the fracture a splint larger and stronger than the others, and let there be between each splint two fingers' space, and let each splint be so large that it passes the fracture three fingers on each side.
puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	then strain on the stiles, thus as I said at the beginning of the chapter on the fracture, stronger and less in aligning.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit;	And if you see the alignment of the stiles, and the constriction, as we have said, in the work that you restore the broken member, and you suspect hot abscess, let it be until the seventh day, as we have said;
puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	then examine each for three days the ligament, that swelling or inflammation does not come to the limb, or the nourishments cannot come to the member because it is too constricted.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	If it decreases, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac;	And if no such accident comes, then do not force the dislocation further that after three days or more, and let the patient sleep on his back, and put his hands on his stomach;
et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens;	and put a dislocated shoulder in its proper place with a pillow of wool evenly, and watch each hour of the day or night, that the alignment of the member does not break nor the tendons become slack;
si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz;	if it adheres by virtue of medicine, and give the food that we have previously mentioned, in such a manner that the food is first subtle;
et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	and when it begins to seize, then it should be coarse.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout;	And it is customary that the shoulder and the leg should be seized for 40 days from everything;
et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	and then one must dislocate it and administer baths and medicines of anointings for the joint to adhere;
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	And if the fracture is ugly and swollen, then it will take 40 days or 2 months to disentangle.
de la brisure du bras	of the fracture of the arm
Li bras est compos de II os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet;	The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the "radius" and "ulna", one of which is small, and it is the one that connects to the shoulder;
et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi;	and the other is large, and it is the one that is twisted, towards the little elbow;
par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	by chance, the large radius bone will break alone, or the small one, and by chance they will mend together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations;	When the small radius bone is broken, the restoration is easy, and the healing;
et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	and when the large one is broken, then the healing is bad, and more troublesome than when they are broken together.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	If it is the small radius bone that is broken alone, then it is necessary to set it lightly in place, and make it even.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort;	And if it is the large radius bone, then it is necessary to set it with more force;
et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor;	and stretch out on the cushion, and pull the pouch of the hand higher than the others, and let the little fingers be lower than the other fingers, and let the patient cross their arms over themselves, and the cushion in front of them higher, so the patient does not suffer any hardship;
puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	then stretch out the ministers like arms to the part below his hand, or to the elbow, and one minister to the other above.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And then put the mire equal, according to its best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if it breaks into pieces, put each one in its place, and if there is no matching piece to join the heart, and you cannot restore it to its place, then make a splint and the bone, as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler;	And if with the break there is a wound, I have spoken of it in the singular chapter;
si pren la cure.	If you take the treatment.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz;	And if at the beginning of the restoration there appear abscesses and swellings, apply a plaster made from oil and white wax, which should be neither too hard nor too soft;
et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	and spread the plaster subtly on it, until the abscesses and swellings are alleviated.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres;	And then remove the wax, and apply a plaster made from powdered millstone with a little water, then put on the splints, and let the splint of the fracture be stronger, and a bit larger than the others;
et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions:	and know that it must have six splints or arms in various positions:
soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II;	be it that the fracture is in one of the bones, or in two;
et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre;	and hold more firmly on the fracture than other parts, and all the less so in touching, as I said at the beginning of the chapter;
et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres;	and are the bandages that are on the fracture soft and moist, and not hard nor harsh;
et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	and let the thread, from which it is strained, be of linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And bind the limb and the thread after a few hours.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez;	And if some evil accident happens to the limb, such as itching that comes to the limb, then it is necessary that you wrap the limb with warm water, until those itchings are alleviated;
et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	and let the limb not be restrained from resting.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And then restart the tightening, and if the threads are softened and the bones dislocated, and similar things, if it is necessary.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses I poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And beware that the numbness cannot come to the limb, because it is too tight, then it is necessary that you loosen it a little, and leave it thus for some hours, until the numbness departs, and then tighten.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	And if none of these things that we have said come to the patient, then do not untie him for up to twenty days.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos;	Or put a bandage around his neck, then bind his hands to his neck, and let his neck be even, and guard against movement and digestion, and let him sleep on his back;
et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	and know that this fracture is restored in thirty days or in thirty-five, and by chance in twenty days, according to the compositions and complexities of the virtues.
de la brisure de la main	of the fracture of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	Know that on the back of the hand and as we have said, there are few fractures, and it rarely comes to a point where there is often splinting.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement;	And when the palm of the hand is fractured or split, then it is necessary that the patient sit cross-legged, and sit upright in front of him evenly;
puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint;	Then he puts his hand on the extended leg, and extends the mangled bones, and puts the muscles even with the bones, as long as they are well joined;
et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu;	and applies a plaster and the poultices, if abscesses do not come, then he puts a splint according to the quantity of the defect;
et soit envoloupee en I drapeil de lin.	and let it be wrapped in a linen cloth.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie;	And if the fracture is on the inner side of the sole of the foot, make a sphere of cloth, and instruct the patient to bind it to his broken foot;
et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	and then bind it with a long cloth, and let the splint be of leather soft enough as the palm of the hand, and bind it, as is necessary.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the fracture is in the finger, it is necessary that you put a splint on top, and another below on the palm, so that the hand is straight and upright, then tie it all around the hand, and tighten the cloth between the two.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient;	And if the fracture comes to one of the two bones, it is the forearm, set it straight, as it is necessary;
et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve;	and restrain it with a splint, and if you see that a small straight stick is put to lift the fracture, and does not move;
et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés;	and if the fracture is in the other arm, as in the elbow or one of the others, set it straight, and bind it with the healthy arm that is next to it;
ou tu les lie toz en I tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet;	or you tie them both together, so that they do not move, or you put a stick on, as on the forearm;
et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	and take care in the restoration and in the treatment of hot abscesses, and heal those that come from it, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	of the broken thigh
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier;	The bone of the thigh is often broken, and one can see it well when it turns to the front and back;
et li restauration si est c’on lie I liien desus la briseure, et I autre desoz.	and the restoration is when one puts a bandage under the fracture, and another above it.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment;	And the patient puts his face on it, then each assistant extends his hand to his part equally;
et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	and it is when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	And if the fracture is near the root of the thigh, one of the assistants should be at the groin, and the other assistant above the fracture.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval;	And also if it is near the knee, and then the assistant should be at the knee, and the extension should be below;
puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	then put the bones equal with his two hands, as long as it is according to its natural shape, and then apply the plaster, and the bandage, if abscesses do not come.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure;	And if there is a hot abscess, let it cool, then return to your work and to its treatment;
li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	The book is made in such a manner.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus;	It is necessary that you bind the fracture with a bandage doubled in two or three layers, and let the surplus hang over, then turn the leg so that the heels come to the root of the knee, and put a long thread between the thigh and the leg, below the knee, and let the end of the thread come out above.
puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe;	then turn the bandage on the leg and on the thigh, then put these on the fracture, and put a stake on the bone of the leg;
puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure;	then fill the empty space between the leg and the thigh with soft cloths to make equal pressure, then begin to bind firmly two or three turns around the fracture;
et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint;	and the more you go up from the fracture, the less it is constricted;
puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet;	then understand the two heads of the thread that you have placed between the thigh and the hip, and in their place there are three stitches that are detached, then return to the bottom at the head of the thread, until you come up near the foot;
et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	and hold it steady, so that it does not move from its place, then leave it thus, and that there comes neither abscess nor swelling nor any similar thing.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois;	And if it happens, then undo it, and treat what has come, as we have said many times;
et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet;	and if it is a piece of bone that hurts, then make it grow, if one can;
et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer;	and if one cannot, then make the place grow by cutting and scraping;
et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	and treat it as we have said, until it is healthy.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras;	And sometimes the hip is broken thus where one puts stitches, as in the shoulder and or arm;
toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	In all ways, during restoration thus made not ringing to the patient.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en L jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And it is known that the thigh is restored in a day, or a little less or a little more, according to the diversity of the complications.
de la ruelle dou genoil	of the hollow of the knee
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	It is known that in the hollow of the knee there is little breaking, but it often swells.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	And if it breaks, it is nothing but a fissure, or a perforation, and there is a complete wound, and without a wound, and that feels well.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet;	And the restoration is when one puts even what is broken to its two parts, as long as they are assembled as one can.
puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant;	then apply the plaster, and you put on a round bandage, if you have the skill, and hold it as is necessary, then examine all the treatments that we have said for other fractures, such as abscesses, heat, and similar things;
si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Put to each accident what is suitable for it, as long as it is healthy.
de la brisure de la jambe	of the fracture of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»;	Be aware that in the leg there are II bones, because of which one is called by right "tibia", and the other is called "fibula";
et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	and it has the same kind of fracture as the arm, and for this reason the restoration is just like that of the arm, and the work is all the same. And if both bones are broken together, then the leg becomes twisted on all sides.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the slender bone is broken, then it becomes twisted forwards.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien;	And if the large bone is broken, then one feels great pain, and the swelling is visible;
et torne desoz.	and it becomes deformed.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement;	Then we apply extension, and put it in place, and lay the splints equally;
mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere;	but however, it is necessary if the fracture is ugly, and it has many pieces, that the extension be smaller and lighter;
et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	and the wing according to its strength.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren II faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz;	And when you have completed your work, take two pieces of split wood that press against the thigh on one side and the other, and are as long as the thigh from the knee to the buttocks;
puis envoloupe en II leus I bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien;	then wrap two splints with one bandage above and below, and tie it in the middle, and to this binding the thigh should not turn to the right or left, and thus it is well;
et aucun i aministrent I bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie;	and let someone apply a splint as long as the thigh, and it is of wood, and put it on the thigh to prevent movement, and properly made for the fracture or where there is a wound;
et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident;	and move each day the leg, to see if it has an abscess or another accident;
si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	if you treat him as long as he is healthy.
de la brisure des os dou piet	of the fracture of the bones of the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	To the ankle comes no fracture, but to the bones of the foot come sometimes fractures and to the two knees, and it does not happen that they are shattered in many different ways.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus;	And if there is a fracture of the bones of the foot, and you see these bones overlapping each other, then put the patient's foot on the ground, just as if he were going to walk, and then put your foot on top of his, where the bones are raised, then press down until they return to their place;
puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a II chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	then apply the plaster and bandages above, and put beneath the belly of the foot two flat splints, then bind it to the foot firmly, then you have enveloped the dressing around, and other things that you have need of.
Et quant III jors ou IIII seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when three or four days have passed, if you untie the bandage, you will find the bones even, whether they are broken, whether they are dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main;	And if there are some of the fingers broken, restore them, as we have said about the fingers of the hand;
puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment;	Then put on the broken finger a splint according to the length of the finger, and let it be a little wider, then put next to the foot the tablet that I have spoken of, and bind it tightly;
et s’il en i a II ou III, ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en I drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet;	and if there are two or three, or more, broken, put on each finger a splint according to its quantity, wrapped in a linen cloth, and bind the tablet next to the foot;
et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	and let it be placed on top of the tablet across the belly of the foot, so that it holds it well.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit;	And it is necessary that you do not forget the other things that I have said about other fractures, since we have spoken of them.
et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	and treat each accident as it is necessary.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	of the fracture of the bone of the finger
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier;	When the bone in the thigh of the woman is fractured, if it makes her sit with enlargement, then bend her to the back part, and let it be held from behind;
puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto;	then fill the bath with warmth of the patient's body heat, and put in it as much [water] as [the quantity that is] sufficient;
puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto;	then undress the woman, and raise her back a little by little, and then press the cloth, until it comes to the entrance of the thigh, and the bone returns with the rest;
et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor:	and when she wants to urinate, remove the cloth, and when she has urinated, put it back on her, and do this for seven days or inside;
si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature;	If it will be restored the fracture, and you see, take a bladder of goat, and tie to the fractured area a string, and pour all the bladder into the wound;
puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens:	then blow in the string strongly, until the bladder is inflated from within:
la nature si revenra li brisure;	the wound will then restore the fracture;
puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then it should be filled with cotton, and left thus for some days, until it is healed.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche;	And when the bone of the shoulder of man is broken, or of woman, thus it should be restored as we have said for the bone of the thigh;
et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	and these nearby fractures are not hidden from one who applies his study and work, and attends to my book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration:	For the fracture signifies in many ways the right way of restoration:
enten le donques.	pay attention then.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge;	On the stick, when it is broken, take a handful of ivy and bind the stick;
puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse III jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	then wrap it with bandages around, and leave it for three days or therein, and it will be healthy soon.
de brisure avec plaie	of a fracture with a wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is necessary for the one who has a fracture with a wound, especially if it is large, such as the bone of the thigh or shoulder or similar, that it be healed now, so that the healings that we have mentioned bear witness.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound heals, then anoint with vitriol, if you have nothing else, then recommence to restore the fracture in the same hour, or that day, if abscesses do not come.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if abscesses come, then leave the restoration until the ninth day, as long as the abscess is alleviated, and do not touch it on the third day nor on the fourth, for you will cause bad accidents to come.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the broken bone is visible on the heart of the uncovered wound, then it is necessary that you put it in place lightly with your hands, with small extension.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a VII dois ou VIII de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie;	And if the extension is not prepared to be put in place by your hands, then reset it with this instrument made of iron, which has 7 or 8 fingers in length, and its width is according to the quantity of the wound;
et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne III ou IIII, selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure;	and for this reason it is necessary for the master that he take 3 or 4, according to what he needs in each treatment of a fracture;
et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	and let it be rounded and somewhat thick, so that it does not press on the member during your work, and let it be pointed at the front, and thick from the middle forward, thus:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent;	And it is called "palainche", because it is necessary that the curved head be put on the top of the exposed bone;
et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	and strike it once, as long as it grows back, and let one be even with the other.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And if the fracture is subtle, and the surgeon cannot well grasp the bone, then it is necessary that you cut off the end of the bone, so that the surgeon has possession of it.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir;	And if you cannot reset the bone, as we have said, then cut it with an instrument suitable for that purpose, whether to cut or to scrape, according to your ability.
puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	Then remove what remains in the bone of callus and small spurs.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	And when the bone is reset, and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit;	Do this until it is in its place, then wrap it in a bandage soaked in black styptic wine, and apply it neatly if it is in a splint.
et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption;	and do not put anything on the wound, such as cerote or other things that have oil, so that it does not cause suppuration and corruption;
puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure;	then administer these once you have restored the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and cover it all around, according to the size of the wound, and take good care that the wound is not constricted with the dressing;
et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois;	and many times foolish physicians have done this, and have caused death or corruption to come upon the patient;
et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	and let the dressing be softer and more gentle than other dressings.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles;	And if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that a serious accident may occur, as we have said, and you feel pain in the body, then it is not suitable to put these on;
mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	but wrap around, on the body of this dressing, a cloth, and tie them.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And when you see after one or two days the wound beginning to fester, then remove what you had applied on top of everything, and put on a healing ointment for wounds, such as ointment called tetrapharmacum and similar things.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre II fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And it is necessary that you unbind the limb two times a day, in the morning and in the evening, until it is sound and healthy.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And it is necessary that the limbs be bound in such a way that the wound can flow downwards slightly.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if many days pass, and it cannot heal but rather discharges continuously, know that there are small pieces of bone, because of which it is necessary that you touch the wound with a probe, and remove all these loose pieces that cause that pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	And if a fistula or other kind of corruption comes to the limb, then it is necessary that you treat it, according to what is written in its chapter above.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse;	And when the bone is broken, and open on the limb, such as the bone of the thigh or of the shoulder, and other similar ones of the large limbs, do not touch it, because many times death comes from it, but let it be until it becomes calloused;
par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues;	By chance it will close itself after twenty days or thirty, then treat the wound, if you can;
et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	and if you cannot, then leave it be.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	of the bruises that come on the abscess
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre;	We come many times after the health of the bruising, especially when it is near the joint, and the bad thing is to see the shape of the limb;
et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	and by chance it cannot make the limbs do their natural works.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres:	Take care then that the nostrils are fresh:
si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil;	if you administer medicines that dry up, such as aloes, incense, and myrrh, and sarcocolla, acacia, and other similar things, so that you prepare one of these things, or all together, and mix them with wine that dries up or with absinthe or with vinegar;
et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors;	and put them on the nutmeg in stops, and constrain it well, and do not untie it with gentle movements;
et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee;	and then reset it, and restart another one, until the swelling is reduced;
ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite;	or you constrain on a well-made piece of plaster;
car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres;	for the property of plaster is that it reduces all the swellings above the limbs;
et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent;	and if the swelling is already converted into hardness like stone, and it is in need of being cut, then cut above it, and make the excess apparent;
ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	or you treat it with some ease, until it is reduced, and the treatment until it is healed.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	of the member which is weak after the healing
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes:	When the fracture of the bone is restored, and it remains weak and subtle after the healing of the members, this happens for many reasons:
de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit;	because one is for this that it was tied too tight, and was not tied as it was supposed to be
ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre;	or because it had too many ties, and the nourishments could not come to the limb;
ou por multitude d’arosement;	or because of a multitude of swelling;
ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre;	or because of too great movements, not in its time;
ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	or because it has little blood in its body, so is weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui;	And the cure is that you make the patient eat, and make the body tender, so that the blood is multiplied in him;
et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce;	and give it a bath, and give joy and happiness;
puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre;	then put poultice on the limb, so that the poultice attracts great nourishment, and the swelling of the hot water, until the nourishment runs to the limb;
et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	and returns to its natural shape.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	the member is twisted after the injury
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil:	When the members are twisted after the restoration, and the broken bones are exposed, and the form of the member is ugly, it does not lose its natural function:
si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre;	if one does not believe the fools who say that one should break the member anew, and many foolish doctors have done this in our land;
et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors;	and these practices are to be blamed, and great evils come from them, and death often results;
toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses;	however, if the nodations and the swellings are fresh, then it is necessary that they be treated with warm water, or that softening herbs be applied, such as leaves of violette, and roots, and melilot, and similar things;
et li fai I emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus;	and make a softening plaster, such as a well-made diacaluminum, and take the muscle of violette, and mix it with the fat of a goose or oil of cypress, and apply the plaster;
ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	Or you take fat figs, and crush them with cinnamon powder, and similar medicines that reduce the swelling.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	And sometimes the knot is soothed by continually and for a long time rubbing with a moist hand.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And restore movement to the limb every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement;	And if the tortured part is inflamed and hardened, like stone, and needs to be operated on with iron, then you should cautiously cut just to the bone, subtly and lightly;
et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	and put caution and study into the cure.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here is the translation of the sentence: Thus begins the book on dislocations.
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation comes to anyone, if you need to now bring back into alignment.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu;	For if it is delayed, the limbs become swollen, and by chance, one resets them to the right place;
por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez:	because it is not suitable to move it to the hole where it is swollen:
maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors;	many times it causes spasms and other pains;
toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez;	in any case, when this happens, make the patient sane, then let him be, until the abscesses and ulcers are appeased;
puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	then raise the limb from the cold and oily water, then reset it gently, and treat each member as the treatment will come into its place.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have ordered the chapters on dislocations from the head to the feet.
des mandibules	of the jawbones
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc II manieres:	It happens that the jawbones are dislocated and loose, and the dislocation of both is in two ways:
ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc;	where they are a little loosened from their places, and softened a little;
ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	where they are entirely dislocated, and hang towards the pis, and cut the saliva from the mouth so it cannot be held, nor can the mouth be closed, and envelops the tongue with speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is small, it returns due to the many arrangements of the body.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie;	And if it is entire and complete, then it is necessary that you reset it quickly, and do not tarry;
et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars;	and in such a manner that the minister guides the head of the patient, and puts his fingers into the root of the dislocation of the jaw inside the mouth with one of his hands, if the dislocation is on both sides;
et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal;	and the other two fingers are placed apart, to make even;
et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	and instruct the patient to soften his jaws, and move them from all sides.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And let the mire (mirror or sight) be equal, until it returns to its place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les II mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement;	And if the resetting is difficult, especially when these are the two jaws together, then apply warm oil and oil to them, so that the resetting becomes lighter;
ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	Nor do we speak of resetting, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens;	And when they are reset equally, and the patient's mouth closes well without softening, then put on dressings moistened with a mixture made of oil rosat and wax, then tie them lightly with soft bindings;
et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules;	and let the patient sleep on their back, and their head be steady between two cushions, so that they do not move either to the right or to the left, nor make an effort to chew, but take light food, until the pains are reduced, and the jaws are numb;
et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	and then chew what it wants lightly, and does not labor to open the mouth of the jaw and the drinker, as long as the mandible is well cleaned and healthy.
Et se les II mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two jaws cannot be put back in place at one hour, and are not converted to their uses, then come fevers and accustomed sweats, and by chance comes a purging of the belly, and by chance vomiting of pure bile.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions;	And when you see this, then know that it is a sign of a prediction;
et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en VIIII jors.	and many times he whom it happens to, dies within eight days.
de la forcelle	of the force or strength
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The force cannot dislodge what is stuck in the continuity of the chest and the back, and is sometimes dislocated at the thigh, and one can feel it well.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras;	And the restoration is such that the patient lies on their back, and stretches out their arms;
et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra;	and then press the limb firmly with your palm, and it will return;
puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint;	then put on a plaster and bind it, and make it tight;
et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer;	and the joint which is turned towards the hip cannot be dislocated;
se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit;	if it does not, and if it dislocates again, reset it to its place, as we have said;
puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez;	then put on a plaster and bind it, and make it tight, and instruct the patient to rest until they are healthy;
et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	and likewise the head of the shoulder is reset when it is dislocated from its place.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	Of the dislocation of the shoulder
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres:	Know that the shoulder is dislocated in three ways:
de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz;	of what is it that the dislocation occurs at the part of the joint at the elbow
et li seconde est a la partie dou pis;	and the second is at the part of the wrist
et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc;	and by chance it dislocates at the upper part, and that happens rarely;
et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners;	and not dislocated behind at the shoulder, and not dislocated inward for the kidneys;
et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment;	and often dislocates downward toward the joint, especially to those who have little flesh, for to them it is a sudden and hasty movement;
a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	to those who have sufficient flesh, it happens with effort, and enters with effort.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And by chance it happens to some men a percussion or fracture, and inflames the shoulder with a hot abscess, and they think that it is dislocated because of this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains;	It is necessary then that you examine it, until you are certain of it;
et adonques encomence la cure.	and then begins the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste;	And it is known that dislocation occurs when it is downward towards the armpit, and there is a difference between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find between them a noticeable diversity;
et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes;	and you will find at the head of the shoulder a hollow, and below the armpit to the touch the head of the shoulder, as if it were an elbow;
et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens;	and the patient cannot bring his hand to his neck, nor move with any movements;
et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier;	and also, if it is dislocated upwards, it is not hidden, for you will find it manifestly at the touch;
et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	and this kind of dislocation is not difficult to reduce, when it is recent, or if the sinew is sick.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu;	And the method is that the ministers raise the hand of the patient up high, then put your fingers below the armpit, and lift the joint with force upwards to its place;
et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz;	and the minister raises the hand, and stretches it up, then puts on a dressing.
si venra hastanment.	if it comes quickly.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude;	And if it does not come as we have said in the mornings after, then it is fitting that the patient be bathed in warm water;
et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree;	and let the anointing be soothing and softening, such as a decoction of dock and fenugreek and melilot in water, and let it be anointed;
puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide;	then let the patient be laid on their back, and put on a dressing a bandage of equal thickness, not too soft nor too hard, then let the physician place his heel on the bandage, and lift the head of the shoulder gently, and pull the hand of the patient;
et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval;	and another minister holds the head of the patient, so that it does not move downwards;
celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere:	That swelling returns now, and if you see it reset in this manner:
et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides;	and have the bone that is larger than the patient's;
et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar;	and be straight towards the ribcage, and push the shoulder down from the patient's armpit, and lift the armpit up high, so that the patient hangs in the air;
et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	and another attendant pulls the patient's hand downwards towards the belly.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And if the patient is too lightweight, then hang with him something weighted, and the dislocation returns now.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere:	And the resetting is done in another manner:
et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile;	and it is that you place a stick on the ground, whose thickness is like a pestle, and is neither too large nor too small;
puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust;	then it should be placed under the patient, but so that he has his shoulders draped upwards, and the patient should be standing from the length of the stick;
puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment;	Then his hand should be extended downwards from the other side of the arm, and the joint will return to its place quickly;
et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure:	and if it does not want to return for all these things that we have said, then make this treatment:
pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	Take a piece of two arms in length and four fingers in width, which has the head bent back to enter inside near the bottom of the shoulder, according to this shape:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide;	Then tie a cloth around the head of the fist, so that the fist does not harm the patient, then put it under the armpit of the patient;
et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus I eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part:	and extend his arm on the fist of the long one, and tie the shoulder to the fist, and the arm to the head of the hand, then put the arm on a stick of a wide chair, and let the hands hang downwards, and let the body hang from the other side:
li jointure reva ens maintenant.	The joint returns to its place now.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is in place, in whatever manner that may be, then you must put under the shoulder a layer of even wool, then put the plaster mixed with powdered millet, with incense and absorbent vinegar, on the entire shoulder and around, then strain under the shoulder strongly, and turn the linen on the plaster, and wrap the arm at the neck, and let the hand remain in place.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost;	And it is necessary that he moves little, so that the limbs are comforted, for it will heal more quickly;
et puis menjuce plus aprés V jors ou VII, et le mueve;	and then move more after 5 or 7 days, and move it;
et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	and if it is firm and not loosened, then it is healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint is out of place due to moisture that has come, or for another reason, then it is necessary that you administer cauterizations to three parts, as it is stated before in the chapter on cauterizations.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés VII jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis;	And if you do all that, and it dislocates after seven days, and the joint does not hold, and cannot lift his arm upwards, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is cut or stretched or softened;
et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure;	The dislocation that is towards the chest, and the breasts, or behind, if made by impulse, and stretching of hands, and one administers another ointment;
et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and cures it until it is healthy.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after the healing, stiffness comes to the limb, and slowness in movement, then let the patient bathe many times, until that stiffness is alleviated, and it returns to its first nature.
de la dislocation dou coute	of the dislocation of the thigh
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient;	know that the joint of the thigh is dislocated at the hips, and at the hips it returns;
et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien;	and it is dislocated on all sides, and likewise in front and behind, and the dislocation is not responded to, for one sees it well and feels it well;
et desalue selonc chescune figure.	and dislocates according to each shape.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	And when you join the sick joint with the sound one, if you can see it openly.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	For the joint is strained, and cannot bend the arm, nor touch its shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener;	And it is necessary that you reset it so that the abscesses of the foot are gone, for if the abscesses of the foot came, it would be grievous to reset;
et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier;	and by chance it cannot be reset from all at once, likewise when it is behind;
si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	if it is worse than the other dislocations, and is of greater pain, and by chance death comes.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes II mains;	And the restoration is such that when it can be brought back, you extend your hand with both hands;
et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	and its arms are stretched out, and the hands are placed according to the joint, above and below, and the joint is pushed towards his chest together, or to the root of his palm, until it returns to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is in front, then it returns when he doubles his hand on his hand, and strikes from the root of the palm the joint that is dislocated.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension;	And if it does not want to return to its place, then administer a strong extension;
et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension;	and it is that two ministers extend the arm, and two ministers hold it, so that it does not move during the extension;
puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large;	then turn the arm from each side, after you have enveloped it in a double cloth that is long and wide;
et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne;	and when the mire sets a joint in its articulation, if he anoints it with some oil to soften the joint, then warms the joint thoroughly, until it recovers;
et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	and when it is in place, put on a dry plaster with some wool or yarn, and warm thoroughly, and bind the arm to the patient's neck, and leave it for some hours, then undo it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse;	And if the joint is firm in its place, untie the bandage, and let it be;
et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis;	and if you see that the joint does not bind well, restart the plaster and the bandage, and let it be for some hours, until it is firmly set;
puis le deslie.	then undo it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez;	And if he feels grit or gravel after the resetting of the joint, and it moves, then bathe and rub it thoroughly, and press until it is alleviated;
ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain;	Where you put on the joint a plaster of fat wool, then let it be for a day and a night, then remove it, and make it enter into the bath;
et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain;	and when it sweats, rub the joint moderately, then put the plaster on again, and then enter into the bath;
et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and do this two or three times, until it is healthy;
et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus;	and if you want, put on a piece of moist cloth warmed with butter, and strain it on;
si revenra a sa disposition.	so that it returns to its condition.
li dislocation de la main	The dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures.	The joint of the hand is dislocated, and its displacement is slight, more than the other joints.
Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	However, it is necessary to bring it back to its place quickly, in the same way that it was dislocated, so that the limb is not weakened, or that an abscess does not form.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne.	And the treatment is that you put the bad hand on a table, and extend the good hand, and look at the bad hand equally, so that it puts its palm on the surface of the joint, and bends until it returns.
Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu;	In any case, it is necessary that you check if it is well in place;
adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	Then put the bad hand with the back of its palm on a table for extension and for treatment.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	And if the dislocation is at the back of the hand, then put the bad hand with its back on the table, and look to put the hand on the same surface of the joint.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien.	If it returns now, it's good.
Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If not, then apply a poultice of warm abscesses and let it be without restarting the treatment.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte;	And if it cannot bear it, and you cannot put it back in place after some hours, the joint remains twisted;
et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout:	and do not touch the patient's arm unless it is swollen, and they cannot stretch any thing at all:
adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere;	then you should know that the nerves are cut, or the arteries;
si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	if there is no other remedy except to stretch by cauterizing the affected part, and it happens by chance that there is nothing else.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse V jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the arm is in place, put on the plaster that we have mentioned, then stretch it and leave it for 5 hours, then unbind it and leave it thus.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it cannot be well moved, and there is some stiffness, then take a warm cloth, and rub it until it is healthy.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre;	Sometimes the fingers of the hand are dislocated on each side, sometimes to the back of the palm or to the front;
adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins;	then take the fingers and push the dislocation to your pouches as far as it will go, then hold the head of the finger, and bend it towards the part where it is dislocated;
et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor;	and let it be two hours, and then put it even with that hour;
et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut;	and anoint the limb, as we have said, and the joint of the hour, and make it move, and anoint it again;
et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and do this often, until it is straight, and also do this, if it is dislocated at the palm of the hand, and do as you have done before, until it is healed;
et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	and also do this, when it is dislocated in another place.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	Drop the dislocation of the shoulder bone at the back
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the shoulder bone in the back or neck is dislocated, where there are multiple dislocations, if there is no point of treatment, for death hastens the patient.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I.	And the symptoms are that the evacuations come out spontaneously, cannot be held, and many times some members become weakened, either the two hips or the right arm or the left.
Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars;	And often the shoulder moves to four parts;
celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»:	that which moves backwards is called "gilbositez":
li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance:	the treatment is that you should rewarm the gilbositez when it comes from childhood:
si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	if there is no point of cure or healing of the whole.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit;	And that which comes from a fall or blows or similar things, the ancient manners of cure say with great words, but there is not much profit in all of them;
mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	But I have shortened it according to my intention, and have formed treatments in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit;	I say that in the swelling that comes to the chest before, neither injury nor health;
et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis;	and also that which comes directly to both sides, and one cannot cure the abscesses that come to the back, as I have said;
et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece;	and it is that the patient should be stretched out on their face in one position, and have a bandage placed under them, so they do not slip;
puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles;	then fix one stick to the head on the ground firmly, and another at the feet, and tie a string under the shoulders of the patient, and another at the hips, and at the knees, and at the ankles;
et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons;	and two attendants hold the strings, one to the head and the others to the feet, between the two sticks;
et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	and are well strengthened, the tendons as we have said, and the muscles put their palms on the spine strongly, until it recovers.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee;	And if it does not recover with this treatment, take a table three bracles in length, and shave the area around it, and let the patient be on the side, and put the head of the table under the area, then put the middle of the table on the spine;
et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu;	and put the master's feet on the other end of the table, and press firmly, until it recovers to its place;
et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	and if you see that it is done, then make it at the turning which turns to the hand.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc;	And it is that you attach two tendons at the head of the patient's arm of a great size, and towards the feet two others, and have between each tendon, above and below, a palm of space in length;
et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent;	and it has in each season a piercing, where the thread passes through, and the season is firmly on the ground, so that it does not move;
et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet;	and between two seasons it has one season that turns, for which the thread turns, and it has in two turnings two small seasons of a palm's length, to turn the thread.
et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	and then put the thread that is among the bones at the turning towards the head, and the other thread towards the feet at the other turning, and each of the ministers turns its turner for all the thread, and the master puts the spine even as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And when it is even, then put on a plaster made with a mixture of egg and water, and then the poultices, and then the stake of a tablet three fingers in length, which supports the joint of the hip and the part of the spine, then tie with a thread, as we have said, and use the patient's subtle nourishment, until they are healthy;
et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant;	and if something comes at the end of the sickness, then it is necessary to administer softening and soothing medicines, with the steel that we have mentioned before;
et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations;	and sometimes one must administer a piece of plaster, and sometimes the appearance comes in the posterior spine of the back, and it is thought that this is a dislocation;
et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption:	and it is the bone that is exposed, because of which one should not have presumption:
par aventure feroit venir la mort.	by chance sudden death comes.
des dislocations de la hainche	of dislocations of the thigh
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures;	It is known that the joints of the thigh and the joints of the shoulder only come out in dislocations, nor do they come out like the other joints;
et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc IIII parties:	and the joint of the thigh is dislocated according to four parts:
dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier;	downward and upward, and forward and backward;
et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	and further inside the shoulders, and a little dislocated forward and backward.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu;	And the recognition of its dislocation inside is that when one joins the diseased thigh with the sound one, if it is longer, and opens up the patient's knee more than the sound one, and the patient cannot bend their knee to the fire;
et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	and the member that is next to the swollen abscess becomes hot, because the head of the thigh comes there.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of one who has a fever, it is that these accidents are contrary to those before.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement;	And the signs of one who has it in front, it is that their thigh is well according to the accomplishment;
toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	In any case, do not bend the knee without pain, and if you want to make it move, then it cannot before, and retains its urine, and swells the groin, and when one walks, it passes over the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of the one who has a dislocation are that he cannot stretch his knee, nor bend it, and this leg is more twisted than the other, and the ankle is softened, and the head of the thigh is out of place under the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure;	The reminder of this kind of dislocation is that you should consider whether the dislocation is old, and it remains according to its condition, if there is no prompt treatment;
et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	and it does not matter that he has a swelling.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des IIII manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre;	And in the case where the dislocation is fresh, and it is one of the four manners of dislocation, then hasten that you turn the joint, and stretch it from within and without, and move it to the right and left;
par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	by chance if it returns, and there is no need for another treatment.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil;	And if it does not return in this manner, then it is necessary that you apply a strong minister, and hold the leg strongly with two hands, or with a bandage that is tied above the knee;
et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe;	and one minister extends his hand upwards in a similar manner that he bends his hands downwards towards his shoulders, then tightens with a soft thread on the thigh;
et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien;	and another ties at the head of the thread;
et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	and they stretch upwards and downwards all at once, until the patient is lifted from the ground at once, and remains hanging.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as IIII semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This manner of stretching is common to four similarities, and if the dislocation has recurred, as we have said, it is good.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance.	If not, then it is necessary to apply a treatment to its similarity.
Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele;	When the dislocation is in the shoulder joint, then you must place the patient on his healthy side, then put the thread at the root of the thigh, and the limb which is below the hip, then stretch the thread upwards towards the hip, and towards the strength;
puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment:	Then take another minister of his arms, and embrace the large limb of the hip of the patient, and stretch it to the right side firmly:
si revenra a son leu maintenant;	if it returns to its place now;
et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	and this manner of dislocation is lighter than the others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres;	And if you cannot constrain it in this manner that we have said, then it is necessary that you tie the two feet of the patient together with a strong soft rope under the two heels, and under the two knees, and let the diseased leg be extended two fingers more than the other;
puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc;	then let it hang from the head of a pole, and let it be above the ground two arms length;
puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	then command one minister to embrace the head of the hip, and let another minister be hanging with the patient, who firmly embraces the hip, for the joint returns now quickly.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi;	And when the dislocation is in the thigh, instruct the patient, as we have said regarding one who has a deformity, and stretch the tendon above the sick thigh properly, and above the foot also;
puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme;	Then put two splints, one at the head and the other at the feet, then fix the splint between the groins of the patient in the middle of the form;
et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	and let moist cloths be applied inside, so that they do not bother the patient, then extend each minister towards him, and the surgeons put their hands equally on the dislocation.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	If it returns, it's good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If not, put on the table, and press thus as we have said regarding deformity, and instruct the patient to rest on the affected side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit;	And when the dislocation is in front, it is necessary to extend the sick thigh immediately, and according to what I have said;
et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	and put his right hand on the patient's shoulder, then press with the other hand, and stretch downwards towards the knee.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches;	And if the dislocation is in the thigh, it is not necessary to stretch the patient downwards, or lift him up from the ground, but rather that he should be as if his hip was dislocated upwards, as we have said about lying on the two hips;
et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table;	and let it be on his face, and the leg stretched out as we have said before, and one must press on the joint at the thigh;
et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz;	and it will be perfect when the patient stretches his legs, and they will be even;
adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve;	then join the thighs, and apply a plaster, and bind with a bandage, so that the hip does not move;
et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus;	and let it rest for three or four days, then undo it, and put the plaster on again;
et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors;	and if you see that they are even, then hold them back, as before, and let them be for three days;
puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	then unbandage it, and make it walk gently, until the limb is comforted.
de la dislocation dou genoil	of the dislocation of the knee joint
Li genous est desaluez selonc III manieres:	The knees are dislocated in three ways:
c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier;	that is to say, inward, outward, and backward;
et ne desalue point devant.	and not dislocating at all to the front.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez;	And the signs are that you instruct the patient to bend his leg to his thigh, and if it does not adhere to his thigh, know that it is dislocated;
et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez;	and the restoration of all is that you make the patient sit upright, and extend his leg if he can, and put your back against his face, and put his foot on your feet;
puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment;	Then take your knee in your palms, and pull it between your thighs, then bend the two sides of the knee joint together.
et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement;	and another minister stretches his foot, until the knee returns to its place, and the signs are that it is well for his leg to be lightly put back on his thigh;
et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie;	and put the plaster on, and make the leg adhere to the thigh, and bind them together strongly for three or four days, then undo it;
et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	and do not exert the patient to go, as long as the limbs are comforted.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	And if the limbs are not in place, then minister strongly as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until it is healed.
de la dislocation dou talon	of the dislocation of the ankle
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The ankles are sometimes sprained, and sometimes completely dislocated, inwardly and outwardly.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee:	And the signs are that the shin is swollen, and it is pulled towards the part where it is dislocated:
li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	the forearm is lightly moved, and the arm is slightly extended by his hands when it is simply massaged.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville;	And when it is dislocated from the whole, then you must make the patient sit straight, and hold the ankle firmly from behind the leg, above the shin;
puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut;	then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, and then with your left hand twice, then stretch it high, and nicely push the foot upwards;
et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet;	and do this twice, as we have said, pushing and pulling the foot;
s’elle revient, c’est bien;	if it returns to its place, that's good;
se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient;	if not, then resume the work, for it will return;
et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide;	and if it cannot return in that way, then make the patient lie on his back on the ground, and fix the ankle firmly to the ground between his thighs, and tie the sheets around, so he does not move the limb;
puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet;	Then let the minister anoint the thigh, and another minister holds the foot in his hands or at his leg, so that he lies on the hill of the foot;
puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent;	Then each minister holds equally, and the straps are repeatedly between the thighs of the patient to hold the patient when they stretch it;
puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	Then put the minister equally to the dislocation in his hands, and another minister anoints the sound thigh above, and the dislocation will return quickly.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois;	And when it is in place, put the plaster and stop up above, and strengthen firmly, and tie the foot to the thigh, and beware of the nerves which are above the knee behind, that the ligaments are not too tight;
puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain;	Then let it be for two days or three, and if the ligaments become soft, then strengthen them;
puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors;	then untie it on the third or fourth day, and have the patient urinate for four days;
et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	and if it goes beyond this limit, it is not certain that it will not dislocate again.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if a posthernial abscess comes, then you must treat it, as we have said elsewhere, until it is healed.
des dois	of the fingers
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the fingers are dislocated, then you must gently extend them without force, and it is an easy thing.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne;	And if the dislocation is in any of the joints of the foot or toes, then you must have the patient sit on a flat surface or on a table with their leg straight, and put your foot on what opens up the joint, then press firmly with your foot until it returns to place;
et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie;	and when it is even, and does not open at all, then put between the sole of the foot and a board two sticks, then strain firmly, and leave it for three days, then untie it;
et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and have it rest, until it is healthy.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	of a wound and of a dislocation together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert:	When a wound comes with the dislocation, and one wants to restore it, often it happens that the patient dies:
si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis;	if you are not presumptuous in the cure, if you are not wise in the art and have not used it for a long time, and if you are not gentle and merciful and slow, nor harsh;
et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit;	and apply at the beginning of things that bring about a hot abscess, and leave the patient in the hand of God, if you do not see hope of health;
et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne;	and when you do see hope, then reset the limb in place, so that the hot abscess may come to a head;
et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis;	and when the limb is in place, then administer things that bring about a hot abscess, and treat the wound, as it requires, with dried and powdered remedies;
et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples;	and with the dislocation of a fracture, and the bones are out of joint, if they are fractured, and do what we have said in simple illnesses;
et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	and guard yourself from entering into the way of fear, according to what I have said, for this is of value to you according to your Creator, and for the safety of your arm and your body.
