O, children, now that I have completed this book, which is the last of the science of medicine, by dedicating it to its end and by the explanations and declarations within it, it is clear to me that I complete for you here this treatise, which deals with surgical operations.
Since the operation of surgery is widespread in our region and in our times, yet it remains almost entirely private, despite its clear importance and utility; and only some small descriptions are found in the works of the Ancients, which correct many errors and hesitations within them, the understanding of it has been obstructed and its force and art have been diminished.
And it is clear to me that I should vivify that order of this treatise according to the way of explanation and declaration and abbreviation; and for it to come in the forms of the tools of cautery and other instruments of the work, through the addition of declaration and preparation, which cause is necessary.
More the reason why a good craftsman does not touch his hand well in this our time is because the art of medicine is long and it covers the actor before this to be exercised in the science of anatomy which Gualia knew among that he was acquainted with the youth of the members and their forms, and the conjunction and separation of them; and had knowledge of the bones, the nerves, and the ligaments, and the number of those, and their qualities; and of the veins pulsating and the quiet ones, and the places of the effusion of them.
And for this Hippocrates says that in his name is written, more in the little work, and especially in the art of the hand.
More however we have already spoken of this in the introduction to this book; for who does not know what we said about anatomy, will not be free from error through which many men will die, as I have seen too many of those, for some are formed in this science and fall into that other science and its experiments.
For you saw a foolish and inexperienced doctor who incurred an apostematia escrophilosa in the neck of a woman, and injured some arteries so that great blood flowed until the woman died amidst much suffering.
And there was another doctor who almost performed an extraction of a stone from a man who had been suffering from his condition, and the stone was large, and came to him, and he dried that stone with a piece of bladder, so that that man died on the third day.
And I have already called for the extraction of that stone, and I saw that due to the size of the stone and the position of the patient over whom it was located, he would die.
And there was another doctor who took surgical fees from a duke of our land, and he arrived at a blacksmith named Negre who had a fracture in the thigh; and because of the doctor's ignorance, he dried the fracture, over the wound, with pillows and splints with strong structure, and did not allow the wound to breathe.
And then the dislocation according to his desires, and then the reattachment, and then the drying for several days and commanded that we release the bandage; and thus remained until the thigh and foot became well, and then proceeded to recovery.
And I was called to him, and prepared to untie the ligament, and peace and an attempt to alleviate his pains was achieved.
But however, since corruption was confirmed in the member, I could not prevent it, and did not cease to walk the corruption through the member while the illness persisted.
And there was another doctor who incised an malignant abscess, and it ulcerated for several days, during which its malignity increased greatly in the lord of the area.
The cause is that the pain is purely due to melancholic humors, and does not affect the entire body, but rather affects a member that suffers from being attacked by all.
And for this reason, my son, it is necessary that you devise the operation in two divisions: one where the operation is associated with health, and another where the work is perilous in its major preparations.
And I have already existed here in all parts of this book where the operation is associated with error and fear; therefore, it is necessary that you keep this and leave the other, so that the leaves do not find a way to speak ill of you.
And therefore take your weapons with diligence and protection of God, and your patients with felicity and firmness.
And use the best way by the grace of God seeking salvation and praiseworthy success, and lay aside the terrible diseases difficult to cure, and remain with your weapons against what frightens you, so that sitting in your faith and in your name you are not overcome: for more remains to your glory, and greater still in this world and beyond in your sanctity.
Gum disease is observed in some cases: Do not treat disease improperly, so that bad doctors are not named.
And I have already devoted this livre according to three chapters.
Begin the division of the book, and first of the first part. The first chapter ordered of the head concerning the feet, in the forms of the instruments and in the tools of the cautery, and of what is necessary in the operation.
The division of the second part. The second chapter, on drying and perforation, and on cups, and on plaques, and on the extraction of arrows and similar, all categorized and organized by the forms of the instruments.
The third chapter, on restoration and dislocation, and on the healing of tortoises and similar conditions; a chapter organized by the head between the feet, and by the forms of the instruments.
I will now describe the quality of the metals used for the cautery and its components, and in which condition a cautery should not be used.
Therefore, I say that the discourse on the quality of the cautery metal and its component is long and prolix, subtle by science, and secretly hidden; and much has been spoken about it by wise men, but they are in disagreement. For me, a little from their sermons is enough to avoid lengthy discussions.
And therefore it is said that a cautery is applied to any entire composition universally which is either hot or of a hot nature, except for two compositions, which are gout compositions.
In the gouty and dry composition of matter, it desiccates; for some said that a cautery is beneficial for that, while others said the opposite, that a cautery is not convenient in the malady which is due to quality and dryness, for the nature of fire is quality and dryness, and it is inconvenient that such a malady, being dry and of matter, be healed by what is hot and dry.
And he who says the opposite asserts that by cautery one is healed in all gouty and dry maladies that come into men's bodies, for when you compare the body to its humidity to the composition of fire, you find the body to be hot.
And I say according to the speech of that person, who has already experienced this several times and discovered it.
But I do not know if it comes to that which is already experienced and exercised in the capital of cautery by recent exercises, and has known the diversity of the composition of people and the disposition of maladies in their members, and the causes of those, and the accidents of them, and the space of time of those.
In other complications, there is no need to fear, and especially in the cold and damp diseases, for all doctors agree on those, and are not divided in using cautery in them.
Know, sons, that the secret of curing by cautery with fire and its good effect is based on the burning medical cautery, for fire is simple, and its action reaches only the member being cauterized and causes no great harm to other members.
But the action of the burning medical cautery reaches that part of the member which it touches, and strongly brings to the member pain of difficult healing and strongly sustains it.
But fire, by its sublimity and the goodness of its substance, does nothing but superfluous consume. We already know this from experience and long service in studying the art about the true causes; and for this reason, I excuse myself for the length of my discourse. If it were not that this is not written freely in this pause, and that you secretly keep the qualities of fire's operation on bodies and its expulsion by which you expel diseases, this discourse would be philosophical and demonstrative, suitable for your ears.
And know, sons, that they disagree about the time at which it is convenient to perform a cautery and when the best season is spring.
And I say that a cautery is convenient at all times, because the damage from the accidental season is submerged in the youth of what is burned by the cautery, and especially if the cautery is for pains or necessary pains, strong and fistulas, which do not suffer delay because it is feared of those that come malice, which is greater than small damage entering through time.
And this is not done on your feet, sons, for they do not consider it except by the common people and the foolish doctors, since for that illness that is cured by cautery it is not convenient at all times, and they pause that consequence.
And the reason is not like this they consider it, for a cautery is not but in place of a medicine which alters the composition and dries the humors which are the cause of the wind's pains.
Yet, however, an excess cautery over medicine for the swiftness of its virtue and power of its operation and greatness of its lord.
And it is possible that his illness returns at some point in time, according to the complexity of the illness and the location of his illness, and its virtue, and what is prepared in his body from the aggregation of superfluities in him, and what is obtained by him in his acquisition through food and semblances of those causes; but the illness in which cautery is administered is a subtle illness in a member with few superfluities and humidities, just as cautery for toothache due to pain and similar to that, it is possible that that pain does not return in it, more so when it is done in small amounts.
And more commonly said is that cautery is the last remedy of medicine, and it is a layman's saying, not what we understand by it, for I believe that it is not a cure that benefits either medicine or any other cause except cautery.
And the reason is the opposite; and I understand that cautery is the last remedy of medicine only when one administers the methods of cure for some illnesses, and those medicines do not help, and near the end of the cause, one administers cautery, and it benefits then. And here from this point cautery is the last remedy of medicine, not according to understanding which I understand of the vulgar and too many of the foolish doctors.
And the ancients said that a golden cautery is better than an iron one, and they did not say this because of the equality of gold and the sublimity of its substance.
And they said that the place for cautery does not burn, since it is not absolutely heated, for I have already tried this and tested that it works only in some bodies and not in others. A golden cautery is good and better than iron as they say; but when you make a cautery with fire of gold, it is not up to you to declare, for it ignites according to the quantity you want due to the hardness of the gold, and prepares to receive heat; and if you adjust over the ignition, the gold melts by the fire, and some sheets remain in the fire for the craftsman to cut through the occupation of that.
And for this, you should make the cautery of iron lighter and more precisely to the right position during the operation.
And I have already ordered this chapter on the cautery according to other chapters, and I have ordered those of the thigh between the legs, so that I delay the requesting party what he wants from him.
The first chapter.
This cautery addresses the cold and humidity over the servel accident of which there are two causes, which cause soda and much traumatic flux, called corissa, from the head to the parts of the hollows and of the ears flowing, and much sleeping, and toothache, and colic, and universally all illness that comes through coldness, thus as paralytically, soda, and apoplexy, and similar signs in those illnesses.
The form of this cautery is as follows: first, I command the patient to be evacuated with a laxative medicine for three or four nights, according to the strength of the patient, the age of the patient, and his custom.
And then command him to shave his head with a razor, and place that razor between your hands on a sloping bench so that he places his hands on his own foot.
And then place the razor from your palm against his cheek between his fingers. More importantly, since the correct location has been determined, mark that location with a probe, and then heat the olive cautery of which this is the form:
And then place that cautery over the marked location with a probe, in such a way that it descends gradually, and you rotate it.
And then lift your hand lightly and look at the location. If you see any part of the bone being revealed, as much as a grain of barley, then raise your hand. If not, return your hand to that iron, or another one if it is cooled, until what I have said can be seen on the bone.
And then take a little salt and dissolve it over the location and leave it there for three days.
Then place your hand over the inguinal area where the fire scar is destroyed, and leave that hand on the inside. Then apply a tetra-pharmaceutical salve to the area until it is healed.
And we have already said that when the wound is opened wide, it heals better, because it is healthier and more beneficial.
And some of them say that the ankle should be cauterized inside the bone, and that the cautery should remain until part of the bone is burned.
Then scrape away what is burned from the bone, and then treat it.
And others say that the cautery should reach the marrow, pressing strongly into the bone until it cools, and this is the method of Alphécat, petit. And they believe that from that location the vapors of the head expire.
And keep the wound open for a long time, and then treat it until it is healed and consolidated.
But these two types of cautery I have not seen in all my days, except in some men according to a fear-based method; leave that one, I advise you, it is better for health when possible; for the head is heated by the solution of continuity of itself as we have testified in other members, and especially when the head of the patient is of cold nature.
And the first type of cautery is safer and better, I advise you; use that one and do so for health.
Capitalize second.
Of the cautery for the head.
When chronic and long-lasting pain occurs in the entire head of the patient, and this is prolonged in the patient, and the patient uses towels, pillows, head poultices, plasters, bandages, cold compresses, and warm compresses, and especially if the head has already been cauterized with a cautery that does not relieve it from any of these causes, consider whether the head of the patient is of strong constitution in its nature; and since it is not cold, do not find much freg (irritation). In such cases, use another type of cautery and leave the previous one a little. And then cauterize that on the corner of his head with a cautery between where the seam is split. Incise the seam and the quantity of the mouth which we have counted, and cauterize that with a cautery at the back part of the head in the place which is called vas, — and this is the place where suction is applied. And raise your hand here, but do not uncover the mouth, for the patient finds great pain different from the pain of all other head cauteries.
And I will say this cautery in its place, for I know that the cautery on which one cauterizes the corners of the head and the occiput is a finer cautery than that on which one cauterizes the middle part of the head; and this is the form of it.
Capitulum terminat.
On the cautery treatment for new migraines.
When there is severe pain in the back of the head, or dull pain between the temples, the head should be treated with medicines that dissolve obstructions, and then the other treatment I have described for diseases should be administered; and if this does not help, then cauterization in these areas can be performed in two ways: either with a sharp burning medicine, or with a iron.
More importantly, a burning cautery in medicine is that you take a rod of alum, heat it, and bring its两端文本翻译已经超出了单条消息的限制，我将分多次继续为您翻译剩余的部分。请问您是否需要立即翻译这句？ And then apply the location of the pain to the temple with a lancet laid between it, and let the needle be concealed.
And then strengthen the area stopped by descending constriction, and let it be for the space of three hours; and then draw out the alum, and leave the wound for two or three days, and then place over the hole submerge in borde until the area becomes bluish.
And then cure that area with ointment as it heals.
And if you wish, use those areas where you have written about burning medicines in the second treatise on burning medicines.
More importantly, the cautery should be applied in this manner: heat it by fire, and this is its form:
and it is called a shoulder dislocation, for the head of it is thus shaped like a blade, and in the middle part there is a small prominence.
Then place your hand over the site of the pain, to prevent the artery, which is left exposed, from being burned, and slowly rotate the small iron bit.
And if the quantity that is burned due to the size of the wound is such that it affects the quantity, then raise your hand so that the artery, which is left exposed, is not burned, to prevent bleeding.
Then immerse it in salt water and place it over the area, leaving it for three days. Then place it near a warm spot, and cure it with ointment until it is healed.
And if you do, cauterize at the tip of the knife blade according to the cautery, and guard against cutting the artery in this rather modern migraine.
Capitol quarter.
Of the cautery for ancient headache.
When you cure a headache as we said in the previous cure and as we said in the divisions of diseases, and the cure is not effective, and sometimes due to the disease that does not allow what we said about the first cautery from medicine or the cautery by fire, then you should heat the surgical cautery until it is white-hot. Place a line on the area of pain equal to the length where the major part of the said lies, or approximately there; then hold your hand for a moment and strongly press that area to incise the artery and reach the bone.
However, it is necessary for you to guard against the continuity of the mandible, which is disturbed by mastication, and ensure that the lacert does not adhere, and the nerves which cause this disturbance are unaffected, and that no spasm occurs.
And if it concerns the care and precaution of the flow of sand from the artery that is amputated, for in its amputation there is fear, especially for him who ignores what he does and is not studious or attentive; and leaves the operation at the beginning.
And I will recall the regimen for the flow of blood following an arterial accident according to its manner, in this place of this libretto.
And if you see in this illness that this cautery does not suffice and you find the patient's condition tolerable, cauterize him in the middle of his foot as we have recounted, and cure the wound while it is healing.
And if you see, administer the cautery which we have said in the chapter on the striction of the artery with two knives, and this cautery is better and more effective.
Capitol.v.
On the cautery for pains in the ears.
When there is pain in the ear due to cold and it is cured by the usual causes and another treatment as mentioned in the division, and the pain does not subside, then apply the cautery, which is called puncta. This is its form:
And then puncture near the beginning, and carry it around the entire ear as if a wheel is turned, or in the circuit of any part where the pain is. Lengthen the cautery of the ear gradually more as you have touched the place while testing.
And if the cautery of ten points around the entire ear, then remove it, and soon cure the places as they heal.
Chapter VI.
On the cautery for the tortoise shell.
The tortoise shell, which is cured and treated with cautery only involves substances that the wind humors pass through, as we have said in the divisions of diseases.
Avoid cautery for the substance that passes due to drying or spasms of the nerve.
When you cure that substance of the tortoise shell with jerras, capipurgi, and guarismes, and your cure does not agree, then when you treat the disease with three cauteries: the first on the ear wheel, the second a small touch on its temple, and the third on the junction of two lips.
And place your cautery on the opposite side of the malformed part, for softening occurs only in the part that becomes healthy.
The method of cautery is to place the cautery on the right side of the extremity of the ear, just above a small spot at the corner of the head, and in the temple, the length of which should be according to the length of the affected part of the scrotum, and then place your hand over the area until the quantity of the matter of the scrotum is burned.
This is the method of the cautery, and it is the specialty of the barber-surgeon, the form of which is described below. Yet more subtle is that you use a small amount, as if you could see it; and cut in such a way that there is just a slight superfluity.
Then cover the area with what is described and leave it to heal.
Chapter VII.
On the cautery treatment for ancient apoplexy.
When apoplexy is old and you have cured it as we said before and there is no fever in the patient, then cauterize that with four cauteries: over all the horns of its head; and with a cautery and the middle part of the head, as we said; and with a cautery on the scrotum. The method of cauterization is performed as described above.
And it has already been cauterized on the mouth of the stomach; and it is more posterior; and then it is cured as you proceed.
Capitol. viii.
Of the cauterization for oblivion through flame.
Give to the patient at the beginning large stones and pills of the servant grinding them.
Then spread over the head of the patient and place on the scrotum a plaster as described in the treatise on plasters.
And hold that for some beats, as this is a manner of cautery. And do so according to that method and order as I have said.
And therefore, if by those good means it be cured; and otherwise, then make three cautery marks in the back part of his head, which shall descend from the upper part of the head between the lower parts of the neck. And hold for the thickness of a finger between each cautery, and then apply the cautery in the manner that is to be done.
But if you add more heat and the patient can tolerate it, then make the cautery in the middle location; and if you have a greater addition of heat, then cauterize that area above the two horns.
And cure that until it is healed; and let the cautery be made in the form as shown previously.
Capitol.ix.
On the cautery treatment of piles and the cooling of the entire body.
Cover as you proceed with the modification of the head by stones and what we have said; then approach the head of the patient, and approach the cautery at that place on the middle part of the head, and with a cautery over all the horns of the head, and with a cautery over the back part of it, and with three cauteries on the vertebrae of the neck.
And if it is necessary in the disease of softening of the body for more and the patients tolerate it and the disease is strong, then cauterize that with four cauteries on the vertebrae of the spine, and behind with a cautery between where the ribs meet, and raise your hand. And then cure that once it is healed, and this be a olive cautery.
Capitulum.
Of the cautery for epilepsy.
The epileptic is not cauterized unless the epilepsy is due to phlegm.
And therefore cover as you modify the brain at the beginning of the procedure with the other treatment which we have described in the division when the patient is large and tolerates the exception of the medicines.
And if the child does not tolerate the medicines, then administer gargling and chewing remedies to the servant modify, before this for several days, improvement of the food.
And near the head of the patient, apply a cautery in the middle part of the head according to the previous method, and with another cautery on the occiput, and over each horn of the head he cauterizes. And if the patient is strong and tolerable, then cauterize those areas as I have said, while paralyzing and softening the body over the vertebrae of the neck and the vertebrae of the back.
And cauterize with olive oil as previously described.
But if the patient is a child, then use a subtle cautery according to this method.
Capitol. xi.
On the cauterization for melancholy.
When the causes of melancholy are corrupt and thick humidity, then cauterize that area with the cautery we have mentioned in the discussion on paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is superfluity diminishing to melancholy, and the body of the patient is humid, then give him to drink that which purifies his brain according to what has been previously divided.
And near the head of the patient, and properly make a tortora over the circle on the middle part of the head, and then place that over the central location of the head.
And the patient is laid down, and is held from all sides.
And place the liniment; it is particularly worthy of being applied before shearing sheep. And heat that over the fire for a tempered warmth by measure, which the patient can tolerate when more in it. And place that in the middle of the head in the circle, and leave it there until it is well rubbed.
And do this to the patient every week once, following the other regimen until he is healed; or if you wish, cauterize that area making small points according to its size; otherwise hold your hand on a properly arranged cautery: this is a type of cautery which moistens the brain in equal quantity.
And then place that protruding part inside the border or in the folds of cloth.
Chapter XII.
On the cauterization of water descending into the heel.
When the beginning of water in the heel has been declared by the signs which I have said in the division, then begin and give to drink to the patient what modifies the head of the water, and keep that free from all moisture.
And do that with a sponge dipped in decoction for several days.
And then command him to rub his head, and cauterize that with a cautery in the middle of the head; and cauterize that with two cauteries on two temples if it is the beginning of ysembet (a type of inflammation) of water in two heels, or with one cautery on one temple if it is the beginning of water in one heel.
Apply the cautery to all the veins and arteries which you leave unclamped; and let the cauteries be in that length along the breadth of the temples.
And guard against flows of blood when it is cauterized; and if you see flows of blood, stop it with any medicine which is within your reach.
And I will come with wisdom which is in the extraction of arteries and in the cutting of those, and caution about flows of blood.
And sometimes it is cauterized in the neck leaving two bones with two cautery marks.
Capitol. XIII.
On the cauterization of ancient tears.
When tears from the feet are ancient and frequently occur through the veins and arteries which are in the obvious location on the head and it has been verified that these are superfluous phlegmatic humors, then cauterize that area with a cautery as we have recounted in the Capitol of the beginning of water flowing in the feet, and cauterize in the middle of the head, and place two cauteries in the neck leaving two temples, and place two cauteries in the neck leaving two bones. And if you need to add a hole, then cauterize that on the entire length of the cheek over the end of the eyebrow with a small cautery.
Chapter XIV.
On the cauterization for nasal odor.
When your treatment for nasal odor, as we have discussed in the division, does not improve, then you prepare and give to the patient to drink three nights a decoction of chicory; and shave his head, and cauterize it with a medium-sized cautery and an olive oil cautery. And cauterize that with a carnation cautery on both eyebrows, leaving the hair slightly singed.
And be careful not to burn that area.
And the carnation cautery is used in this way.
Chapter XV.
On the cautery for softening the eyelids of the eyes.
When the eyelid of the eye is softened by illness or humidity, then cauterize that eyelid with a cautery of this lunar cautery; and this is its form:
And if you, cauterize that over the two eyebrows with a little from two cauteries in all parts, and they be long from the temples. And let the length of each cautery be according to the size of the eyebrow.
And do not press too much with your hand on the cautery, but according to the amount that the inner part of the eyelid is adhered.
Capitol. XVI.
Of the cautery for the eyelid of the eye when the skin is converted in the inner parts and fistula of the eye.
When the skin of the eye is converted in the inner parts, if I puncture the eye, cauterize there according to two methods: either with a cautery or with burning medicine.
If the cautery is from fire, command the patient before applying it to their skin as if those that cleanse them, after they are extended and equalized; and when you hold that [cautery], you strengthen its edge with a bandage so that it does not hurt until the skin is grown.
So when they are grown and equalized, then place the head of the cautery in the patient's mouth, and closely touch the edge of the cautery to the skin, marking it with a symbol resembling the shape of an olive leaf, which is the beginning of the mark on the skin.
Then closely press it in beef fat or in mucus of blister on the wound.
Then ignite the cautery of which this is the form.
Then cauterize over the figure which is marked, little by little with small grains, until the surface of the wound is burned which is like an olive leaf, entirely apparent properly.
And a sign of health from your work is that you see the eyelid of the eye already contracted and the skin around it raised, indicating successful treatment.
And raise your hand and let it be for three days, then place it over the wound between where the scar should be eradicated. And apply ointment there until it is healed.
But if it returns through the skin for some cause near their origin and the eyelid becomes softened, then make another time the cautery over that area as you did first.
But if the skin is on the eyelid, then cauterize that until it rises to its natural place and remains equal, ensuring the skin does not touch the eye.
But the cautery with burning medicine is that you command the patient to let the skin remain stretched and equal, then make it of linen cloth the shape of a bay leaf.
And then take known soap and fresh cow urine, or what is equivalent to this, and mix these ingredients well, doing so quickly to prevent it from being diluted; then spread this over the cloth which is made thus in the shape of a mulberry leaf, and place that over one or both; place the other end closed in a bag of flax, and the thigh of the patient in the middle.
And place the said part on the medicine and press it slightly so that the patient feels the bite of the medicine, for the bite is like that of fire.
And so, when the patient perceives that the bite of the medicine, let the medicine off and place it again on the thigh as said; therefore, when the bite ceases, then put the medicine back on and wash the area with water; then consider if the eyelid has already been lifted; if it is washed like this, apply heat or incision, for then it is good; and if not, return to applying the medicine to the place where it was not pressed, without disturbing your operation and contracting the area.
Then place your hand over the groin area between which the adhesion should be removed, and cure that with an ointment or something else in which it is healed.
And you must, with due vigilance, guard the wound from falling into disuse of medicine, and if the eyelid itself for some days becomes softened or any cause affects the skin around it, then repeat your medicine on that place where the eyelid has become softened, and proceed in this manner as at the beginning, and soon let it heal.
This is the way of using the hawthorn leaf.
And know that the wounds of men vary according to their size and extent, and therefore according to this you should make your incision.
And the way of right treatment for those who study in this art should not be hidden.
Chapter XVII.
On the cautery treatment of a fistula in the lacrimal duct of the wound.
When you treat fistula as we have said in the divisions of diseases and do not apply your treatment accordingly, then when you cauterize it in this manner: command the patient to place his head on your knee, and let a minister hold the back of his head between your knees in such a way that it is neither hurt nor agitated.
And then place the hot cloth or the blistering material on the heel of the foot.
And then heat the cautery, and this is its form:
which is cylindrical, as it forms like a cane or a bird's feather quill, from one end of which the cautery is made.
And if sharp, penetrate into the other end. And if you want, let it be straight like a needle.
However, that which is concave is better for your work.
And then press the fistula if it is opened, and draw from it clean and dry it out. And if it is not opened, then open it and extract the pus from it.
And then place the well-ignited cautery over it, and hold your hand a little above the nose, so that your hand does not err or the patient be at peace, and then place the cautery on the cheeks and corrupt that area.
And so, if at the beginning of your cautery it enters into the mouth, that is good; and if not, then reapply the cautery one or two times, as needed; and leave it thus for three days, and then place your hand over that spot to keep it warm and surround it with an ointment that is dry until it heals.
And if ten days have passed and it is not healed, then place your hand over the sharp corrosive medicine until the bone is revealed and is scraped as you see fit in your treatise.
And another way to cauterize a fistula, which some first doctors said: find the place of the fistula and do it there, then place yourself over that fissure as if with a thin probe which is its form; then put in there the quantity of one uncia of melted lead; and keep your hand tightly, so that the bad humor does not enter where the melted lead does not reach; and pause over the opening of the bad humor like immersed in white of an egg or water, for lead adheres to the place of the fistula and heals it through a marvelous cure.
And if the fistula is healed as we have said of the cauterization and cure, that is good; but if not, then it is necessary to administer a nasal draught and reduce the fistula into the nose cavity according to its proper place.
Chapter XVIII.
On the cauterization of the wound from the boil.
Motes (or small openings) that occur in the lips, and more frequently in the lips of children.
Then, when you cure those fissures as we have said in the divisions and your cure does not take effect, then heat the small surgical cautery according to this form that is taught:
Let the cavity be according to the subtlety of the blade.
Then place that hot cautery in those fissures until the heat reaches the base of the fissures.
Then cure that with cerote until it is healed.
Chapter XIX.
On the cautery treatment of a fistula in the mouth.
When in the root of the uvula or on the palate or in the roots of the teeth an abscess forms, and soon bursts, and is old, and a channel is formed, and you cure it but the cure does not take effect, then heat the cautery according to the quantity received in the fistula, place that heated instrument into the tract of the fistula, and with your hand ensure that the burning iron reaches the base of it. Do this one or two times; then cure that as we have said for the cure until it is healed.
And so if the abscess is incised and healed, that is good; otherwise, it is necessary to uncover the place and treat the corrupted bone according to what will come in its chapter.
capitol.xx.
Cauterization of the teeth and softening of the gums.
When the gums are softened by humidity and the teeth are loose, and you have cured those with medicines and not applied them, then place the head of the patient in the basin of water, and quickly heat the cautery into the shape which will be given shortly. Test that you pause the cautery over the tooth and insert it there rapidly, ensuring that the patient feels the heat from the fire to reach the root of the tooth.
And lift your hand, and repeatedly apply the cautery several times according to your desire.
And make the patient spit out the salt water and hold it for an hour, then stop, as the loose tooth is now closed, the softened gum tightened, and the corrupted humidity dried up.
Chapter XXI.
Cauterization for tooth pain.
When tooth pain is due to inflammation or decay, or if medical treatment does not relieve the pain, then cauterization of that area can be performed in two ways: either with a cauterizer made from ox horns, or with a hot iron.
Cauterization with ox horn is done by taking a horn from an ox and filling it with hot iron. Then, take some cress or other herb and wrap it around the tip of the horn, immerse that part filled with the hot iron into the cress or herb, and place it over the painful tooth, pressing firmly to ensure it cools before being applied to avoid further irritation.
And then repeatedly apply it several times to ensure that the heat from the fire reaches the root of the teeth.
And if you do, immerse a piece of wool or cloth in the horn as mentioned above, and place that over the painful tooth. Then hold the hot iron inside until the heat reaches the root of the tooth's cavity.
Moreover, however, the cautery with fire, you must attend to the small opening of skin or of iron, and in its core there should be some coarse substance so that the sharpness of the fire does not reach the entrance of the patient.
And then shape the cautery as it will come, and place that over the tooth and put your hand inside so that the cautery is well rubbed; and do this several times to prevent the pain from worsening on that day or the next.
And ensure that due to the impression of that cautery, the patient opens their mouth wide and keep it that way for one hour; this is the form of the cautery.
And cautery the area where you wish to stop the bleeding as much as is possible.
And this is the form of the catheter:
Chapter 22.
On the cautery treatment for protrusions.
When protrusions are caused by phlegm and humors that are not obedient to digestion with medicines, and you see the digestion of those only slightly, then apply the cautery over the form of which this follows, having two open extremities so that smoke comes from one end through the other, and place that ignited cautery over that abscess for a moment, and another if you still feel it necessary before it reaches the core of the abscess.
And if the abscess is small, then place the cautery according to the quantity of the abscess, and let it remain for three days, placing it over the core inflamed between the time that the fire has consumed.
And then cure that with ointments and dressings until it is healed.
Capitol. xxiii.
On the cautery for hoarseness and constriction of the windpipe.
When the humidity of the wind affects the canal of the lung, and especially when it is due to a complex coldness, then it is necessary that the patient be treated with laxative medicines at the beginning, and then cauterize the root of the gallbladder in the compressed area.
And be sure that you do not apply the cautery to the gallbladder nor burn the chain of the gallbladder but only a little.
And cauterize it with another cautery at the junction of the neck in the rear vertebra of the patient. The cautery for the gallbladder should be applied according to the previous method.
And then cure that with what was preceded until it is healed.
Capitol.xxiv.
On the cauterization for lung gout and cough.
When cough and lung gout are due to cold humidity, and the gallbladder does not have fever or consumption, and it is an old gout, then cauterize that with two cauteries on the furcula in the compressed areas of the lion and bull; and with another cautery in the middle area of the foot between two mammary bones; and let the cautery be applied to the gallbladder according to the form previously described.
And if you wish, let your cautery puncture using the cautery called puncta, the form of which you precede in the punctation of ear pain.
And puncture within the cells for those; and then cure that with what you apply after it is healed.
And let the cautery have three edges; for this cautery, you can make three punctures with it in one go according to this form.
Capitol.xxv.
Of the cautery for titillium, which is the head of the helper.
When the head of the helper is dislocated due to lubricating humidity and is not fixed at the time of its return, you should reduce its dislocation while it is about to naturally return, and then with a slight movement it is displaced so that it seeks to return, as we have testified. When first reducing the dislocation, place the patient's head on their back or on their side; then lift the neck which is in the inner part of the clavicle with the upper parts near your left hand, if the joint is dislocated towards the inner part.
And then heat the cautery having two heads; this is its form:
And then cauterize the vein where the humor penetrates into the other side; and the figure of the cauterization will come when of two cautery heads.
And sometimes it is adjusted according to this count and for what the cauterizations are VIII.
And then place your hand on the cautery for a while with salt, and then attach the patient to a bed of rest, so that the limb is not moved for some time until it is comfortable.
And if the dislocation is above the knee and treatment is applied there, then cauterize over the muscle with a cautery on the knee or with several pointed cauteries, so that the joint is confirmed and the humidity is relieved and the patient is healed.
Capitol. XXVI.
Of cautery of the stomach.
When pain in the stomach is due to cold and humid mists that extract from its composition and multiply within it, and if you continue with the methods of treatment and they do not relieve, then you will know that gout is on his back ribs and extends its hands and its things, and then cauterize that area with three cauteries: in one cauterization place the foot with the size of a finger’s breadth using a lancet cautery, and in two cauteries place the sides of the cauterization, forming the figure of a triangular cauterization; and leave space between those that will cause suppuration.
And if the depth of the cauterization is two-thirds of the thickness of the skin.
And let the shape of the cauterization be as follows. If you wish, cauterize with a large cauterizer in the middle of the stomach according to this form; this shall be a cauterization in the form of a circle according to this form:
And the stomach should be cauterized by puncturing where someone is scared by this cautery: and you prick the stomach according to the quantity you wish to test, then cauterize that with the cautery at the punctures; then cure that with the cure that follows until it is healed.
Capitol.xxvii.
Of the cauterization of the inflamed groin.
When there is pain in the groin due to coldness or humidity or from excessive windiness before it is brought back to its normal structure by excess discharge, and the patient is treated as we have said and not referred elsewhere, then you should place the patient on their back, and prick three cautery marks according to this form and this quantity over the groin below the hypochondria, letting it reach the supine position of a person.
And let the space between each cautery be according to the thickness of the finger, and let the cautery be according to the length of the body straight.
And do not hold the cautery too long.
And if the amount that is applied equals the weight of the spider's species; and if the illness standing on the feet of the patient; and if not standing, lying down, which already has extended its parts, raising its arms.
And you may apply this cautery with a surgical cautery when your subtlety and prudence in the art are sufficient.
And be careful that you do not burn too much in the cautery, and let the spider's species adhere to the entire foot so that the whole body is affected and permeates the intestines, for the foot here is delicate; and know this.
Chapter XXVIII.
On the Perforation of an Abscess on the Foot with a Cautery.
When there is an inflammation or abscess in the buttock and you want to know if that abscess is in the flesh of the buttock or in its skin, then if it is in the flesh of the buttock, the patient will experience increased gravity and pain severity.
And if it is in the skin of the buttock, then the pain will be severe and often causes great fatigue to the doctors treating it.
Therefore, check if the patient is lying on their side; and then place the location of the abscess in the palm of your hand; and then apply the cautery, which resembles a strip of flax, as described earlier on the previous page. And cauterize it so that the entire chain of the wound is charred, until it reaches the navel, until it becomes healthy.
And then treat that by the method of curing other abscesses until it becomes healthy.
And you should only use the cautery of those whose study in the art of medicine is extensive, and for whom many diseases are known. However, this one has been tested several times on this operation, so I leave that to your discretion, and it is better.
Capitol.xxix.
Of cautery for the thigh.
They said that the ancient cautery for the thigh should be made according to this manner: take from the bark of the aristolia tree a long stick, which is found there, and let it have the thickness of a finger.
And then submerge it in oil and heat it on the fire. Then cauterize with that cautery in the area between the continuation of the furcula and the neck; use two small cauteries to guide, one slightly inclined towards the side where the beard begins, and another two cauteries that are inclined between the fifth rib and the hipbone, slightly inclined backward; use another cautery in the middle of the thigh; place another on the stomach, and three cauteries behind; use one cautery in the area between the two shoulders, and two cauteries on both sides of the thigh, placing the cautery between the two shoulders.
And make sure that your hand is not close to the cautery, but held at a distance from the flame.
And some ancient doctors have said that certain men use a cautery resembling a ray and ignite it, placing it in the area between the ribs until we reach the abscess and allow healthy tissue to grow, as we have said regarding the abscess of the groin.
In this perforation, there is no fear with the cautery; for if it happens in the location of the fistula where it does not heal.
Capitol.
Of the cautery for the fistula.
When you cure the illness of the fistula, follow what we have said about the treatment in the division and do not alter your treatment. The cautery for the fistula is according to three methods, all of which are correct. One method is to make three or four lines according to the length of the fistula, following the figure of the fistula's cautery, the figure of which has been shown previously.
And the distance between each cautery should be the width of a finger or a little more. The method of applying the cautery should be the same method we have described for the cautery of the groin.
And do not hold your hand on the cautery; the patient should lie on their back.
And another way to cauterize is that you ignite the cautery having two vertements, which we have said in the chapter on dislocation of the muscle, and elevate the leg which is in the line of the seam where it passes the vein of the patient's left side.
And your elevation should be such that you raise the leg according to the length of the body, so that the cauterizations are made according to the breadth of the body.
And then insert the two vertements, ignite them, and in that place where you penetrate the leg from the other side.
And then remove the cautery; and thus he makes four cauterizations.
And if you do, cauterize with the cautery having three vertements.
And then you treat the cautery when it has been allowed to become too hot for too many days, as this is more conducive than the other preceding causes in the treatment.
Capitol XXXI.
Of the cautery for hydrocele.
Cauterize not for hydrocele but for ailments properly.
When you treat the hydrocele, follow the methods of cure that we have said in the division. Do not deviate from your cure; instead, ensure that you use four cauteries around the circumference of the swelling and one on the stomach, another on the flanks, another on the back, two between the vertebrae of the spine, one along the right side of the foot, and another on the stomach. And the depth of the cautery be proportionate to the thickness of the swelling.
And leave the cautery open so that it heals slowly over a long time.
And do not evacuate the unhealthy matter near the cautery where it should be, so that two intentions are added to it, and it will be treated with healing assistance.
The shape of the cautery with which the stomach is cauterized should be claw-shaped according to the form described above, and it is with this cautery that the two olive shapes are cauterized according to their previous form.
Chapter XXXII.
Of the cauterization of feet and thighs.
When the feet are swollen and filled with yellow water, cut out the part of the foot where it is between the toe and the finger, and lift your hand with the cautery without twisting that part; then lift your hand, and do not return it completely, so that the yellowish water can drain.
The cautery should be done in this manner: And on each thigh, make two cautery marks, and on each thigh, place the cautery at the end of the surgical blade. The cautery should be done according to the length of the thigh: and leave one end open and place the other near the middle of the thigh; and on each thigh, make two cautery marks.
Leave the wound open for a long time so that no water remains from it.
And then cure the ailments which we have said.
Chapter XXXIII.
On the cautery of the abdomen.
When the abdomen is caused by cold and moisture between the intestines, it is due to the digestive and retentive virtues, which are in the stomach and the intestines. This is treated as mentioned before, and sometimes the patient suffers from a cautery of vital virtue, so perform a large cautery on their stomach according to what was previously described in the cauterization of the stomach, using the ring cautery and four small intestinal circle cauteries, a fine stylus cautery; or use a large aloes cautery, or two cauteries.
And if sometimes the excessive moisture and the patient tolerates it, then perform a cautery on the pentenburg and on the intestines, and strengthen the stomach with two cauteries near the inguinal region, which is a perfect cure for vitality from which you will not err.
Chapter XXXIV.
Of the cautery treatment for ancient hemorrhoids.
When they are in the nature of old hemorrhoids or a mass of thick humors that have rotted moisture, and they are cured as we have said in the division, and you do not apply your own cure, then cauterize three times on the base of the two small and slightly triangular parts, and with one cautery above the navel down by two fingers.
And if you suspect that the stomach of the patient is affected and the food they ate was not digested, and their face appears swollen, then cauterize that area on the stomach with a large cautery as previously described; and with one cautery on the inguinal region, and another on the armpit with a pointed cautery. Let the cautery remain open for some time, and cure him until he is healed.
Chapter XXXV.
Of the cautery treatment near the site of lithotomy.
When you incise the thigh, then apply the cautery that resembles a ray. Then insert the ignited cautery into the incised thigh, and keep your hand there until the cautery reaches the venous orifice from which the pus flows.
Do this once or twice; if there are more, then cauterize each one as we have counted, and place salves between the wounds until they heal.
And if you cauterize with a large cautery over several areas, it is more effective in curing the wound.
Capitol.xxxvi.
Of the cauterization of fistulas that occur in the natural passages of the body.
When nature does not comply with the work we have recommended in its place, and the patient is scared by this, heal it with a cautery.
Then when there is an old fistula in nature behind, and corrupted with good health and humidity, therefore what is more worthy that comes is to try a fine thread under it, and then know the quantity of the depth of it by the front mentioned thread.
Then heat the cautery that resembles a ray. Then place the heated cautery in this fistula, according to the quantity in which you insert the thread.
And iterate over that with the cautery until those corrupted tissues burn completely, one time or two or three, according to the quantity of your necessity.
And guard yourself from burning nerves and veins; or if the fistula goes to the cavity of the bladder or the intestine, then guard yourself from all those areas; and do not do this unless the fistula is in a fleshly location and you know it is not penetrating.
And then cure the area until it is healed.
And if the area is sealed, and the materials are severed from it, and the exudation persists for a long time, then you know that it is completely cured.
And if the materials are not from within, then you know that it is penetrating or in the process of corrupting the bone, or it comes from those causes which will be recalled later in its place.
Capitol.xxxvii.
On the cautery of warts.
When warts are in pain due to rubbing or excessive moisture, and for this reason the condition of the patient is worsened, then you should cautery thewarts with a cautery over each wart using a pointed instrument, for which see the recall later.
And cautery it slightly with a small pause in between, for three linear cauteries will follow, and thus they will be more effective in healing.
Capitol.xxxviii.
Of the cautery treatment of the bladder.
When there is a debility and softening of the bladder due to flegm and humidity, such that the patient cannot retain urine, then cauterize that part at the beginning where the skin of the pubis starts, and cauterize with one cautery on the right side, and another on the left side.
And the length of each cautery should be according to the size of the patient's foot; and cauterize that area with a cautery at the lower part of the foot, or with two cauteries if necessary.
And use a thigh cautery according to how it is applied.
Capitol.xxxix.
Of the cautery treatment of the vagina.
When venous blood and humidity are present in the vagina, it is forbidden to conceive, and the menstrual flow is corrupted, and conception is delayed. When joint pain occurs due to this condition, then cauterize the area with three cauteries around the umbilical region, as we have said in the treatment of the bladder; and place a cautery at the lower part of the foot, or use two cauteries, and use a thigh cautery.
Capitol. xl.
Of the cautery for the dislocation of the ankle.
When moist phlegm infiltrates the area around the ankle, and causes displacements of its location, a sign of this is that the swelling extends over the other foot when compared between them. And the location of the dislocation is treated on the side that is swollen.
Then, make a circular cautery on the foot of the ankle with a pointed cautery, as you will have marked the circuit of the area as it is rotated, so that the area falls in the middle of the circle.
And the form of the cautery mentioned above is used in the treatment of the stomach.
And if this cautery is not available to you, then use three large olive-wood cauteries instead.
And the cautery should be made according to the strength of the pain in the entire limb; and then care for that which remains until it is healed.
Chapter XL.
Of the cautery treatment for the sciatic vein.
When pain in the leg is caused by cold and humidity, the patient is treated with what we have said, and you do not apply any of the ancient methods where you would cause the patient to suffer from large humors through foul pills or artificial ones; instead, cautery the affected area.
The method of cautery for this is according to two methods: either with burning medicines, or with fire.
According to two scientific methods, of which one is to perform cautery on that area over the broad part of the foot with three triangular cauteries in this form; and do so with good depth. And let the space between each cautery be equal to the thickness of a finger, whether the cautery is small or large.
More often, apply the cautery in the middle of the location on the top of the foot because there are four cauteries.
And if you wish, cauterize around the circle where the form precedes in the cauterization of the dislocation of the ankle, let it be a circle that burns the entire circumference.
And this is the way to cauterize for the ankle when pain is localized to the ankle and not extended down the leg.
But if it is extended down the leg, then cauterize there with two cautery points on the thigh over the area around which you will encircle the ankle that causes the pain; and with one cautery point on the shinbone, a little you should raise the lateral part.
And for the surgical cautery, the depth of the cauterization should be according to the intensity of the pain.
And if the pain extends to the area near the ankle bones, then cauterize there where you will apply the cautery with three or four points, or more if needed.
And if the pain extends to the area of the heel into the calf, then cauterize there with a surgical cautery.
Guard yourself in all cautery that you do not end with the cautery to such a degree that it burns nerves or great artery, and that by this you are over the patient harmfully or contraction.
And I have seen several cases where cautery was applied to the cavity and completed in the cautery, and the bed of fire inflamed between the tumor and the skin, and fire perforated and corrupted all the skin. And then follows a strong solution for the belly, and then death.
And if the pain is in two parts, cautery each one according to this manner.
And the wise will say about the cautery of water-cauterizer: This is the manner: Make it resemble a circle of iron, with its circumference the width of one palm; and make its orifices according to the size of anfinger bone or at most a little more.
And within that circle, there is another third; and let the space between them be the quantity of a foot's breadth; and let those circles be open in two parts; and let the length of those gaps be one foot or two feet, and make on those iron edges decently attached to the circles; this is the form of it.
It is lit in the fire until it becomes red and sparks, then placed on the part of the ankle, with the patient's foot over the ladle. And cauterize it with three round cauteries in one pass.
And leave it for three days; then apply a plaster with bread and leave the wound open for many days; and cure it by anointing it until it is healed.
Albucasis says: My son, we have used this type of cautery little because of the fear of looking at it, and because we have found few that concern it.
Nevertheless, for those who have suffered from the best cautery, you find it to be the spot for them.
Nevertheless, the best cautery for medicines that adhere is to make two circles having a perforated frame in which the smoke from the iron door passes; let the length of the walls where they are be two nuts or quarters.
And if the space which is between each one of the size of the swelling of the finger; and they be opened both above and below, and they should contain themselves among them according to this form:
And then place your hand over the part of the ankle where the patient is lying, and hold your hand over the part of the ankle; and take some hot water, pour it between two circles, and let its quality be as hot as fire little by little, and have that for the quantity of one hour, and suffer the patient the bite and adjustment of it — for that atrophy bite thus like fire — until the bite ceases.
And then lift your hand with the instrument and remove the hot water from all over the ankle with cold water.
And then let it be for three days and place your hand over that border until the blackness of the adjusted wound fades, and let this be for some days, and the redness will go away; this is healing in youth.
And then cure it by applying ointment until it is healed.
And if the pain is extended to the thigh or leg, apply a pad containing water as is done in the water.
And this is the method of water cauterization, and I have already written about that in the treatise on the preparation of medicines. Recipe for alkali and for the unextinguished caustic from both parts one, three times let them steep in a new vessel of which the part left has been pierced by a small tube, according to the quantity that enters it.
Place the bottom of the vessel in another heated vessel, and get over that alkali and live caustic from water gently until they cover it by a finger's breadth. Then, with your hand applying good compression, let the water flow from the bottom of the heated vessel into the part left in the other vessel.
Then adjust all that water, and get it over another live caustic and renewed alkali, for at that time it will have great strength. This is administered in most operations of medicine and in the cautery of other members, for this operation uses fire.
And of some medicines that are cauterized wide, such as terebinth and mel anacrat, it is assayed that they be mixed.
And Gualia recounts of an ancient man's operation and cure for pain and sciatica vein, magnifying the method much, saying there is no need for other treatment, and that he was cured in one session as recommended, since he immersed himself in hot and cold baths.
And it should be applied with a certarraga vert, and if no certarraga vert is available, then a fresh fig; it should be tied with a few threads and placed on the pain, or in the thigh, or on the chest, and it should be tied.
And it should be left for the quantity of three hours or for the amount of time the patient tolerates the application.
And then place it in hot water; when the patient's body is well warmed, insert it into the soil, for the pain ceases and the patient is cured.
And be aware that no use of cautery should be made with these medicines but only near the body's evacuation.
And I say that when making a cut in the tendinous vein, it should be cauterized more thoroughly; and the cautery should be used in this manner: take wool and soak it in old oil, and place it between the toes of the foot and over the scar.
And place a cut in the dry skin and immerse that in fire to make it char; then place it over the wool and let it dry while extended. And repeatedly do this, and continue doing it until the sensation of the bite reaches the water and relieves the pain.
And this method of cautery is called the cattle cautery.
Chapter 42.
On the cautery for pain in the foot.
Sometimes pain in the two regions is caused by multiple factors, such as congestion or puncture or excessive evacuation, and other similar causes due to the infiltration of wet material.
And the cautery is not used for burning, but only in this single instance where it is caused by the infiltration of wet material.
Therefore, open, and place pills similar to them for the evacuation of the malady over both sides where the pain is three lines according to the width of the area. Then prick or more with cautery in any line, according to the quantity that comes from the tolerance of the patient and the virtue of the cautery.
And perform the cautery with a pointed cautery.
And if you want, perform the cautery with three or four of the middle-clawed cautery in this manner:
Capitol. xliii.
On the cautery at the beginning of gilbositat.
When the first signs of this illness appear in little children; and the sign of the beginning of it in children is that they accidentally exhibit an increase in their stature, elevation, and movement.
You find in the last vertebra of the spine and in the ribs that are beginning to overgrow the other vertebrae.
And when you see this and want to prevent it, then cauterize that with a cautery in the shape of a circle according to this form: that the cautery cover the entire part of the vertebra equally.
And if you wish, cauterize around the vertebra with the pointed cautery two or three lines wide. And let the points be close to each other.
And then cure the area until it is healed with what we have said.
More importantly, ensure that the cautery is not applied in a hot state due to nerve spasm.
Capitol XLIV.
Of the cautery treatment for gout and joint pain.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
And thus, gout caused by cold is treated in a therapeutic manner and not by merely alleviating the pain, but by using cautery.
And you cauterize the area near the joint of the foot with hot cautery to facilitate the evacuation in the circuit of the joint.
And the olive cautery is as follows:
And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. And if the pains ascend to the toes or other joints, and you notice this, then cauterize each toe with three or four cautery points using this olive cautery.
And if you need to use cautery for these cauteries to be necessary, then apply the cautery and do not press your hand too much against the cautery before, just around the width of a finger.
And if the pains penetrate into the groin and thigh, then apply the cautery which we have said in our chapter.
And if the pains are only in the intestines and it is called dropsy, then puncture along the course of the nerves as they run, puncturing in those two lines.
And if the pains remain in the fingers, then puncture along the course of the nerves over each joint and over the back of the hand.
And if the pains remain for several days in the elbows or muscles, then apply cautery to all parts of the elbows.
And if you do not evacuate the patient properly and do not receive medicines well, then even if good regimen and fumigation are performed, this cautery will not be sufficient for recovery, God help us.
Capitol. xliv.
Of cautery for ruptures.
When there is a rupture in the groin and intestines are pushed in front of the hernia sack towards the genitals, and this begins to appear, then when you order the patient to fast on that day and use mild remedies so that the opening in their abdomen does not worsen.
And then place the patient between your arms on their side, and command them to keep their leg bent or maintain the position until the hernia sack or intestines appear.
And then return those points to their place and touch the rupture over the bone of the thigh, marking the extremity of which should resemble the size of a circle in the upper parts of the body.
And then heat the cautery of which this is the form:
until it is hot enough and emits sparks. Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
Then place the cautery over that mark with your hand holding the cautery straight, and keep it there until you can reach the bone of the shin in the middle of the lower leg; and repeat with another pass if you have not reached the bone in the first pass.
Observe wisely the condition of the hernia during your cautery, that you do not burn the hernia too much so that it does not result in death or another great harm to the patient.
Be mindful that when you use the cautery, you should not touch the bone, as this would compromise your operation.
Ensure that the cautery for children is fine according to their size and measurement.
And after care for the place of the cautery for three days among that the scar of the fire be healed.
And after, care for it along with other ointments until it is healed.
And the patient lie on his back for 10 days until the place and wound are sealed.
And ensure that you place the nourishment according to the length of the healing time of the wound which closes his abdomen, and that the intestine does not come out with the great effort to heal.
And after, when you want to lift it after 10 days, then administer the ointment decently made, and keep it for other 10 days.
And let it rest from work and replenishment of food and drink, and of strong voices, for when it uses this regimen of healing entirely, it will be cured.
And I will say the healing of ruptures in other parts of the abdomen, and at the beginning, if you want them not to tear, then cauterize the rupture with a round cautery according to its quantity. And this should be what is drawn from the codena as the tender part of it; then after care for it as we have said, and it should not be tightened.
And some first ones have said that rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery according to this form, rather than with forceps.
And a line is placed there for the width in the legs and passes over the rupture, another line above it; then place your hand on a cruciform cautery, but the first cautery is lighter and better.
Capitol. XLVI.
Of the cauterization of the torchio.
When pain persists in some members due to adhesion or percussion and does not respond to medical treatment over a long period, then you should cauterize with a pointed cautery.
And the cautery should be of the size and shape appropriate to the member, its heat and intensity, and the location and pain of the torchio.
Then if it is healed with the first cautery, that is good; otherwise, repeat the cautery on it. For customarily, those pains are pierced in a neighboring member to the affected one, so that you may achieve healing through the cautery before the disease is cured.
Capitol forty-seven.
Of the cautery for leprosy.
The lepers are sometimes treated with a large cautery for a long time, and moderately if the species of leprosy is caused by the putrefaction of flame and melancholy.
And therefore, if you want to cautery that area, consider whether the leprosy is common and similar to that cured as we have said in the division and neither this nor that, and fear that the corruption may encompass his entire body and all its parts. Then cautery that area on the head with five cauteries: one in the middle of the head, and the second at the side; place the front near the end of the hairline; two on the horns; and one behind, on the neck or servant.
And finish your hand with the cautery a little before it enters the mouth, creating a small impression, so that the expiration of thick vapors is alleviated; and cautery on the cheek as needed.
If leprosy is already spread over the patient and manifest clearly, then when you cauterize that area or those cauterizations which we said in the head; do so on the tip of the nose, and two cauterizations on the two moustaches, and two on two vertebrae of the neck, and six on the vertebrae of the back, and one large one near the coccyx, and one on the spine, and two on the flanks, and one on each flank, and two on the hips and one on each hip, and two on the knees, and two on the muscles, and two on the tendons of their feet; cauterize that on all joints of their fingers and their toes, and on each heel of their feet, and on their nails.
And guard the nerves which are over the heel that you do not burn those.
And sometimes cauterization is done with one cauterization on the bone of the pelvis and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the diaphragm.
And you should know that the more tightly you adjust the cautery, the more beneficial and effective it is; and you should know that the patient does not feel pain in the cautery, as do those on the surface, because so the patient's body is already numbed.
And know that the cauteries should be large or small according to the members and joints as preceded by the species of the instruments.
And then cure the cautery with a paste of roasted wheat flour and honey, and other treatments until it is healed.
Capitol. xlviii.
On the cautery for stupor.
When some member is numbed or asleep and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, and does not heal, then you cautery that numb member with cauteries according to the size of the member or its smallness.
And let your cautery penetrate the thickness of the skin slightly. And then cure that which is ointed until it is healed.
And in some cases, a cautery is applied to certain spots that affect the thighs and the feet, as well as the vertebrae of both sides. This causes the inflammation of the nerves which run through that member, and it alleviates the pain.
But do not apply it indiscriminately, but only to those who are skilled in the anatomy of the limbs and the course of the nerves throughout the body.
Capitol XLIX.
On the cautery treatment for swellings that become morphew.
When the swelling is old and does not respond to any of the medical ointments, then cauterize over it with a cautery for a small amount according to the quantity of the size of the swelling until the whiteness and the color of it are changed.
And then cure that with a paste of ergot and lentils in beaten oil and leaves of rosemary, or with the ash of columbine or the ash of marigold, taking one part of each, mixing them all together. Then place a cloth over the area until it is healed.
Capitol I.
Of cautery for the knee.
When cancer begins and you want to stop it, then cautery the area with a circular cautery along the circumference of the lesion as it is revolved.
And the wise will say that it should be cauteryed with the latest cautery in the middle spot; but I do not see this, for I fear it is ulcerated, and I have seen this a few times.
And it is better to cautery the area along the circumference with a circle as we have said, or with several cauteries.
Capitol II.
Of cautery for adenitis.
When some adenitis is delayed in maturation, this is either due to excess causing it, or due to the patient's condition, as they are old and decrepit, with little strength, or due to time, and you want to hasten the maturation of the adenitis; then cautery the area along its circumference with several small puncturing cauteries; and let that which will mature remain.
If you want to make the puncture with a cautery, then heat the cautery of which this is the shape: and place that in the middle of the affected area where the needle will penetrate.
And if you place the cautery in that location, let it be, so that the arm will be relieved; and then cure that which will be healed.
Chapter II.
On the cautery for corruption.
Corruption is a spreading decay in the member, which eats away at it like fire consumes dry wood.
Therefore, if you see corruption in a place where the cautery with fire will be applied, then heat the cautery with several small and large flames as appropriate for that place where there is corruption.
And then cauterize that completely after you have removed all the corruption and do not leave any cause of it.
And leave that for three days, and place a warm oil mixture over the cauterized areas until all the scars are completely eradicated and all the corruption is gone.
And then cure that with ointment producing flesh.
But if after three days the flesh grows healthy in the area where there is no corruption, that is good; but if not, then re-cauterize the area that is rotten in the corrupted locations.
And if the lesion is treated several times with sharp medicine, which is half the use of cauterization. But however, cauterization with fire is more beneficial than light ointment.
And I have already described the treatment with sharp medicine in the division, so use it when you need it.
Chapter 33.
On the Cauterization of Ulcers and Similar Conditions.
Small stones found in the foot of the sick that are called clavus, and this is a large cause, penetrating, which affects the foot; and cautery for these is according to two methods, one is cautery by fire and one is cautery by hot water.
And the cautery by fire is that you heat the concave cauterizer shaped like a needle point, which is made of iron according to the quantity it can contain the stone from all parts, and it should have fine edges.
And then place that heated instrument over the stone, and quickly move your hand with the cautery in a circle around the stone while the cautery reaches the depth of the stone. And let it be there for three days until it begins to heal. And then apply a poultice to it using wild thyme boiled in salt water, and let the poultice remain on it for one night, so that the stone is eliminated by its roots.
And then treat the area with a cream of generative flesh until it heals.
If so non-conductive, and motes viewed occur in the surface of the body, mainly in the thighs and feet, then when you administer there with cautery moistened, take a lancet of iron or of steel or of bone, place that over the nail; and bring into the lancet of moisture a small quantity, withdraw your hand, and you revolve that by compression of your hand from all sides, and press the margin of the cannula on the root of the nail, and you will find the moisture flows through the channel of the nail; wait for the patient a little by the bite of the moisture for an hour, and then withdraw that, since the nail has its channels eroded.
And thus apply them to those and then to the other, over all of which they are in the body.
And then cure those boils where the nail's channels have been eroded with ointments the flesh gets infected.
Capitol. liiii.
Of cautery for trembling.
When there is a tremor due to friction in the nerves or fever of that cause, or for another similar reason, then you should cautery it with four or five cauteries on the spine, placing one cautery between each vertebra; and one on the foot, and one over its stomach.
And the tremor subsides, and the illness improves with this treatment.
Capitol.lv.
Of cautery for ailments affecting the body.
When in the body there are abscesses and pustules, which are made of gross corrupt substances; then at the beginning as they appear, they should be cauterized over the entire length of the fistula with a fine cautery, the end of which is extended over fire; or with a piece of erystologia longua; or with a lentil-shaped cautery.
And sometimes a cautery is applied additionally at the beginning of its expulsion according to this manner; and not believing it, they break the superfluity by doing so, and heal those.
Moreover, I must say that this should be done near the evacuation with a flebotomy.
Capitol lvi.
Of the cautery for flux of sand accident by incision of artery.
Many times, after an injury to the artery that is incised, along the wound which runs through, or from the incision of abscesses or cautery on the member, then the flow seems difficult to stop.
Then, when such a thing happens to any artery, hold your hand over the orifices of the artery and place it there strongly for many times until the flow of the blood stops, then remove it, so that it does not leak.
And place the olive cautery firmer for a few and larger times, by many strokes, and blow on them until they are ignited.
And then take one small or large, according to the place and wound where the artery is broken, over that vein strongly press after you have retracted as I said before, and put the cautery where it may be cut and restricted that blood.
And if the blood is expelled from the opening of the artery when you retract as I said and press the cautery strongly, then take another cautery prepared among the cauteries that are in the fire, and therefore do not cease to do this one after another until the blood is restricted.
And take care that you do not burn the nerves here, and that no other evil comes to the patient.
And know that when blood flows from the artery, it is not possible to restrict the blood with a cautery, especially when the artery is large, unless one of four methods is used: either with a cautery as we said, or with extraction when it is not removed, or when it is removed, its ends are burned and the blood is restricted, or with ligation using salt or gravel for strong constriction, or with pressure using a poultice with proper compression.
But he who administers sufficient restraint to the patient with flax and by binding or through the position of burning causes and similar, will not fare well.
But if he has to do so for someone and neither the doctor is present nor medicine, then open gently with the finger indicated over the opening of that vein as we have said, and understand the great compression within which the wound has remained from the upper part of the wound, and above the arch let the vein not be compressed; and above the arch let water infused with a strongly cold fomentation be applied before the wound is closed and made thicker; and more cauterize or medicate as necessity demands.
Of incision and perforation and venesection and of bleeding and of wounds and their appearances.
We have already said in the first chapter all disease in which cauterization with fire is convenient and medicaments that burn, and the occasions and causes of it, and the instruments necessary for those cauterizations; and I have ordered the chapters from the upper part of the head to the feet.
And you shall proceed in this chapter in that manner, so that the one seeking this may be relieved of what he has asked for.
And before you begin this, learn, sons, that in this chapter we treat of the fear mentioned in the first chapter of cautery.
And because you must be in great caution, for in the operation which is in this chapter, many cases of evacuation occur which can lead to death; you must perform the aspersion of the vein or incision on the abscess or pustule, or perforation of the exsanguination or purgation of the wound or extraction of an arrow and incision for pus, and similar procedures. And in all of these, there is fear and trembling, and in the majority of them, death.
And I warn you that this applies to you in the position where it is situated, for sometimes cases occur where your methods differ from those of unskilled practitioners. And some of them will go to seek their illness and die easily because of the intensity of what they find in their illness, and for the length of the illness, and from the illness which means death.
And of them, some will give to you their advice and say, "You should expect that from that which cures, the illness is harmful.
And so be sure that you consent to only those who come to you with this manner; and let your caution be greater than covetousness and your greed; and do not presume on any cause except for certain knowledge which verifies what you must do, and to which a worthy success will lead.
And use in the cure of all your illnesses based on prognosis and indication of the one to whom health has been converted; for in that is help for you in the acquisition of fame and memory, glory and renown.
Oh, children, God inspires His understanding in you and does not deprive you of direction and protection, for that is in His hand.
And I have also set out this chapter distinguishing it into chapters as previously explained in the chapter on cautery, concerning the cure from head to feet, so that what you seek and require may be alleviated.
First chapter.
Of the cure of water that is contained in the head of the child.
Know that this illness often appears in children during childbirth and when the mother's body strengthens the child's head, its condition improves.
And sometimes it appears for hidden causes that are unknown.
But I have only seen this illness in children; and for all of them that I have seen, it has led to death, so I have been left with no other option but to include it in my work.
And I have seen that a child's head was full of water, and its head remained always swollen until it could no longer bear the weight due to the size of its head, and moreover, the humidity increased until death.
And this humidity or is added between the tendons and the bone, or is placed over the surface of the bone.
And if the operation in that case where the humidity is between the tendon and the bone, and the abscess is small, you should cut in the middle of the affected area making a fissure in the lateral direction, such that the length of the fissure contains two nodules through which the humidity can drain, and this is the form of the spatum:
And if the humidity is much increased and the abscess is larger, then here make two fissures in this manner:
And if the humidity is on the bone, the sign is that you feel the edges of the tendon gaping apart and the water exudes when you compress it with your hand on the inside parts; this is not what you want to see. And if the humidity is between the tendon and the bone, you should cut in the middle of the affected area making three fissures in this manner:
And draw out the entire humidity through these fissures; then strengthen the fissures with bandages and pillows; on the fifth day, pour oil over them; then remove the bandage and cure the wound with herbs and ointments, strengthening the tendon with equal parts; let the patient eat dry food of little humidity until the limb is comfortable and healed.
And another method of cutting, which consider as regards the magnitude of the abscess and the collection of water, for in some cases it is more at the occiput, or in the anterior part, or on the right, or on the left; and therefore attend to the cut where the abscess appears and the filling with water, and do so according to what seems best to you.
And observe that you do not incise the artery and attempt to flow of scabs and delay the healing of the wound by that flow of blood at the expense of moisture evacuation.
Chapter II.
When an abscess or wound occurs in the ear or foot, it is customary to treat this, and you should not rely on medical treatments for the cure, but rather the incision of these two arteries.
And thus cover when you want to incise those that the evil root its head, and then rub the place with rough cloth so that the arteries appear, and then strengthen the neck of the evil with some cloth; and consider where to feel the vein; and the places of each over the places which are near the ears pressing, and they are hidden in almost all men.
And then place your hand over the artery with care, and incise each one with a sharp spatulum into the mouth, and do this for the width of the head.
And if you want, insert the spatulum between the artery and cut it at the incisions on the parts above.
And let the length of the incision be two digits wide, for when any vein is incised, the wound is set at the pulsatile outflow, which leaps forth by frequent leaps.
And if the artery does not appear at the incision, then measure from the ear the quantity of space three digits wide, and place your hand with care, and make it enter into the mouth.
And what comes from spitting blood is a quantity of one uncia, and heavier or lighter than its normal weight, and all this is according to the quantity which appears from the virtue of the malady and the fullness of the artery of the same.
And then consider the plaque, and therefore if any cause of chiphac remains on the bone, then incise this so that it does not lead to an abscess.
And then strengthen the plaque with down feathers and linen cloth, and place it in ointment until it is healed.
Chapter III.
On the extraction of the arteries which are in the temples.
When an old migraine or acute headache occurs due to moist conditions and the quality of the humors in the temples, or is very severe and resembles those, and is treated according to the methods of medical cure, if this does not bring relief, then we have resorted to the extraction of the arteries in the temples, or cauterization of those as we have shown.
And the manner of the operation and extraction is that you grasp the pelles which are on the temples; and understand the artery apparent on the temple where it is shown to you by your own pulse, and is hidden in only a few men through the force of cold.
And if it is hidden to you, then hold the neck of the patient tightly with some cloth; and then rub the area with a rough cloth or evaporate the place with water until the artery becomes clearly visible. And then you take the spatium of which this is the form: And then you insert the needle there with ease until you reach the artery; and then get on it with oil and extract that into the upper parts while you remove that from the needle and discover that of the tunics which you leave there, from all parts.
More if the artery is subtle, then wrap that with the extremity of the needle, and then incise a part thereof according to the quantity for which the extremities of it are elongated and contracted, and there will not be a flow of sand, for if they are not incised, the sand will not rise from all parts.
And then evacuate from the wound three ounces of blood.
And if the artery is large, then you should divide it into two locations using a double strong ligature or long cords, and do not cut into it before the consolidation of the wound and ensure a flow of blood.
And then incise the excess fluid between two ligatures; and do so at that time or shortly thereafter.
And if you wish, cauterize it with a cautery inside the bone and with a surgical cautery at the points where it has been incised, and this will serve in place of that operation.
And it is better to do this operation if the patient has fever or is in a state of heat; for cauterization is among those treatments that help with final humors, and therefore it is better for recovery.
And then remove the arteries that you ligated at the proper site, and place them over powder properly made, and do so with dry medicines to promote flesh growth and with warm applications until it is healed.
And if during another operation an outflow of blood from the artery occurs, then you should restrain that blood, either with a cautery, or by filling the space with cloth, and firmly press your hand there so that the blood is restrained. And if for some reason it is not at your present, then place your hand as previously described over the area until the bleeding congeals, and pour cold water over the area to allow the acute pain to subside, and apply pressure accordingly.
And for the lighter case in the extraction of an artery, you should cauterize the vein with this cautery, having two knives at hand, after you have marked the two areas with your fingers, and place hot coals nearby so that they reach the bone and cut the vein into two parts, so that what is between the extremities of the vein is elongated, which are not fully sealed by this cautery.
And this is the form of the cautery:
And let the sharpness of the two knives be evident. But if the pain is acute as if two knives are close to each wound, and do not cut the flesh with speed.
Therefore, where there is any swelling, hold the heat from the fire there and the flesh is incised lightly.
And this method is better in all works and more gentle.
And let the space be which is between two knives the amount of swelling of the digit.
Capitol quart.
Of the cure for bodies with sharp and acidic tears from the eyes.
When the tears are acidic, and the body involves those veins which run over the temple of the head, and you find no cause for the cure in medicine, and sometimes the face of the patient turns red and feels a crawling sensation on his forehead as if it were being walked upon by ants, and the eyes become weak and humid, with the skin seeming to be known, and the eyelids are scalded by the acidity of the tears, they use anti-inflammatory treatments in the cure of those from this operation, and they number that cure among the passing symptoms.
And you command the patient to stretch the skin that is on his forehead, and then incise in the forehead three equal distances according to the length of the forehead. And if the length of the incision is two digits: the first incision should be equally distant from the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second according to the length of a small movement of the tears which are in the lacrimal, and the third from the other part.
And be careful of the beginning of the arteries which are in two branches, and keep your hand away from the continuation of both jawbones. And if the space of each incision the quantity of three digits adjust.
And if you have a piece of sponge equipped or dry cloth ready at hand, place them over which to dry the wound.
And then insert the tip of two sharp instruments, of which this is the form of the incision: that is from the opening between the temples into the second incision. Exsorbe all the pus that is between two incisions along the channel which is over the bone, and then do so for the mid-incision between the second incision. And then stab this pus and introduce it into the first incision. Another time use another instrument called a cuttle, sharp on one side and blunt on the other.
And place the blade of the sharp one against the adjacent flesh, the blade inside the bone, and push it into the mid-channel fracture, and cut all the vessels that descend from the head to the heels.
More than that, continue the incision to where the pus appears in the flesh, and then do so for the mid-fracture between the other fracture.
And when the bleeding has equalized in quantity, squeeze the areas of the feet where the clotted blood is located.
And then place your hand on any gouty fissure of the old skin, and place over those powders mixed in wine and oil and vinegar, and ensure that no abscess forms.
On the seventh day after the ligation, administer a large fomentation of warm or boiled water, and place basil cream in oil on the area where the wounds have healed.
Chapter V.
For the cure of tears due to catarrh and those derived from parts inside the head.
When there is an acute catarrh continuing, and the tears of the eye are small and exhausted, and their vision is weakened, and the eyelids are ulcerated and the skin around them is affected, and in the prepuce of the head there is sharp pain and subsequent swelling, then you can recognize from these occurrences that the humors and catarrh do not come from veins within but from small veins inside the parts.
And the best cure for these is this: command the patient to raise his forehead, and then incise a small fissure in the middle of the forehead, about the width of a finger (starting from between the left and right temples; begin inside the bone, where the tendons are most taut you should lengthen the incision), while the bone is exposed.
Dry all the blood with sponge or dry cloth and then insert between the two lips of the裂隙一个干的棉球或布片。 Strengthen above with powders mixed in wine and oil so that it does not form an abscess.
And when you open it and see that the abscess has already diminished, then wash the bone where it begins to have new flesh, and then cure it with an exsiccative regimen which causes the flesh to dry, as if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of resin and mix them, and from them make a plaster and apply it to these wounds of the flesh's nativity.
Chapter VI.
Of the cure for what affects the ears.
All cause that affects the ears is of four kinds: one is due to mineral stone or a similar cause, such as iron or lead, another is due to plant matter such as cedar or fennel, or it is a fluid cause such as water or wine and their类似物质，或者某种动物。
And when a boil appears in the ear or another cause seeming like those causes that do not adjust or swell in the ear, and you place the ear in the sun, and if times the boil, then it distills in that some cause of viola oil or sesame, and then administer its extraction, and make him sneeze with a condition, and plug his nostrils to prevent sneezing. And then place some pieces of cloth or wool in the circuit of the ear, and extend the ear to the parts above, where motas (small particles) are often found due to these causes.
And if it is not cured, then administer the extraction of it with the instrument called gesti epicicarios subtil, of which this is the form:
And if it is cured with the gesti, well done; and if not, then administer the extraction of it with the fine onci of little duplication.
And if it is not cured by this, then make a cannula of wire and insert the end of the cannula into the tract of the ear and close around the cannula with wax and with oil softened so that it does not swell except the cannula. And then extract the thigh muscle with strong traction, for too tight ligaments as we have recounted.
And if it is not loosened in this manner, then take a sharp instrument or a previously prepared one with which the arteries are clamped with a small quantity, place that at the extremity of the ray, and then properly wrap around that knot. And then insert that into the tract of the ear with ease, and then dry the ear of its moisture.
And if it is not loosened by all the causes we have recounted, then you cut to excise that which tends to become an abscess or spasm.
And the way to cut it is that at the beginning you touch the evil of the vein superficially and extract it according to the manner of its virtue, then make a incision between your fingers and convert the ear to the parts above, and make a small fissure in the back of the ear and place the skin there. And let the fissure of lunar shape reach to the heel, and, if the heel is blackened, obstruct it if possible with appropriate instruments; then place the fissure in that hour with speed, and cure it while it is sound.
And if the cause settles in the ear is one of those waxes that build up and are inflamed, then administer the cure and extraction of it; but if it does not yield to your attempt, then take thin subtle spatum according to this form: And administer the extraction of that wax which has settled in the ear.
And do not do this when you think that it is already moistened by the vapor of the ear, and place it on fine wicks, and for extraction use either gentle pressure or incision as we have said, for this alleviates the extraction.
But in the water which has entered into the ear canal that the patient uses for sneezing with a condition at the beginning, and fills her ear with a little old rag, and places it over the ear in which is the water, and if by this it is forced out, well; but otherwise, then take ten or twelve pieces of lead and lion's teeth according to the length of the finger, and heat those in the fire a little, and the patient inserts one of them into her ear canal and sits over a piece of that part and strikes with another stone upon the stone which is inside the ear. Therefore continue to apply heat until all the water has been expelled.
Therefore continue to apply heat until all the water has been expelled. And when the water has been sufficiently expelled, take a piece of paper or cloth, and place one end in the ear and extend the other end into the fire until the paper is ignited.
And place another cloth and do this several times until all the water has been expelled, then remove it with a suction tube as previously described.
In the extraction of a small foreign body entering that ear, proceed with more caution and according to what we have said in the division. But if it is a large object causing an immediate sensation, then perform the extraction quickly and with precision; the cause is less severe compared to all other causes found in the ear.
In the extraction of a worm generated in the ear, when you treat it as we have said in the division and in the treatise on distillations, and if your treatment does not show results, then look into the ear with the sun shining.
And therefore if any cause of worms appears here, then extract that with forceps or fine tweezers, but if no cause appears, then take a catheter and stretch it wide, this is its form: I insert the narrow end into the ear according to the amount that the patient can bear; and then I extract it by strong suction, performing this several times until all the worms are extracted.
But if it does not respond to your attention, then you plug and close the circuit of the catheter with wax as we have said; then administer distillations which have already proven effective in the treatment of worms, and you will find this in the treatise on distillations.
And let your application be with that which you will pour medical oils into the ear with this instrument, which is its form: And make it of silver or copper, straight, with a small tube, and a flat surface above.
And therefore they should push so that it is in the cavity of the catheter here where it will be necessary. And if you want, take the ray and wrap it decently around its extremity, then insert oil into the cavity of the ear, or the juice of some herb, or any medicine you wish — and that is in the auricle —, and place the ray carefully over it and squeeze your hand with gentle pressure so that the oil is expelled into the cavity of the ear and the malady feels the oil inside.
And what is infused in the ear should already be heated over fire for a little while. And make sure that the medicine you will distill in the ear is not too hot, for ear medicines do not tolerate this.
Chapter VII.
On the cure of perforations of the ears.
Sometimes children of unperforated ears inherit them from their parents, and this happens in some people. Perforation occurs in the ear meat due to a wound or no tissue at all; sometimes this perforation is in the pars petrotica of the ear, which does not contain cartilage, and sometimes it is in the external parts.
And that which occurs in the region of the loins, which does not admit inspection, is in the major disposals of difficult recovery.
And in that where you can see it, check that you place the patient's ear in the sun and look at it. And if you see an apparent swelling, open that small incision under which this swelling is located:
If the extremity of the swelling where the width is small, and one part is acute while the other is not; and the incision be made with two lancets to prevent it from causing harm to the ear.
And if the obstruction is due to hidden flesh in the ear or in the meat of the ear, then make those small incisions and cut vigorously enough to remove all the flesh.
And if the obstruction is in the region of the ear, then take a small lancet and heat that piece of iron slightly in the fire, and then place it on the flesh of the ear.
And so, if you sense an abundance of fluid that the patient experiences with ease due to the weightiness of excretion, relieve the pressure on it by easing; and be sure not to injure the nerves of the ear.
And then place a cloth on the ear according to the amount of swelling you have wrapped in Egyptian ointment; and do this for several days until you are sure of the healing of the swelling; or take some and insert it into water and powder it over which you apply the dried trissemum, using it; and if you see that the ear has already become flaccid, then scoop out what you have damaged and replace it with another substance which you wrap in a cloth made of rubbed oil, until the abscess is drained; and cure it as it heals.
But if a blood flow occurs, then submerge a sponge or cloth in cold water and place it over the ear, and use the other treatment which constricts the flow of blood, which is called in the treatise on distillation.
Chapter VIII.
For the cure of a boil that occurs on the eyelids.
Boils that occur on the eyelids sometimes become wet, at other times they are dry.
Then take those that you have heated or boiled, and dissolve those in the foam of their juice, and place it over the areas after boiling.
But if there is pain with a flow of black bile, then cauterize those areas with a thin cautery.
And the best cautery is near the incisions, and the wounds heal when there remains any cause of their juice; and when they are cauterized with fire, those juices are burned and do not return.
Chapter IX.
For the cure of a great boil that occurs on the eyelids.
Boils that occur on the eyelids sometimes appear with a cause which, in its strength and hardness, is like a great boil, and for this reason it is called a great boil.
And it is an addition of large humidity in the eyelid below and above.
And the operation in this case is that you consider whether the swelling is present in it where appears from the eyelid and is augmented at all parts; and the cause of it is slight.
And make a incision for its width, and then probe it from all parts with ease so that the fluid evacuates, and suspend it by a needle and cut it off.
And if the figure is large, then you adjust it with sutures; and cure it so that it heals.
And if it is small, you will not suffer harm from it because the ointment restores and heals it.
And if the swelling is decreasing inside the eyelid, you should probe the inside surface, and then drain the eyelid. Suspend the swelling by a needle, or one that you choose to make an incision with, and press it from all parts. If the eyelid is stretched by an incision, you do this without any cause.
And at the beginning, wash the area with salt water; and cover the place with water until it is healed.
Capitol.
For the cure of excision in the upper eyelid.
Excision is caused by grease that is generated in the tunic of the upper eyelid, especially among children, who aggravate their ailments and may die from it; they cannot look at the clarity of the sun for this reason, and tears begin to flow.
And for this reason, you see them weep on their cheeks all the time, and they sleep with their faces in their hands. Over their cheeks where their eyebrows meet, there is moisture due to swelling, and the imminent need for excision is apparent in the eye; and when you press the area with hot objects, you feel the excision between them.
And some method of operation is in that the patient rests their head on a hot object, then places a cloth around them and makes a circular incision according to the quantity it contains from all parts. Then place this over that and press with hot objects so that excision is aggregated in the middle of the circle. And in the middle of that moisture, make an incision perpendicular to the width, and let the incision not be greater than the incision made in a flaskotomy.
More in the prepone cough that you make the incision totally until you reach arcernach, for in the most serious cases proceed with an incision according to the form of white grease.
Therefore, extract those from the cloths which you have wrapped around your thighs and remove them between your hands right and left until they are dispersed.
And make sure you do not press on the incision so that you do not plug it and leave it open.
More if your alternach does not appear at the beginning of the incision, more that you press on the incision a little with a cloth to prevent it from closing; then extract those as we said; and place wet cloths under the area and strengthen them with powder.
And so soak it with salt and place it in the cavity of the incision to prevent what remains of that humidity.
And cure it until it is healed.
But if an abscess occurs in that place, then cure it by applying cauterized flax cloths until it heals.
Capitol. xi.
Methods of palpation of the whole body.
When in the eyelids of the eye so close set lesions make the natural skin swell and become inflamed, then those nosos [nodules] on the eye become ways of ailments such as constant tearing and softening of the eyelids and conjunctiva before this is a cause of destruction of the eye, which is called tactinir del huel. And it is cured in four ways: either by cautery with fire; or by acute medicine as previously said in the Capitol on cautery; or it is done by incision and suturing; or by canthiresses as I will say later.
And then cover that the head of the eye in your right hand; then convert the eyelid of the eye with your left hand. If it is converted, good; and if not, insert a needle into that part where it is attached to the eyelid, and drive the needle with thread above, and let this be—near the margin of the eyelid where the skin arises—and near the skin, and pull the thread towards the parts above the eyelid, and convert that with the flame.
And then in the inner part of the eyelid, place the skin tightly against the aqueous humor of the major lacrimal gland entering the minor lacrimal gland; and then extract the fatty substance and place on the eyelid a powder of coto or cloth dust, and then cover the eyelid with a tent, as in the figure of a leaf of myrtle.
Moreover, I must note that the figure should be according to the amount of swelling of the eyelid, for this already varies in women, for those in whom a large quantity of fluid has caused the eyelid to become soft.
And then apply the aqueous humor along the two lines you have marked, and start from the major lacrimal gland into the minor lacrimal gland. And if your incision near the natural skin is as thick as the king's thumb.
And then place the needle in one of the angles of the incision, and then scrape it completely, and then suture the two edges with a needle or thread of fine wool, and clean the wound, and adhere what remains from the threads on two small pieces of cloth for some viscous causes. If you want to do this, and if not, you do not need to.
And after that, let the stitching of the wounds be left between three days or four, and then cure this.
And if you wish, leave the wound open without stitching, and cure it by promoting its drying and contraction, for when the eyelid is lifted, you should apply the sealing of the wound and its addition; more stitching is better. Therefore, thus say the ancient surgeons.
More importantly, the patient should be active in the treatment, and it is of good operation, and not out of fear.
And another method of treating it is to sew over the eyelid in the shape of a laurel leaf, and then lift the eyelid by about three inches, arranging and gathering it according to this form:
More importantly, if this is not possible, hold the needles, and as this is not feasible, then take a needle on which you have thread and put that in the middle of the figure, and insert the other thread near the major lacrimal gland, and the other thread near the minor lacrimal gland. Adjust the threads between the ties so they are equal, and then lift your hand for elevation equally, lifting the entire area over which it was sewn as we have advised.
And then adjust the two edges of the wound with stitches, and cure what is inside until it is healed.
And if you make an incision or a fissure, stitch that abscess with thread and match its appearance, and apply ointment to it.
And sometimes on the eyelid, let its edges be converted, then use the incision that we have said and stitch those places more artificially.
To cauterize with cantharides is done in this manner: And you convert the eyelid and split the figure that is inside according to what I have recounted; then, with art, make two cantharides or two thin sticks whose length be according to the length of the eyelid and their width a third of the width of the space. And you have incised at the extremities of some parts, where you have the threads.
Then apply a thin layer over what you have excised from the eyelid, and tightly bind the cantharides of each part, and leave it for a few days; as the constriction due to tight binding will cause death and necrosis, and it will fall off on its own.
And if it is delayed, then cut the threads, and promptly cure the wound while it is healing.
Therefore, when it is solidified, the eyelid is raised and the skin is not pricked.
And this is the form of two canes which you will make according to this form: and has neither more nor less in the length and width.
Capitol.xii.
For the elevation of painful skin flaps on the wound use an awl when the skin is tense.
When they are unnatural, hard, rough, and painful skins or flaps on the wound, for the operation there you should take a fine awl and place it in that fine fiber of ceda (a type of tree) and then adjust the ends of the fiber very subtly with small clamps in a delicate manner. And the length of the fibers should be the width of one palm.
And then you prepare another fine substance let it be brief, and use its extremities if you want.
And then place the patient's head in a slight tilt, and expose it to the sun so that your work is declared, for it is a subtle and delicate operation.
And then insert the needle into the incision of the eyelid, adjusting it with a device as needed, and let that penetrate deeply into the eyelid between the time you withdraw it from the natural skin.
And then pull the skin up and insert that into the incision, with the skin being one or two or three layers and no more.
And then pull your hand there until the skin is relaxed in the incision on the eyelid with the natural skin.
But if the incision is made with an alexative and the skin is not relaxed, pull the alexative to the edges leaving it on the flesh where in it will be relaxed from the wound.
And then in that place where you see the wound, there you will stitch the flesh, and sew each part tightly, and leave the stitches for two or three days, until the hair adheres to its place and grows over it good flesh.
And if the hair is shorter, there you adjust a longer piece of natural hair, and elevate it at that place, or let it grow over some space, and then you elevate that.
Chapter XIII.
Of the cure for herniation which occurs in the upper eyelid.
When there is herniation of the flesh, and it is a contraction of the eyelid that contracts towards the right or left side due to poor healing of a wound or section or cautery, it is called leporine. This herniation can be natural or accidental, caused by the consolidation of a wound or sections or cauteries, or resembling them in its malformation.
For the method of the operation, you should cut the consolidation and separate the eyelid margins. Place there a strip of linen between them, and tie those together until they heal.
And know that you should use the cure for those causes which dry up and constrict; for if you do this it will return worse than ever without any time to heal.
Use for those causes that mollify thus as with fenugreek, and apply to the affected area in water in which they are soaked and seed of flax, or ointment of lard, which be liquefied by some of the oils, and immerse the medicament in that, and cure with that.
And the treasure of your cure is that you perforate with anything not consolidated according to the form that it was at the beginning.
And this operation which we have said is nothing but some correction of hernias that do not return to the form of the area as they were before.
Capitol.xiv.
Of the cure of hernias which is done in the eyelid.
This hernia which is done in the eyelid, which is named vertdiary hernia; and it can be either natural or accidental.
More accidentally it is caused by a wound or a cut or a cautery or other similar causes.
And the way of operating on it is that you take a needle on which you make double thread, and place that in the flesh, and make it pass from the left lacrimal to the right lacrimal, so that the thread reaches the two ends of the flesh.
Then extend the flesh at the upper parts with the needle and stitch it with the needle, and incise with a broad blade. And therefore, if you return the shape of the eyelid as it should be, that is good; otherwise, take the ray and place it in the shape split, and with it convert the eyelid, and make the two fissures in the edge of the eyelid.
And let the ends of the two fissures be at two angles of the incision, which you have made where they converge, and form an angle between them so that when they meet, they form the shape of the eyelid.
And this figure is Greek letters: the lambda.
And then hold the flesh there according to the depth of the wound left by the sharp object, what we call the fleshy edge.
And then adjust the separated parts and close them with threads of wool; and then treat them with the medicines we have mentioned for softening and the plasters until they are healed.
And if you suture or cauterize, then make a flat incision on the skin of the eyelid as previously described. And then separate with the plaster between two lips as we have said.
In the conclusion of the discourse on the cure of suture when it is above or left over, let it run in the operation according to how it is prepared in the form of a suture, and that is in the form of various specks.
And the wise artisans at all times prepare ingeniously in any manner that is possible for them to return the figure to its natural form, or as close to it as possible, and the patient according to their convenience from the operation and the instruments in major dispositions.
Chapter XV.
Of the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
When this consolidation occurs in men, they attempt to secure the eyelid above by fixing it to the tarsus, and prohibit its ease of movement and its natural functions. Therefore, you should introduce a needle through the eyelid margin, let the eyelid, and elevate or extend it over the eye.
And then you incise the adhesion with a thin spatula, which should not be too sharp, having a small obtuse edge so that the patient is not disturbed by the operation, and remove the spatula without damaging the eye.
And let your incision excise the adhesion with ease, so that the eyelid returns to its natural form and all the adhesion is healed.
And then put salt water into the eye and wash with it; or use distilled water in which zinc has been dissolved.
And then separate between the eyelid and the sore of the eye, and place over the sore infused wool in honey album, and during the third day use conservative causes until it is healed.
Chapter XVI.
On the incision of the eyelid and the prominence of flesh of the lacrimal bone.
Know that the eyelid is of two kinds: one is nervous, resembling a thin hard cord; the other is non-nervous, resembling white congealed moisture. When you touch it, if it must be cut, it is divided, and the substance does not enter it.
And both species do not begin but from the major lacrimal bone, which gradually covers the eye and prevents both light and movement of the eye.
The way to act in the incision of the eyelid is that the patient places his head in a slight tilt, then opens the eyes and raises the eyelid with your hand. Then collect the eyelid substance with little duplication and extend it to the upper parts. And then take a needle and insert in it a hair of horse or bull or cow, or of similar, or of strong thread, or gradually double the end of the needle little by little and place that in the middle of the nail, and penetrate that with the needle, and seal the nail with glue; and extend that to the upper parts, and strip the skin of the nail which heals the pupil. And then you follow that with the hair into the heel of it.
And then you incise the raw flesh in the rim of the eyelid with a fine spatum or small forceps, and let the natural flesh of the eyelid remain so that by this incision it will not develop continuous flow of tears.
And sometimes the nail on the sole of the foot or with glue, as we have said, and then strip it with a lion's spatum, which is the form of that:
And be careful that with the spatum you do not touch the corneal membrane, and even if there is a rupture in it, and that the pupil is not punctured.
Near the incision make a small cut in the skin with a needle or knife made of steel, and leave that there for a day; then take care that which comes between it is healed.
And if the wound is not nervous and you cannot put the needle there, then moisten this kind of wound with medicines, and it will be healed in this way as described in the division.
And if you want to incise it, then open the wound of the patient and take fine powder of burnt frankincense according to this form: with fine subtlety. And if you see that it is rarified and condensed and impregnated in that space, then blow from your mouth into the wound made of steel or with cloth soaked in frankincense or salt, and plug the wound with another piece.
Then repeatedly perform the operation until everything from it is removed, otherwise if a suppuration occurs in the wound, then you leave it, and cure the beginning of the suppuration until it is healed.
And then iterate your operation over that area until it is healed.
The eminence of the tear duct, if noted for great injury, should be suspended with an ounce; and incise part of that, and do not complete the incision so that it does not cut off the flow of tears.
And then let the tear duct heal and keep it open until it is healed.
Chapter XVII.
On the incision of algazardenic and what arises from flesh attached to the wound.
In some wounds of the eye, new flesh grows and is pressed over the pupil, or comes close to or strengthens the eyelids, lifting them from the parts outside and adheres to the edge of the orbit.
More importantly, the operation is that the patient places their head in a tilted position; then open the wounds and collect all that flesh with appropriate incisions using forceps or tongs; and continue to incise the flesh until everything is finished with the scissors, and carefully keep the wound so as not to lose any part of your operation.
And let your incision be where you incise those or with a spatula which we have recommended in the incision of the elbow, or with small forceps from which is collected gesso according to the form it will take in this chapter.
So when your incision is completed and the entire flesh is cauterized, then fill the wound with salted honey, or sprinkle it with powdered substances resembling those of corrosive medicines, and place something over the wound externally like a plaster until an abscess is assured.
And if any cause of rigor and is softened by cauterization, and you fear an abscess from cauterization, then leave the wound open and cure that abscess with what will yield to that abscess, and repeatedly perform on that area during its healing, and similarly do in the flesh adjusted which you encounter in the wound of this kind.
Yet, however, you must ensure that all healing of the wound by natural means or by accidental means is allowed to proceed, using iron, and do not place your hand in any of these operations until you see that that limb is suffering from that operation.
Chapter XVIII.
From the collection of knowledge in the whole.
Knowledge pertains to veins that are swollen in the whole and you prohibit their operation, and they expand the whole for a length of days.
Therefore, at the beginning, you must consider whether the pain in which knowledge pertains is strong and if there is no other disease present that causes pain, then you collect that knowledge.
And you must command the patient to place his head in a tub of water, and then suspend those veins at one or two inches according to your discretion; and let that inch be of subtle double thickness according to this form.
or be two inches gradually in one piece according to this form.
And let those veins be collected with strong subtlety, in subtlety, and cleanse the ulcer hour by hour, while you observe that those veins are drawn from the whole and are reversed.
And guard thee that thou lead not the wound at the extremities of the spine; and if thy operation in midday before the sun, and be thou firm in thy operation that thou enter not save those veins.
And when you have completed, then thou distill in the wound vinegar or rue to cause what is rehumidified by the bile to dry.
But if this is not possible for thee in that hour, then thou plaster all with what yields relief to it, and let it be for a few days until the pain is subdued and an abscess secured.
And repeatedly work over it according to how the wound behaves until it is healed.
And this is the method for fistulae:
Capitol.xix.
On the reduction of deviations in the nose.
When you treat deviations in the nose with a cautery or with sharp burning medicine according to the narration of it and it does not heal, then do not engage in it but rather cut over the abscess to bring about its maturity, and extract all the humidity which is within it and let the pus be discharged from the bone.
And when the bone and veins within it are corrupted and blackened, then you treat it with an instrument of which this is the form:
And it is called a sharp knife, and it is made of iron, and its head is round, much like the handle of which it is made punctuated by the teeth of an awl or finely engraved by punctation (as in the form following).
And place it over the corrupted part of the bone, and then rotate it between the pincers, and press your hand gradually into the area until you know that the corruption is superficial.
And do this several times, and then restore the area caused by drying and constrictive treatments.
Then if the area is consolidated and there is good flesh hidden within and the wound is divided from the healthy tissue for 40 days, and it is not reinfected and does not become gangrenous and no accident occurs, then you know that it is healed.
And if not, then reduce the fracture to the shape of the nose, and according to this manner: you uncover the bone with iron or sharp medical instruments, and as the bone is uncovered, you take hold according to this form.
Let the end of the tool be triangular, and let the stem be thickened at the extremity in such a manner as you see.
And then place that [tool] on the bone, and let it be close to the lacrimal; extend your hand a little further, and then rotate your hand in the groove until the entire bone is penetrated, and that which feels the malady perceives air issuing from it when you place your hand there.
Then restore the place with medicinal astringents that dry up in the manner you have seen.
Then, when the flesh has dried and the place has become hardened, the matter which it was exuding to the exterior returns to its normal state, thus this is lighter for the malady.
Capitol.xx.
On the reduction of the prominence of the heel.
When the heel swells completely and there is no damage or diminution of the skin, then you should release the malady, and soon after, apply hot fomentations to the neck for six scarifications and draining; then place liniment on the heel made from acacia, aloe, garlic, and dragon's blood, and firmly apply the plaster to the heel with powder.
And the manner of powders is that you take cloths from the lion's tail, and each cloth be folded into four parts; and make of those tails.
And then place them one over the other according to the quantity that it has to be used. And then tightly bind them with a firm cloth; and repeatedly apply the suction cups with several incisions; and then place the suction cups and keep them tight for the day and night.
But if meantime the ligature becomes softened, then keep it tightly fastened.
And then keep the ligature tight for the day and night as we have said.
And if the swelling has already been reduced, that is good. Otherwise, then repeatedly apply the plaster with the powders and the binding and suction cups until it is healed.
Capitol.xxI.
On the incision of the prominence of the uveal tunic.
When there is disruption in the tunica uvea, and it is prominent, you must proceed to lift the eyelids as if with a degree of forceps, and this reveals the form of a man through this. If you wish to incise here, then the operation on it is as we have described, that you insert the needle into the cut of the uvea from one side to the other, and then place another needle in the part of the lacrimal gland which is double, and make the latter penetrate while leaving the first needle in its position; then incise the location of the double filament and lift the part of the uvea in a circle around the needle, and strengthen that movement.
Then remove the needle and place it over the heated wool infused with honey, letting the filament dry in the uvea.
Then apply heat to this to comfort it while the wound is healing.
Sometimes gather all the parts in a circle of cloth over the heat, adjust the prominence greatly, then perforate with a fine needle that comes from below the heat, allowing the humectant humor to flow, lowering the heat and inserting it soon.
And then strengthen as it is healed.
Chapter XXII.
On the cure of ulcers.
This illness called an ulcer is nothing but a wound that appears similar to water flowing down and is not the other type.
The method of treating it is to place the patient on a prepared and straight bench, then take the head in your hands at two parts and carefully bring it where you see the ulcer approaching the extremities, ensuring it dries up and does not descend, and keep the light nearby, so that the patient can see the causes as if seeing them.
And if it does not descend to the feet, you know that it is water.
And if the descent of the ulcer is not prepared as we have said, then place the patient's head between your hands and, closely, take a thin spatula and apply it to the gauze, sprinkling a little over the continuation of the conjunctiva onto the cornea (in the area marked), so that the ulcer dries up.
Then, as it is forgotten, when you distill into the vessel of water in which you have mixed honey or water in which you have already steeped fenugreek and honey.
And then treat the other causes until it is cured.
Chapter 22.
On the treatment of water descending from above.
We have already mentioned the species of water in the division and which is appropriate to puncture as we declared, and then proceed according to its health.
Then you must place the patient's legs on a bench and tie his feet to it securely.
And then place your left hand near the eyelid of the affected side; or with your right hand if the affected side is the right.
And then with your right hand take the flannel, if the side is left; or with your left hand, if the side is right.
And then place the extremity of the thumb near the crown for the size of the ray in the white of the eye from the lower lid, and then peel back the membrane with virtue and turn your hand at that.
And then penetrate into the white of the eye and feel that the membrane has already been reached because of the vision.
And note the size of the membrane's passage by pressing the measure of the space which is from the pupil to the edge of the black, which is the crown of the eye; for you will see the pupil through the vision of the eye by the clarity of the corneal tunica.
And then place the membrane in the location where the water is, and then pull it down a little bit, and again. Therefore, if the water descends quickly, then see the patient who is here under which his vision appears quickly, and the membrane in its eye.
And then rest for a moment; therefore, if the water has descended, then you proceed with another pull forward so that the membrane is not displaced.
And when it is drawn out and does not descend, then you extract the abscess with ease, and roll it a little with your hand at a time, and then dissolve a little of clear gemstone salt in water and wash the whole inside with that; and then stop up or plug the hole with infused wool in olive oil and egg white and tie it with this.
May we and those of our time stop it with olive oil.
And if the abscess does not yield to your hand due to its hardness — which is sometimes the case with those whose flesh is tough — then cut that part out using the instrument for the opening, and this is how the incision is made:
And there perforate that joint, and do not bring your hand too deep into the wound, but rather make a small incision for the abscess to come out.
And then introduce the abscess according to what we have said.
And you should complete your work, so prepare a suitable bed for the patient to sleep in, which should be made in a dark room where he lies on his back, and all movements should be prohibited.
And pause in his nature so that it may be aligned, and do not distort his head to the right or left side entirely.
And let the ligament be placed according to its disposition on the third day.
And then remove that one in the darker part and expose the sensitive sight, and make the eyes notice some causes, and then return the ligament on the seventh day.
And do not perform this during the hour of healing or soon after the infusion. And you should remove this so that the water may pass slightly due to its great and violent flow.
And if an abscess occurs, then you should remove the pus on or before the seventh day, and correct that with which the abscess yields.
And when you finish examining the eye, pause over its face for a while so that the vision of the patient may recover gradually, the one located in the darker part.
And then it should be gradually withdrawn while changing its position in their causes.
And know that in surgery it is not excusable for the apprentice to have a vision on some occasions, and then you should be attentive to the operation.
And now we have been informed of some of those which are in Artach, and some say that fire is made in Ayrac magnam perforated, upon which water is infused.
Yet, however, I have not seen anyone in our land who is perfect at this, nor is it mentioned in any of the ancient books; and it is possible that this is new.
And these are the forms of the species of magdaan so that he may know them:
And they should be made of leather or iron properly, and their ends should have this subtlety in the form of a triangle, with one end acute just like the other.
Capitol.xxiv.
Of the cure of flesh nothing in the nose.
When in the nose there arise various flesh growths from which arises some cause that is associated with a heavy mass or a polyp; this illness is called polypus and is similar to that mass represented. And the flesh is cancerous, dark in color; and from it arises flesh like a lion not of a dark color.
Therefore, in that which is among these lion-like flesh growths neither fraudulent nor cancerous, you should treat the illness by placing your hand between your hands and exposing it to the sun, fumigating the nostrils with it, and prick it with an onion in those flesh growths. Then extract it from the perforated parts, and carefully divide what you have grasped with a sharp thin instrument from that through which you can see that all the flesh has been reached; if any part remains due to some cause for which division is possible, then quickly use one of the fine instruments to facilitate its separation. If the patient complains of a wound or an acciden'ted abscess, then you place something over it that fits; if it is from malignant abscesses, then you cut and cauterize there where the blood has escaped and all cavities are exposed.
And then apply something warm in the nose near the incision either with oil or water. If the nose is already opened and of it there is a discharge into the palate, then you know that it is healed.
If the discharge does not penetrate as it should, then you know that inside there is no flesh but pus, and there are bones of the nose to which an incision has not been made.
Then when it is appropriate that you insert the finger of whom there is any lump, use nutmegs in between each finger, placing the quantity of a digit or less, and extract the illness and insert an extremity of the finger into the nose either by force or for another reason which is possible for him.
And once this has been done, he should inhale it into his nostrils through the channels, and sit on his stool; for too much laughter at this action makes children giggle in schools, and it is a light cause for those who wish to do so.
Then place the two ends of the cord, one end that passes over the nose and the other that loops under the nose, and then apply a flesh stitch at the nuts which are in the cord, doing this while you can feel that the flesh is against the nuts of the cord.
Then extract the cord, place a cloth in the nose near the end of the bleeding, and do this for three days or more until the salve consumes all that is rotten from the flesh.
Then, at the end of the treatment, place a lead catheter in the nose for several days until it is healed.
If you need to expedite the cure that dries up, use that one.
And this is the form of the instrument for pouring at the head which oils and medicines are distilled into the nostrils:
And make this of silver or gold, which is similar to a small open lamp, like a small cup, and the mouth similar.
And if you wish, make a closed tube like a cane, and the mouth of the instrument for pouring at the head should be flat and open; to this, attach a handle at the rear end, with which you can hold it when you heat oil or whatever you want from the fluids and causes that are suctible.
Chapter XXV.
From the roots to the extremities of the nose.
The roots are examined from the extremities of the nose, and are enlarged, fattened, and observed over several days as the swelling is noted.
And for this reason, you should examine it at the beginning of its appearance, and extend your examination to all of it. Then place your hand over the area or the cautery or burning medicine which was at that location.
But if its examination is delayed until it has enlarged, then consider whether it is hardened, dark in color, and of little sensation. In that case, do not touch it with iron, as it is an abscess; for enlarged roots that you examine are to be treated carefully regarding the area around which this abscess lies due to its great malignity on that part.
And if the abscess is due to a blow and not dark in color, and examination is possible throughout that area, then drain the illness and examine it without fear, and treat the area with what dries and constricts until it is healed.
Chapter 26.
For the suturing of the nose and lips when the continuity is dissolved by wound or resemblance.
Know that when there is a solution of continuity in one of these cartilages, you should not place much trust in that operation but rather in several skilled individuals.
Therefore, when you have to deal with any of these cases, consider whether it is a fresh wound with its own exudate, and then adjust the two edges of the wound with sutures, and proceed to cure it until it is healed.
And if the edges of dissolution of continuity are already separated, and any one of them is made healthy, then you should expose each part of its hidden edge until it exudes exudate. Then adjust the two edges with sutures and strengthen them, and sprinkle dragon's blood powder and threefold wine on them. Place a piece of diafinicon plaster or another consolidated plaster over the powder, and let this paste remain for two to three days. Then remove it and change the plaster, allowing it to remain until the threads dissolve by themselves. Finally, continue to treat with ointment until it is healed.
The method of suturing is that you add the solution of continuity or use needles as we have recommended in abdominal suture, or add the solution of continuity with thread as you are made to know.
Chapter XXVII.
For the extraction of those causes that occur in the two lips in the internal parts.
Small spots appear in the internal parts of their lips and there develop hard abscesses resembling fat globules; some are small and others are larger.
Therefore, thoroughly examine each of the lips and openings around those hard lumps from all sides, and after the incision, fill the area with three layers of cloth to strengthen the wound, then wash it with vinegar and treat the area with water that is astringent until it heals.
Chapter XXVIII.
For the incision of flesh embedded in the gums.
Great care in applying the cauterization to the gum tightly fitting the cheek, which the ancients called albulus, then carefully remove that one on which you have applied it with force and scrape off its scab, and let the healthy blood flow or the pus.
Then place yourself over the area after treating it three times or another styptic or excitatory powder.
And if that flesh returns, then scrape it again secondarily, and cauterize it, for after the cauterization it will not return.
Capitol.xxix.
On the reason for teeth pain.
When on the surface of the teeth from the inner parts and those from the outer parts, as well as between the gums, there are sharp, rough edges, some times they are black and are caused by yellow or green substances that affect the gum through this corruption, causing the teeth to become loose.
And therefore make sure you cut the patient between your thighs and place the head in a towel, and rinse the teeth where these edges and similar causes appear, ensuring that none of them break for any reason, and do this with the blackness and the yellowness as well as with others that have been transformed.
Therefore, if what is at stake is in those of the beginning of the reasoning, that is good; and otherwise, then you iterate the reasoning on those the next day and the second and the third until it comes to the final statement in what you want.
And know that the teeth have required roots resected in various ways and of different figures according to how your operation is prepared. And so, there is the razor with which the tooth is resected from the inside part, and another razor with which it is cut between the teeth according to other forms. These forms of razors you should prepare, which you will often see:
Capitol.xxx.
For the extraction of teeth.
Cure the tooth thoroughly with skill and take your time in the entire extraction, for no cause can substitute the actual removal when it is performed, for the substance is升华 during the process of extracting it.
When the patient is forced to open that tooth, you must be certain which tooth is painful, for many times the pain descends from the tooth and seems to be in a healthy one, and you extract that one and soon after the pain ceases once the diseased and painful tooth is removed, for we have seen this through the operations of barbers.
Therefore, you must be certain which is the painful tooth, and knowing this well, when you incise around the base of the tooth where any virtue lies, once it is dissolved from the root of the tooth in the gums, then remove that area or use fine forceps gradually, as those concussions cease.
And then apply water to it strongly to maintain good speech or strong fracture, and place the head of the patient between your palms so that you hold them well without causing harm, and then extract the tooth in a proper manner so as not to break it, nor give greater pain to the patient.
And if it is not forced open, then take one of those instruments, and place it on the patient from all sides with ease and effort to facilitate its removal as is done at the beginning.
If the tooth is broken or corroded, then you must cover that gap with cloth and tie it at the end of a fine thread to prevent it from breaking during your operation on that area.
And you must incise precisely on the circuit of all parts of the gum and preserve its strength so that you do not break that part of it, but return to the soreness for the malice that is greater than the first pain of it.
And beware that you do not do what some ignorant barbers do in their incisions and audacity in the removal of hair; for they do not administer what we have recommended. For gray hairs often bring great sicknesses upon men which are harder to break than gray hairs, and the causes of their errors all, or some of those, or that you extract from certain bones of the jaw as gray hairs have testified.
And after the removal of it, wash the mouth with vinegar or water mixed with salt.
And if there are fluxes of pus for this reason, as gray hairs often do, then take some ginger and sprinkle it over the wound. If this does not help, cauterize.
The shape of the forceps and the fine tongs with which the tooth is extracted should be long at the beginning, short and thick, so that they do not bend when those you need to work with them.
And they should be like this: when wide for thick manipulation, then they do not bend, being short and long.
And they should be made of Indian iron, long and straight at the ends. At the ends of these, there should be teeth such that one enters the other and are strongly fixed by downward construction, and sometimes the ends of these are in the shape of a bird's bill which is called a ciconia, like gloves, and they are of strong construction.
Capitol. xxxi.
For the extraction of teeth and the removal of bones from broken jaws.
When you need to extract a tooth that is broken due to some cause, then you should place pressure on the area steadily for one or two days until the area becomes softened; and then insert forceps or tongs whose ends are shaped like the bill of a bird called ciconia or glove, the shape of the forceps:
The extremities of their limbs are made inside thus as a hammer or awl.
And if it does not obey to your attempt with these forceps or tongs, then you must cut over the crack and spread all the flesh, and insert the instrument which is called atali, that is a small lever whose shape is this:
And briefly, make the extremity large inside and small outside so that it is not trapped.
So if by this the crack is sufficiently opened, that is good; and if not, help yourself with these other instruments of which these are the forms: the form of the first instrument is triangular extremity in which there is some thickness:
The form of the second instrument is triangular with a finer extremity.
And now help yourself with this instrument having two ramps, of which this is the form approximately as follows: And with other instruments which are used for the rasp of teeth; when youth is made with this instrument which resembles a large claw, and this is the form:
From the triangular end of the swollen or curved extremity, which is some kind of swelling, and not buried deeply so that it can be compressed.
And another thing that the toothpicking instruments resemble other instruments.
But the skilled and subtle artisans find suitable tools for themselves according to what the operation and various ailments signify; for there are ailments to which the ancients would not have said nor used a proper instrument due to their diverse forms.
But if the bone of the jaw or other bones in the mouth are compressed, or if puncturing is necessary, then place weight over that area at its appropriate location. For the instruments and forceps we have mentioned in the extraction of the roots of the teeth, use the hand gesture described as follows:
And let it be some small swelling little by little, and press or hold it with your hand so that it does not escape or get pushed into the bone before it is completely pierced; then restore the area with appropriate medicines.
If in the bone there is a small abscess, then drain that abscess and cure it when it is healed.
Capitol. xxxii.
Of the treatment of prominent teeth over others.
When the teeth are prominent not according to their natural shape and size, especially when they protrude in women, particularly in elderly women; therefore consider: if a tooth is close to another tooth and it is impossible to form a socket or line around it, then extract that tooth; but if it is not connected to another tooth, then cut out that tooth using this instrument, which resembles the head of a pig and is made of very sharp Indian steel.
And your incision should be on the spot where you are to extract that tooth due to its hardness, and it should not be too close to another tooth.
And if the tooth is prominent and worn down, then file that using a file of Indian steel, which has this shape:
And let it be all of iron and the margin sharpened; and let it be of small points like a file on which needles are made, on which the tooth is filed little by little over days for ease, so that there is not another sharp tooth. And draw that one at the end, and cut that one with a few razors.
And if the tooth is such that a part of it is broken and the tongue lides against it, then you must file that area where the sharp edge of that portion is stopped and smoothed, so that the tongue does not cut nor the word be corrupted.
Capitol. xxxiii.
For the restoration of decayed teeth with gold or silver foil.
When you encounter front teeth that have been damaged by concussion or extraction, and the patient cannot strengthen what remains, and you have treated this with astringent medicines without successful results, then for those that are strong use gold foil rather than silver, because silver turns black and may leak over a few days, but gold does not change in any way.
And let the saliva be in such subtlety and coarseness according to the quantity that can enter between the teeth; and the form of the process is that you take the saliva and place twice its amount between two healthy teeth, and soon there will be two tortuosities of the saliva between two molars, or if one or spots, until the tissue reaches the healthy tooth of the other part. And then push the tissue into the part from which you started, and strengthen your hand with facility and knowledge so that it is not a molar.
And let your compression be such that you retain the roots of the teeth so they do not escape.
And then divide the excess roots of the saliva with forceps or tweezers, and add them to any location with your hand, and convert those and the hidden ones between the healthy tooth and the molar, so as not to injure the tongue. And then let it be stretched thus as in Roman style.
If it is slipped or broken, strengthen it or them by another ligature in such manner throughout its time.
This is the form of the teeth and the figure of the extraction of two healthy teeth and two decayed ones, as you see these ligatures:
And when one returns a tooth or two to their socket in its proper place, and they have grown back as we have described, and are retained.
And it is not done by anyone but skilled artisans.
And sometimes it is fitting for certain causes of cow bones, and it is made from them as the form of a tooth, and is placed in the place where the tooth failed, and is strengthened as we have said, and remains and serves for a long time.
Capitol.xxxiv.
On the incision of the ligament where it is in the language and prohibit speech.
This ligament which leaves the tongue in some passages is either natural, as one is born with it, or accidental and due to a wound which has already healed.
The operation is to open the mouth of the patient, their current head in the lying position; elevate their tongue, and then incise that ligament nerve according to the width between which the tongue can be freed from its attachment.
But if there is any hardness or tenacity in that area, and this is due to the healing of a wound, then you cut once and incise that ligament according to the width at which you have already incised the ligament and dissolved the knot.
And make sure that no fissure is made in the perilobe of the flesh and that you incise here to allow the flow of blood.
And then wash the incision with vinegar or with wine or with a salty water; and then place the tongue to drain; if necessary, let the patient keep the tongue out at night to prevent it from healing again.
But if there is a flux of blood, place a vitriolic salve on the area; but if the blood flows, then cauterize the area with a pointed cautery suitable for this. And then apply that cure to other causes until the patient is healed.
Chapter XXXV.
For the extraction of a ranula, I use the tongue.
At times, an abscess on the tongue occurs, resembling a small boil and prohibiting the tongue from its natural operation; and greatly enlarges when it fills the mouth.
And the operation for this is to open the patient's mouth wide facing the sun and examine the abscess.
And if you see it of a brown or black color, hard, and the patient does not feel any sensation in it, then do not touch that area.
And if it turns white, which indicates humidity, then place the lancet in it, and incise that with a sharp blade, and divide all parts; and if blood flows during your operation, then apply vitriolic salve above, so as to restrain the blood.
And then return to your work after you have brought him to completion, after he has been washed with vinegar and salt; and care for that with the other cure when it shall be healed.
Chapter XXXVI.
On the extraction of abscesses from both ears and those that arise in the jaw and other abscesses.
When I find in the jaw pain, these are glands which are closely arranged like ears, which occur externally and are named as both ears. When you treat them as we said in the division and they do not heal, then consider if the abscess is hard, of dusky color, with little sensation, then do not touch it with a knife.
And if it is of a red color and the root is large, then do not touch that with a knife to avoid bleeding; first let it mature, and then either you will incise it, or it will break on its own.
And if it is of white color, soft, and the root is thin, then this should be incised.
And in the operation for this, you consider before your operation whether the abscess has already rested after being cauterized and is completely healed or if it has diminished by some reduction; then you make an incision in front of the sun, with his head under your care, and hold his mouth open, and the servant holding between his hands the patient's tongue, takes the noblest instrument of which this is the form:
And let it be made of silver or copper, and let it be thin like a刀片。
And when you press there on the tongue and show it to your assistant the abscess, and prick over that with quick force, then take a hot iron and place it in the embers, and pull it out to the sides as far as you can. And another thing you pull from the tunics, and then incise that with the instrument of which this is the form:
And another thing you pull from the tunics, and then incise that with the instrument of which this is the form: and it is similar to forceps, except that the ends of it are curved, so that the opening of each of those is in the opposite direction, sharp points, which should be made of iron and well tempered.
If this instrument is not at hand, then incise that space from which this form comes: it should be sharp on one side, but not on the other.
And since you have incised one wound, incise the other according to this manner of incision, and near the incision let the sore drain with water.
If there is a flow of blood, let the sore drain with water from the decoction of scurf grass or of hollyhock leaves, and resemble it to that of the styptic causes until the flow of blood is restrained, and cure that as it heals.
And sometimes abscesses appear in the throat or others in the two ears, and incise those according to what I say and have been mentioned in the incision of two wounds equally.
And I had already treated a woman with an abscess which was located in her throat, which abscess had a dark color, caused little sensation, and had already closed the throat. The woman breathed freely, and food and water intake had been prohibited, and she was close to death if more days passed without water.
The abscess had already pusced so much that there were months distance between what remained through two incisions.
Then I cut it incisively and grasped one of its parts, and pulled that out, drawing the larger portion with it, then proceeded to incise the other one, and fixed the mouth of the wound, and secured its tongue, and finally grasped the part in the abscess.
Then I incised a large part of it, and from it only a little blood was flowing. Then the woman's recovery was complete, and she began to drink water soon, and then eat food. Therefore, I continued incising that abscess for a long time, and an abscess would form in its place, which kept forming as long as that one was prolonged.
Then I treated her wound and cauterized it, following the method of addition; then I walked around and did not know what God had done to that nearby.
Chapter XXXV.
Of the incision of the heel when it is inverted.
When mucus drains to the uvula and it is inverted and long, then it is named perpendicular; if it is in the part large and round, then it is called a bubble.
When it is cured as we have said in the division, and you do not find your cure effective, and accordingly you often see that the abscess cautery has already dried up and become thin, then cut where the swelling is round; if it is along its length, and it bleeds, of a dusky color or black, and is not more than an inch, then you must beware of cutting into it, for there is fear of the disease.
And when you see it according to the manner that I have said of its whiteness and length, then cut out the disease and press the tongue with the instrument of which describes its form and then fix the probe in the new opening, and pull that down and incise that with one of the two instruments, which is called the incision of two tongues.
And make sure you do not incise there but only what is adjusted over the natural term of addition, for if you incise more, you will destroy its proper function.
And near the incision, use what we have described in the incision of two breasts, and cure that within which it is healed.
If the patient was frightened by the incision, make sure you use something to calm him during the cautery, and the manner of the cautery in him is nothing but with sharp water. You should place the head of the patient's malaute [likely a misspelling or archaic term for "leg"] in your hand, and then press the tongue of the patient against the instrument as we have said. Take from the water which we mentioned in the capitol of cautery, and apply it to that cause alive, and place it not thin nor subtle, but fill the concavity of the instrument of which this is the form:
Let the external part of his cavity in which the medicine is placed be as the cavity of a ray's hook, and place the instrument on the medicine over the vula, and the patient should hold it with his hand so that saliva or mucus from his mouth flows through the inner medicine, so that it does not descend from any cause onto his scrotum and that it descends there.
And then place your hand on the medicine, and express it over the uvula for half an hour between each time you let it become darkened and soothed by the bite of the medicine.
And if you wish, take a wick and wrap it around the end of the rod, submerge the wick in the medicine, insert the rod with the wick into a tube such that the wick adheres to the tube, and do this as many times as you need for the cauterization of the uvula, then let it dry and fall off in about three or four days.
And if you need to apply the medicine again, apply it, and after cauterization, cleanse the circuit of the uvula with a wet wick, modify what is in the circuit of the uvula from the medicine, and wash it with water, and treat externally with poultices, and internally with remedies until it is healed.
And this method of treatment is both safe and long-lasting without fear.
Sometimes the uvula is cured with what is finer than a cautery and incision, which is treated by subfumigation in this manner: take calamus, hyssop, origanum, rue, scikados arabicus, camomile, grind them and prepare as if from herbs, and adjust all those causes or some of them into one ointment, and be submerged in vinegar and boil; and let the ointment be well mixed with good plaster, and in the middle of the ointment place a wick, on which is placed an instrument filled with oil according to this manner; let it be made of silver or brass.
And let the extremity be inserted in the mouth of the patient so that the vapor rises to the uvula over the throat, so that the uvula may be suffocated.
And then it repeatedly passes over those places that are dry, and guard that you do not perform this cure at the beginning of the formation of abscesses, for it would too tightly constrict the abscess. You should not do this, but declare the abscess by cautery instead.
But if you do not have this instrument at hand, then take a cane and place a cork at the end of it, so that the opening of the patient's anus is obstructed, for the cork prevents the vapor from burning the opening.
And this cure is good for health.
Chapter XXXVIII.
On the extraction of thorns and what adheres in the wound and other causes.
Spots or thorns that adhere in the wound or from a thorn puncture or some other cause.
Then remove what is obvious from those, upon which the view falls. But first press the tongue with an instrument in front of the light, so that you may be made aware of what is in the wound.
And what is not obvious and hidden in the wound, make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach, because if the cause attached to the wound is strong, it will be alleviated by vomiting; or have the patient swallow a piece of nap or of raisin of flax or a bite of dry bread; or take a piece of sponge dried with wine, bind it strongly with pitch, and make the patient swallow that, because it will reach the place where the thorns are located and be extracted. And take an eel and bind it with honey, place it inside the meat and gradually extract it; or take a pear and insert it gradually from the outside into the wound.
And if none of these methods work as we have said, then use a lead instrument in this form:
And let it be as thick as a small finger, and at the end of it have a cavity which you insert into his throat with ease.
And let him lift his head up, and guard that the touch of his bone in the throat reaches his body or the one that covers the bone or spine, or that the doctor places his hand there.
And instead, let the patient himself insert honey, by his knowledge of the place of the cause and cover it below, and pull his hand towards the instrument, all this according to the quantity which is prepared for him before it is inserted.
Capitol.xxxix.
From the extraction of gouty blood associated with gout.
When the gouty blood is treated with what we have said in the division of the treatment with medicines and you do not agree, consider during the sunbath in the gout attack that you may have misunderstood the language of the physician with the instrument we have recommended.
So if you see the gouty blood, extract it either with a small needle or with fine, thin instruments.
And if it is not possible to extract it there, then take a concave cannula and insert it into the gout attack of the patient. Place a burning iron in the concavity of the cannula, and do this as many times as necessary (until the gouty blood is dead and comes out) and keep the patient without water for the whole day.
And then take a sponge full of water, open its mouth at that spot, and wash the area with it; and do not swallow any of it, but keep applying the water for about an hour with your hand, as the gouty blood will quickly come out upon contact with the water.
If it is not already treated as we have advised, then fumigate the sore part with cucumber or saffron through the instrument we have recommended in the fumigation of the uvula.
Do this, so that it may be effective.
And another way of performing the fumigation is to take a vessel in which are burning coals and cover the vessel with a cloth in the middle of which there is a hole, and place the end of the instrument in that hole; then proceed with the subfumigation; and have the sore part place its mouth at the end of the cannula, and close its mouth so that the subfumigation is not forgotten until you can see that the subfumigation has reached the uvula, for the uvula will soon fall.
And if it does not heal, then you repeat the subfumigation several times, and forbid the sore part to drink, eat salty foods and others, and do not allow water, and thus it is necessary that this regimen be forgotten.
And this is the form of the instrument used to treat gout when it is seen; and it is similar to tongs as you see, except that there is some curvature in it. And it is placed on the gout, and the extremity of it is similar to the beak of a stork, which is curved, and is filed with a file, so that when any cause is grasped, it does not slip.
Capitol.xl.
In which the main discourse on boils and their sections is found.
Boils are special kinds of swellings, occurring in various ways, as remembered, for each one in this treatise.
And they are diverse in their perforation and section through two methods. The one method is according to the nature of the boils themselves; and by this, we grasp the humors.
And the second method is near the places where bodily accidents occur. For a boil that occurs on the head is different from a boil that occurs in the buttocks; and a boil that occurs in a fleshly area is different from a boil that occurs at a joint; and each has its own judgment through operation.
And for abscesses some of them should be allowed to drain naturally rather than punctured until the healing process matures in those or their complement.
And for other abscesses, some of them should be drained when they are ripe, and not matured according to their complement. Thus, for abscesses that are near joints, the nature of such an abscess is prolonged into the area where you can see it in the circuit of the joint; or if the joint substance is corrupted by the decay of ligaments or nerves of that joint, it may cause contraction of that limb; or it is near a main member, and if you delay the puncturing of it until it matures, it will affect the main member; or it is near the anus, therefore drain what is not ripe there; and do not drain it raw due to poor digestion, but one near the anus, so that it does not cause prolapse and extend inside the anal parts, forming a fistula, or done in a term where it has not been healed. And you must know the time for puncturing the abscess, and this is when it is ripe.
And know that it is matured when there is a decrease in pain and fever, and the reduction of swelling and pulse, and the subsidence of the head of the abscess, and other signs.
And know that when you have identified the puncture point below the location of the abscess and discharge coming from the wound, proceed.
And the puncture should be along the length of the flesh or body, if the abscesses are in the thigh or foot, and at the location of the lacertae, the cords of the nerves, the arches; and, finally, in all locations where there is no reflection; for in those that are reflective, use puncture according to that member.
When the abscess is in a fleshly location, it is better to delay the puncture until the digestion of the pus is confirmed according to custom; as we have said. For if you puncture before this, you will prolong the course of the disease and increase its tenacity, as well as deepen the lesion.
More abscesses should be punctured according to the width of the flesh or body if necessary, or according to that from which the limb derives.
And ensure that you administer a small puncture in large abscesses, and a large and wide or multiple sections according to the diversity of the size of the abscesses.
And in other cases of abscesses, ensure that the string is closed and tied when it is done so as if it were a bandage for wounds like those from dubelis and buboes.
And of those that are incised with a section having three angles; and in which it is incised as the shape of a mirtle leaf, as with abscesses of anglers.
And of these, there are those in which a round section and a lunar section are administered, and similar to those.
More for those where none is done so, as with superficial abscesses of lions, ensure that you puncture them with a superficial puncture, or flat one only.
And when the abscess is large and has already collected healthy pus, you should puncture it and not hesitate to extract all the foul matter in that hour; having extracted one part, then raise the abscess on another day, and extracting a larger part, and repeatedly do this until it is completely drained.
And especially if the patient is a man of virile virtue, or a woman in labor, or a small child, or an old person in decline, because the animal spirit resolves into the exit of the healthy fluid, and greatly alleviates the illness, and you may openly do this.
Take great care with this chapter, and when you puncture the abscess in which you are making the incision, ensure that you cleanse the wounds and consider whether the wound of the abscess is small, or a flat section, then administer the simples of either li or coto antic; if the abscess is large, and the cracks of the incision are deep, then you should place your hand in each part until they heal together.
And if in the abscess you have divided a part of the cord or have concave it in the circuit, then you should close it with old linen or thread made of li fabric, as when you have drawn out bandages or roots, to retain their moisture; strengthen it on the third day; and proceed with it and cure it as what is appropriate from ointments until it is healed.
But if you happen to have a flow of blood during the time of your operation, when you administer water mixed and wine in which soak a cloth, then place that over the location of the blood flow many times.
But if the flow of blood persists, then you must administer treatment and cure using powders which I have recommended in several places of this our book and division.
But if it is in the time of winter, and the location of the abscess is near many nerves, then you must infuse powders in wine and oil with a cautery, and place those over the locations.
And if it is in the summer, and the locations are fleshy, then you must place powders soaked in water and oil or in wine and oil, all of which should be infused together by the third day, as we have said, and then you must incise the abscess, cleanse it, and administer to it what is appropriate for it to receive until it is healed.
And this is what is necessary concerning the knowledge of the cure of abscesses generally, but according to the way of distinction, I have already said all about the abscess in how the cure of it is conducted specifically by chapters.
Capitol forty.
Of abscesses whose veins are in the scalp.
In the scalp's veins, small abscesses appear, and they are of nodules which contain tunics that are formed; the substances within them are spots.
And they have pus, and those that contain moisture resembling lime. And those that contain moisture resembling dust, similar to it; and those that are hardened, hard.
And in the section of all, and in the extraction of those, there is no fear, just as you should not fear during the extraction of those, as it does not cause arterial resistance.
And the operation for the section of those is that you expel them with an instrument in the form which is nearby, which is called entremes, until you know it contains moisture.
And if what it contains is moisture, then divide it in the section according to its length by a superficial section in this form:
And begin in the section of the line B. between the line G. When the humidity is evacuated, then scratch that skin which contains that humidity, and leave none of that cause to it, for many times returns if there remains any cause from that.
And then immerse it in Egyptian ointment, if present, and otherwise in water and salt; then apply it to the wound and leave it there for another day, for with it you will dissolve all that is rotten of that skin.
And then repeatedly apply it to that part with Egyptian ointment gently if you need it, until you are confident that there is no rotten cause of that skin; then cure the wound with ointment once it is healed.
And if there is an abscess containing fatty nodes, then incise it according to this form: In the section having a cruciform shape, and make an incision between two sides of the section, and drain it completely, and exert your virtue in extracting the tunica which contains it.
But if your artery makes resistance, then do what I recounted to you first.
And similarly perform the incision and cure of the abscessed area as we have said; the incision over an abscessed area should be lighter, because it has little bleeding and little humidity.
And sometimes the abscesses in the head of some people have little moisture; the cause of which is that I could not incise an abscess on a old woman's head and scraped the abscess as if it were a hard, rough, white stone that could not be broken, and if any did percuss it, it would burst.
But in other abscesses in the head, this is not covered in this chapter. As with abscesses that come to the heads of children, you should incise behind the ears; but the incision for all of these should be a superficial one.
And place the incision for those lower parts below such that it alleviates the body of the disease to the lower parts.
And then attend to what needs to be done for the sake of the patient's cure.
Chapter XLII.
Of the section on scrofulas which occur in the neck.
Moles or swellings often occur in these abscesses in the neck, in the armpits, and in the groin; and sometimes they occur in other parts of the body.
And those that occur in the neck, and the moles that are generated within them, and all scrofula of these is filled with its own membrane. Just as in the nodes and abscesses of the head, as we have recounted.
The species of these scrofulas are moles. Some of them are lumpy, some contain moisture, and some are malignant, which do not respond to cure.
Therefore, in that one which you find in good condition in the Tocament, where the color of what is manifest is similar to the color of the skin, and is palpable throughout the body, and is not attached to the nerves of the neck, nor to the veins, nor to the arteries, and is not painful, cut that one with a superficial incision from above to below along the line of G. to the line of B., and scrape it out completely, extending the edges of the skin of the neck outward or outward in small flaps if you need those, just as we said in the abscesses of the head, and extract it little by little.
And it is more careful that the vein or nerve not be injured.
And let the incision not be too deep, so that it does not touch with your hand during the incision, or to relieve the patient, and do not incise what is not necessary to incise; for if you incised a vein or artery and prohibited yourself from further operation, then pause in the wound with vitriol trioxid or other powders which are fluxes of salt, strengthen the wound, and leave that within which is at rest the acuteness of the apostema and make the wound mollified and begin to suppurate. When the blood is incised.
Then return to your operation once it is completed.
And then inquire if there are any other small scrofulas, and if so, incise those and cleanse them.
And if there is a large vein in the region of the scrofula, cover it so that you do not incise that scrofula from its region. Before you fold that linen cloth strongly and let it fall so that it covers by itself.
And then fill the wound with old cloth which you have already soaked in Egyptian ointment, and then dress it.
And if you incise the scrofula entirely, then you must adjust the two edges of the wound and stitch it tightly so that no superfluous fluid escapes.
But if you see that there is excessive exudate due to the size of the scrofula, then you must understand to incise the edge of it, remove that part, and administer stitches as described.
And for those scrofulas containing humidity, make a superficial perforation at the place where it appears, and pause the perforation of what is dry beneath the body, as we have said.
And then administer the perforation, apply ointment and similar substances to it, so that it corrupts what is decaying from corruption. And when you see the wound already healed, then apply the ointment of flesh-generating medicine while it is healing.
Chapter XXXIII.
Of the section of the ulcer from the abscess due to cold.
The ancients performed this section in the ulcer from the abscess, and no one in our land has ever seen it done.
And this is the inscription of the speech of those.
More in men with sensitivity, a cavity should be avoided where the extraction of the ulcer is performed, for if this is not done properly, all the veins and major vessels in the thigh may be damaged.
In those who have abscesses on the face or throat or ears, when the illness is not in the brain, it is advisable to use the section of the ulcer to avoid the loss caused by perforation.
Then cut when we want to do so, that is to say, incise the epilhom by leaving three or four small circles of the epilhom's rings, or in the breadth between two rings for quantity, that the section be circular, not in the cartilage, and this place is suitable for sectioning, which is devoid of flesh and its blood vessels are high.
And if the doctor fears this, cut when you extend the needle's thread and then open the thread before it reaches the canal, but more avoid the blood vessels if you see any cause.
And then incise the cicatrix as we have directed; and it is meant by the section of the canal by the flame which is of that tissue and of its disordered part and by the separation of the voice.
And let the wound remain open for some time.
And when the time is delayed in which the perforation is feared, add two layers of the thread of the wound, and sew that single layer to the cartilage.
And then administer medicines that cause flesh to grow where it is missing.
And Alcubasis says that the main point of the discourse we have recounted is simply that you see some of these abscesses have already formed the wound in the thigh, and the thigh has come into death, and its artery has been severed. Some go on to incise the epiglottis so that the patient can breathe over the place of the wound with a single breath, and thus be saved from death.
And for this, I order to leave the wound open until the malignity of the illness is consumed; and the malignity of the illness lasts for three days; and then, when that time comes, I order to close the wound and treat it until it is healed.
And what I have seen with my own eyes is that a servant took a knife and placed it on her thigh, incising a part of the femoral vein of the thigh. I was called to treat this condition, and I gathered the blood as it flows from the dead, revealed the wound, and let the bleeding continue which was coming from the small wound in the thigh.
Then I confess that she had not incised a vein nor a guidagei, and the wind from the plague, and cured her within which it was healed.
And she did not suffer any harm nor even in her voice, and soon returned to her normal state of health.
And now I say that in the section of the circumcision there is no fear.
Capitol. xliv.
On the section about the abscess that occurs on the cheek outside, and is called a cheek hernia.
This abscess, known as a cheek hernia, is a large abscess according to the color of the body, and it is common in women.
And it occurs in two ways: either natural or accidental.
And naturally, it is not easy to cure.
And the accidental occurs in two ways: one is similar to fatty nodes, and the other way is similar to an abscess formed by the obstruction of an artery, and in that case, there is fear. And do not assume that it is done for him as a favor but only for those who are small. And thou probe that and investigate that which he says, and if thou findest a semblance of fatty nodes, and it is not suspended from any of the veins, then thou incisedst that thus as the nodes, and extractst that from the skin and bursicleth; and if not, then thou thoroughly examine his entire being, and place care on the area for cure until it be healed.
Capitol. xlv.
Of the section on types of fatty nodes.
Of the various types of nodes, and I have already mentioned all the types of nodes in the division.
And note that I enumerate thus the difference between a node and an abscess so as to avoid doubt.
Thus I say that in an abscess there is warmth and fever and severe pains until the boiling of the excess subsides; and when the putrefaction is complete, then the fever, pain, and heat cease.
But if there is no heat nor fever nor pain, and concerning that leaf of the lion which is in his own skin.
And it is according to the color of the body, and its beginning is like a stain and is made thus, whether greater or smaller, and they are according to two species: either fatty and contain humidity, and the colors of the humidity are spots, as I said in the division.
Therefore, when you arrive at the cure of a node, express that and inquire about that from its beginning in the tissue which is called intromes, according to its form that will appear in the capitol which is nearby.
And this is the method of inquiry for abscesses and all nodes, and it is that you take this tissue and insert it in the place most humid which you find in the abscess, and you will mix the threads thereof gradually into it until you know that the tissue has penetrated the core.
Then place your hand near the measure of the size of the abscess, and then extract the intromes and consider what is situated in the residue of it.
And if the running moisture of any color is neglected, then you incise according to a superficial section as I said in the other apothecamas.
And if there is no moisture from the intrusion, then you know it is greasy.
And make a superficial section over it in the shape of a cross according to this form: As I taught you, suspend that with a thread, and carefully excise the tumor from all sides with ease, and keep the skin or sac, if possible, over it and remove the healthy tissue at the node.
But if it breaks during the operation, it is not possible to remove that healthy tissue. Instead, crush it with your fingers and then carefully remove it in pieces so that it does not rupture for any reason.
But if it ruptures for any reason, whether a little or too much, the node will return according to its nature.
And if you see that it ruptures any small part, then fill the wound with some sharp and strong corrosive powders, strengthen the wound, and place your hand over the area where the abscess is located. Then cure the rest of the wound as it heals.
And if it is not great, then you close the two lips of it and cure that which is inside.
And if the vein is pulsatile on the opposite side, or non-pulsatile, then tie and fill the area with a slice of garlic and let it stay for two days or three until the swelling subsides and the boiling of the blood has paused; and then return to incise what is ruptured from the node.
Capitol. xlvi.
Of the forms of instruments necessary in section and perforation.
Of those, these are the forms of the introduced instruments, and they are of three species: some are large, and others are medium, and others are small.
The form of the large introduced instrument is this:
The form of the small introduced instrument is this:
Make them of iron, of bronze, of fallen extremities properly, so that the instrument speeds in the abscesses.
These are the forms of the experienced physicians, and they are named albed and one of them is called berid.
These are made from three spices, of which one is major, another minor, and the last a small amount.
The form of the experienced [spice], of it:
The form of the experienced [spice] minor, of it:
The form of the experienced small, of it:
It is necessary that they be for those abscesses, ulcers, fistulas, and swellings, so that they are located between the bones and other causes.
And they are made round, large, like large needles to which sutures are attached, and they are made of citron wood, or of iron, or of silver. The best are when they are made of citron wood.
And they perform the experiences with black plum seeds, which are said to be effective when fistulas in their cavities are opened and reflected by their lightness upon those reflections.
And from three species, some are long, and others medium, and others short, according to the width of the fistula and its stricture.
Forma of the experiment with lead:
Form of the experienced smith:
Form of the experienced apprentice smith:
The forms of the tumors are of special knots, some of which are simple, having only one curvature, and they are of three kinds: large, few, and small.
And they have knots in their bodies, and they are of three kinds.
And those having two curvatures are knots, and they are of three kinds.
And they have three curvatures, and they are of three kinds.
And all these are necessary in their place.
Form of the few simple knots, form of them:
Form of an uncia large having two curves: Form of an uncia half-gallon having two curves: Form of an uncia half-pint having two curves:
Form of an uncia large having three curves:
Form of an uncia half-gallon having three curves:
And these are the forms of the knives with which the joints and abscesses are cut and incised, and they are of three species: one of them is large, half-gallon, and half-pint.
Form of the large knife:
Form of the medium knife:
Forma de scapel pauc:
The ends of those on which section is made are acute and the others are non-acute, and they are not paused in such manner, but so that it may be done judiciously in the excoriation of the nodes to avoid incision of vein or nerve, and for those it may be healed and there is a little tranquility due to the cauterization which removes the inflammation.
And these are the forms of agues, and they are of three species: great, moderate, and small, as you will see.
They are made of flax and resemble rays from which alcohol is extracted.
And in the outer end on the side, make points with a hidden spatula and let it flow to the inner and outer parts as you desire, as you can see.
The forms of spasms, which are hidden among the fingers, do not perceive the maladies, and are of three species: great, medium, and few. These are the forms of those:
The forms of vertiginous which involve the interruption of the flow of blood, and are of three species: great, medium, and few; the forms of it:
They are like yellow citrus fruits, round of some length, and very fine.
And you should know that these species of blisters are great, medium, and few, because by those that interrupt the flow of blood quickly in necessity, and then when originally there was no medicine.
But do not use those to interrupt the flow of blood in all parts of the body, and use them only in fleshy areas, such as on the soles of the feet and on the thighs, and on the armpits, and on the breasts, and on the belly, and on the swellings, and similar fleshy blisters.
And sometimes those instruments are made small and resemble curved scissors according to this form; by which the blood is divided when it is done by flебotomy, or through incision of a vein or artery.
And sometimes they are made round according to this form:
Capitol. xlvi.
Of the treatment of men's testicles which are gathered from women.
Sometimes the testicles of certain men swell when they begin to become flaccid during sleep, and then the testicles swell, and the testicles of women and female goats also swell.
And for those who have this, cut the lunar section according to this form, between line B and line G, then remove the tissue completely, fill the wound with red medicine, suture the two lips of the wound, and treat it until it heals.
If the nipple inclines to the sides and is softened by its size as in women, then it should be cut into two lobes such that each part contains the other, with the larger line containing the smaller according to this form of line .B. and line .G. Then scrape the gland which is between the two labia of the wound, remove the pus, and administer what we have said about suturing and powders as necessary in the cure until it is healed.
And if you do not completely incise what needs to be incised due to the patient's restlessness and flow of pus, then you must fill the wound with a cloth soaked in corrosive ointment and leave it until the ointment eats away the necrotic tissue, and then cure it until it is healed.
Capitol. xlviii.
Of the incision of abscesses where pus is allowed to flow out.
Such abscesses where pus is allowed to flow out are of the species of scrofulous, hard swellings, which contain a core that is removed.
And of those that contain humidity; those that contain humidity should be incised according to lunar section as shown in this figure: from the line of G to the line of B. And when all that is within the apostema of the sore has been evacuated, then close it carefully and leave it for another day.
And then let it dry and be treated with a suitable ointment until it heals.
And if the apostema of the nodules or scrophulas is present, then incise there as we have said in the section on scrophulas.
And if the plague is extended to such an extent that it causes gangrene, then apply a cautery to it as we have previously mentioned.
Capitol XLIX.
Of the section on apostema that occurs due to an arrow or vein.
When an arrow breaks the artery and the chain (arrow) is consolidated over it, then dark spots occur as an apostema. And the signs by which it can be known that inflammation and apostema are due to the artery or vein: for when you press on the apostema with hot irons, you feel a stridor in it.
And that which is due to a vein is round in appearance on the body.
And this section deals with an abscess, which is often erroneous, especially in those located on the armpits, in the inguinal regions, in the neck, and in other parts of the body; and if it is large, one must ensure that its cure is not delayed, and that which is near the extremities or the head should be particularly avoided.
More about that which is due to the dilation of the arterial orifice, cut open in the leg section along its length; then carefully incise near the artery and remove the tunics where it will be exposed.
Then carefully place a needle there and make it penetrate into the other side, and strengthen the artery with double thread in two places — which cause you to stitch in the extraction of two arteries, which are located in the temples.
Then cauterize the area between the threads with hot iron so that the wound in it is sealed, and the abscess is dissolved.
And then administer treatment in which the liniments are prepared so that when they are applied, they heal; and cure that with appropriate ointments as they should be.
And if it is an abscess due to venous congestion, then you should have your hand on that which is possible of the abscess with the cord, and insert the needle at the place you have held with your hand, making it penetrate; and extract from there what is on the other side, and tie the abscess well with good bandage as I have said in the vine leaf bandage in two parts along the two ends of the thread.
But if you fear that you will extract the thread, then insert the honey at the needle and completely remove the abscess by making the initial incision of the needle again, and strengthen your threads in four places.
Then dry the abscess in its middle location so that when you sit on it, you make an incision in the excess of the cord, and leave what is soaked.
And then place on it the powder you have soaked in wine and oil, and proceed with the treatment which is made with cloths and ointments until it is healed.
Capitalize the area of the abscess that has occurred due to nerve inflammation.
Similarly, when an abscess occurs in an artery or a vein, and similarly an abscess occurs in the nerves when it happens upon their percussion or occurs due to superfluous work, and by similar signs.
And it is most prevalent in the areas of the helpers or the thigh, or in any area where the joints are loose.
And it is a severe abscess, and its color resembles that of the rest of the body, and it is located in the largest parts of his body. When stretched due to vehemence, the pain is felt as a stupor in it.
And it is not an abscess aggregated in the front of the body, and therefore you loosen the bandage, and he is loose in all parts and does not go to the front or back parts.
Therefore, that which affects the joints must not be considered inflamed with iron, for strong heat will induce contraction.
May it be that which is in the head or on the forehead accompanied by foam. May it be an abscess small, then you have it on the strong parts and cut out that part with forceps.
And if it is large, then you suspend it with forceps, and excise that part, and dress it with a dressing; and sew the wound and cure it until it is healed.
Capitulum.
Of the section on abscesses that occur in the cheek affecting the abdomen.
Some men have experienced swelling in the abdomens of those affected and in other parts of their bodies, where the tumors are called funguals due to their similarity to fungi. The tumor itself is subtle, but the head of it is large; and the lips of these are convoluted, both for those that are small and for those that are a magnified swelling.
And I have already seen one, and in its abdomen there were two tumors which resembled funguses, and there was no difference between those whites, of slight reason.
And the lips were inverted and split, and moisture flowed from that constantly.
So I incised those and drew out the fluid from one foot, which had eighteen inches, and the other, which had six inches.
And in the operation of their incision, consider whether the gout is moist, and the color of the tumor is white, moist, of subtle reason; then incise it with a spatula, and burn it in your presence, for visible spots should be removed from its section thoroughly; and if you see the pus, burn that.
And if you see the gout painful and fearsome, avoid incising with a knife; rather, when you take liquid lead recently made, strengthen that tumor, the manner of which is as we have said; leave it for two days.
And then adjust in the constriction of the lead wire; therefore, do not cease strengthening the large lead repeatedly during the process, until it is cut and falls by itself.
But if the lead is of thick material, then in its incision there is some cause for fear and alarm, especially in that which is in the abdomen.
But it is possible that you incise the majority of it, and then cauterize it so that it does not return.
And then cure that which is within as the wound heals.
And be careful that you do not incise lead which is of dusky color, has little sensation, and is soft to the touch, for such lead is cancerous.
And I will come to recall another disease hereby.
Capitol. lii.
On the cure of an umbilical hernia.
Eminence of the umbilicus is caused by various reasons; or by fissures in the chifac which is above the belly, and leaves out of it the skin or intestine according to what is said in other ruptures; or by an abscess which flows from a vein or artery as previously stated, or by congestion narrowed in it.
If it is by fissures in the chifac and by swelling of the skin, then the color of the abscess resembles the color of the body; and the pain is severe, and often appears in various locations. If it is by the protrusion of the intestine, then the location of that area differs from what we have mentioned, with more varied severity. And when you press on that area, the pain diminishes and soon returns. The pain in that region is strong, and you should use a bath and vigorous work to introduce relief.
If it is due to humidity, then the pain is severe and does not diminish when you press on it with your hand, nor is it constricted or aggravated.
And if it is due to an abscess, then this sign appears in the abscess turning blackish and declining.
But if it is due to flesh alone, then it is a severe, large, and hard abscess, and has been formed in a certain quantity.
But if it is due to obesity, then the touch of it is like a lion.
And the operation on it is that you consider whether the prominence of the navel is due to arterial blockage, or venous, or due to obesity; then you must be forbidden from treating it, for there is fear and terror as you have been taught in the chapter where I said about abscesses due to arteries and veins.
And if the prominence of the navel is due to the intestine or the hernia, then you must command the patient to hold their breath, and stand extended; then carefully touch around the entire navel, and command them to stand between your hands on their sides, and carefully spread spatum (a type of medicated ointment) around the area you have touched with the toucher. And extend the size of the abscess upwards by about an inch or two; and place a strongstring or cord tightly around the navel in the circuit of the location you have marked.
And then extend the apex of the abscess over the membrane and insert your finger in that space to find the intestine; and if you have palpated it and protected it with the membrane, then you extract it quickly and push the intestine into the internal parts of the abdomen.
And if you have palpated the membrane, then take it with forceps; and incise its superfluous parts.
But if it is contrary to your artery or vein, then circumvent that spot, and then return to your operation; and take two needles and put them into those two strong threads and insert two needles in the circuit you have made around the abscess in the manner of a cross, making them penetrate; and then strengthen the abscess in four parts over the needles.
And if you want, hold the needles and let the area extend and drop by itself; or incise that when it becomes tender and can be cut, and then treat that with ointments until it heals.
And if the prominence of the navel is fleshless or due to moisture, then you must drain what you find in its cavity as we have said before, and treat the abscess or moisture which you find there, and then cure that area.
Capitol liiii.
Of the cure of the crank.
We have already said, in the division, about kinds of crank and in what manner they are treated with medicines, and that it is crucial in the treatment that it not become ulcerated; and we have said how a crank generated during the treatment should be handled.
And the ancients said that some cranks can be in a place where their eradication is possible, just as with a crank in the mammary glands or in the thigh, or similar to those parts of the body allocated for extraction, especially when they are beginning small.
But when it is old and hard, do not attempt to drain it, for I cannot heal such an ulcer nor have I seen another, nor has it been treated in this way.
And the operation on them is when it is laid out as we have said, that you precede and leave the patient and purge of black bile several times, and then drain it, if found to be clearly evident.
And prepare the patient for the preparation in which the operation is located, and proceed with the incisions that lead to it; and depress all around with the probe so that it can be thoroughly examined without damaging any part of it. And let the blood flow, and do not staunch it lightly, and squeeze the areas, and wipe away the thick blood with your hand or an instrument at your disposal.
But if you find it contrary to let the thick blood flow from incising a vein or an artery, then cauterize that area once the flow of blood has ceased, and treat it with the other treatment until it is healed.
Capitol. liv.
Of the treatment of hydrocele.
We have already discussed in the division of the topic the species of water dropsy, and the signs of each species, as well as the treatment of them with medicines.
And that which is cured by iron is none other than the species of asthma alone, and it is not approximated by iron to the species of pleurisy nor to the species of heart failure, for that is fatal.
And when you have treated this species of pleurisy with medicines and find that your treatment is not effective, consider that if the patient has already gained weakness or another illness such as dropsy in their coughing or abdominal condition similar to those, then do not treat them with iron, for there is a fear concerning this.
But if you find the patient has an excess condition, and in them there is no other illness but dropsy alone, neither child nor old person, then the method of the operation for this is that you lift the patient between your hands, and place your hand near their abdomen to express the fluid from their body, pushing the water towards the lower part of the body, and then take a spinal syphon according to this form:
It is of two sharp parts long, with acute extremities like a spear; yet, it must be in the latter somewhat brief step by step, so that during the operation you do not pass into the intestine, and let it be damaged.
And then consider if the generation of dropsy is from the intestines, for when you reach the section you should detach it from the navel by the quantity of three digits to the sides leaving, on its right over the pubis.
Yet if the generation of dropsy is from kidney disease, then your section should be to the left of the navel by three digits.
And if the generation of it is from the spleen, then your section should be on the right.
And do not place your section on the side where the pain is felt, lest the superfluities flow to that location.
And then puncture the instrument completely through the cord, and insert it into the section, raise your hand with a spear between the cord and the sponge, and you draw out that part; if the quantity is about one thumb or elbow.
And then puncture the abscess so that the pus reaches the desired location, and this is the place of the water. And then extract that and insert an instrument of this form: And it is similar to a fine silver cannula; it is made of silver or gold or brass, on which at the lower part there is a small hole, and along its sides are three holes: two from one side and one from the other side; and the end is incised like a pen in style, as you see:
And at the end of the instrument above is a ring, so that when the instrument reaches the water, it is easily recognized, therefore evacuates a small quantity of water in about a minute; for if you evacuate more than can fit in the time, the patient may quickly die due to resolution of his animal spirit, or an accident may occur as death approaches.
But evacuate according to the quantity of the virtue of the fluid and according to how the signs of the patient's condition, from the pulse and the quality of the fluid, signify to you.
And then extract the instrument, and drain the water which causes it as soon as it is retained by the cord which draws it up to the surface from which you have perforated it.
And then repeat the instrument on another day if the patient tolerates it, and drain a small quantity of water, and do this for several days with caution, and be careful not to become wet from the water but only slightly.
But if you fear for the patient, and let a large quantity of water remain, then cure that with burial in sandy earth, and washing in running water, and in the sun, wait for a long time; and cure that with desiccative medicines until it is healed.
And cauterize on the stomach, and the bile and the liver near the drainage of the water, as I have recounted in what was previously mentioned.
Capitol.lv.
For the cure of children who are born with the urethral openings not perforated.
Some times one of the children passes through the mother's womb and the opening of her mixture is not perforated (or it is taken straight or is not in its place).
So hurry to make an opening in it as soon as it is born with a subtle sharp tool according to this form:
Then place a thin lead stylus and close it up, and let it be for three days or four.
And when he wants to urinate, let him void; then return it.
And if you do not place the lead, it is possible that the urine which falls on the area will not let this close.
But the one that you take out should be straightened and treated with a lead stylus, as we have said, for many days before it is enlarged.
But those in which it is taken out of its place, as said, the cause is due to those, the one that is born during labor should be pulled by the end of the head of the vagina so that it cannot urinate from the inside parts; while lifting the vagina with his hand above the parts above. This is not a generation issue, because the sperm cannot reach the mother according to its straight path, and this is an ailment that lasts.
And the method of the operation is that the patient lies on his back, and then extend the head of the penis with your left hand with strong traction, and incise the head of the head of the penis at the place of periculum with a sharp blade, as if it were an incision of a feather, or any part you do not cut out, so that the vein may come forth resembling the head of the penis and be drawn downward to the middle location.
And watch that in your operation for the flow of sand, if you see any spots accidentally occur; pause there and keep the sand open, and treat the wound thoroughly until it is healed.
Capitol.lix.
Of the white substance which occurs on the prepuce, head of the penis, and due to corruption, blackening, and adherence of the prepuce to the head of the penis.
Spots appear on this white substance on the penis and form an elevated layer of flesh.
And of those two, one is malignant and the other is non-malignant.
And of the non-malignant one, hang it on a thin thread and cut through that in which that entire monstrosity lies; then place your hand over it to submerge it in Egyptian ointment; afterward, treat it with diafinicon until it is healed.
And if the ulcer is malignant, of a white color, then you should apply a cautery near its incision and around it.
But if the ulcer is on the foreskin of the head of the penis in an uncircumcised man, and one part of the ulcer is inside the foreskin and another part is outside, then you should remove the part that is inside at the beginning, before it becomes consolidated; and afterward, treat the part outside, for when you treat both together, it is not assured that the foreskin will not be torn.
And we have also considered accidents in the genitals and in the blackened foreskin, which are withering and corrupted. Then you should reduce all that is already darkening and about to腐烂或已经腐烂；然后你应该将这一切减至其根部，并在其上涂抹蜂蜜，它是由新鲜大黄粉、三个研磨和筛过的错误组成的。
And then cure that as in another treatment when it is healthy.
And if there is a flow of blood, then administer a lunar cautery according to this form:
A lunar cautery is used in two positions together, either for a flow of blood or during the plague when it has broken out.
And if the head of the abscess is corroded and destroyed entirely in an hour, then you should introduce a lead cannula into the meat of the prepuce so that the gouty urine passes through it.
In the adhesion of the prepuce where the head of the abscess is (and this adhesion occurs only in that from which the prepuce arises, and upon it circumcision is not required; when such adhesion occurs due to the plague or an apostema), you should excoriate with a blunt knife while the plaster is dissolving and remove the head of the abscess completely.
And if it is difficult to excoriate them thoroughly, then you should excoriate with a blunt knife some part of the head of the abscess and of the prepuce, for when the prepuce is thin and light, it can be punctured slightly due to its thinness.
And then separate between the prepuce and the head of the penis a thin thread, which is already moistened in the moist cloth to prevent other folds from adhering.
And then apply the styptic firmly after it has consolidated.
Capitol.lvii.
On the purification of children and the treatment of what occurs to those who have been circumcised.
Circumcision is not a solution for continuitas in the same way as other afflictions: however, since it is of our operation and our will, and those of others are properly in children, it is necessary that we assign to it the best operation and the most gentle path to avoid harm.
Therefore, it is said that the ancients did not use circumcision in any of their free men, for they do not use it in their laws, and it is only because we have acquired this knowledge through experience that they often use circumcision and purification with a knife and torch; and they use lint with honey and incision with ungual.
And I have already tried all these methods and cannot find a better modification with scissors, or with resin and vinegar in the modification like anointing, for you will see that the cord persists above, for the cord of the foreskin is attached to two tunics, and relaxes the inner one, and it is forced to another incision and certain pain. And in the circumcision which is done by incision, and is digital, of which cobblers use, it is not secure the incision at the end of the male member, for it often enters into the wound.
In the operation with anointing, you must use iron and corrupt your operation. And the cord of the child is short by nature, and often does not need to be cut in such a manner that there is no necessity for modification, and I have seen it.
But concerning the modification that is done with scissors and resin and vinegar, its effectiveness, I have experienced it personally, for the scissors are of proportional incision, for which the sharpness above is thus as the sharpness below; and therefore when you press your hand proportionally on two sharps, and cut according to a comparison in one time; and it is made compression of the vinegar in a figure containing the cord of the foreskin from all parts, upon which no error can occur.
And the manner of the first operation is that you make the child lie mostly if it is among those who understand a little, that you do not do anything but tie the faeces in its bowels only, and let it remain in the other day.
And then make that child happy in every way that is possible for what receives its intelligence. And then place that child among your knees preparedly, and do not be more than a hundred steps away; and hide the scissors in your hand or hold them behind your back so the child does not see those or any other of the instruments.
And then place your hand in the child's groin and blow into the anus, and push that forward so it raises the head of the penis, and then modify that which is added to it due to deafness.
The shape of the forceps after modification, this is the form:
If the fingers are not trimmed at the tips and the others are trimmed, let the stem of the key form the handle, and let the length of the two curved parts be as long as that of two equal-sized handles.
More importantly, the error in modification is that if you inadvertently remove the intrinsic tendon completely or partially, you must perform an incision.
Therefore, ensure that you extend the one from your hour on the front of the incision site and make the incision according to equality.
And if you cannot hold it with your finger, then extract it with forceps and make the incision.
But if they have passed three days and remain what is swollen due to the inguinal abscess, then you let it be until the abscess is lanced with a cautery, and excoriate that part for facilitation, and incise that according to how you are prepared.
And guard the head of the swelling, for that is where it will not be.
And therefore cure that part where the wound from the powder consolidates, which we have described in the treatise on powders.
And if it is incised beyond measure, and you obey the rules above, this will not harm it.
And therefore cure that part as we have said until it is healed.
Capitol. lviii.
On the treatment of retained urine in the bladder.
Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by an obstruction due to a stone or a hardened sore, or pus or flesh, and resembles those we have said about the methods of treatment in the division.
And if what we have said is not dissolved, strongly apply the cause to the patient, then give him a surgical extraction using an instrument which is called a scissor, of which this is the form: It should be made of silver and should be very thin, like a long feather quill in thickness resembling half a palm's length, with a fine point at the end.
And the method of urination for this is that you take the string folded and tie it at the end with good knotting; and insert the ends of the string into the part left by the scissor. If any excess of the wool is necessary, cut it off with scissors, but firmly insert it into the tube with vigor. Then tightly draw the scissor closed and cover it with honey.
And make a cut in the patient's side, and pour urine from his bladder and testicle with olive oil and vinegar.
And then insert the probe easily until it reaches the opening of the testicle; and then fold the testicle upwards at its root; and then push the probe inside until it reaches the bladder; and then push that part towards the wound so that it reaches the cause of the disease, and if this is not done in this order, but the meat in which there is a tortuosity.
And then slowly withdraw the probe with wool, for urine dries the wool.
And then remove that and use urine for the cure, and use the probe continuously until the bladder and patient are relieved.
Capitol.lix.
Of the quality of cleansing the bladder with enemas and using similar instruments that are appropriate for this.
When an ulcer or apostema occurs in the bladder, or a sore is gangrenous there, or it is constricted by edema, and you want to distill waters and medicines into that area, then make an instrument which is called clampcedra, and this is its form:
so that in the extremity of it is closed, so it is clamped. And in that there are three cuts: two from one side, thus crossed.
At the beginning it is concave, in which that which is pushed is located, and its quantity according to how it fills that space, its addition, within which when any cause is drawn by the humidities, it is drawn, and when it is expelled, that which remains is also drawn, and when it is expelled for a long time, naphta is placed in the battles of sea on the clampcedra.
So, in order to prevent humidities in the bladder, insert the extremity of the clampcedra into the humidity, and draw from there that which is pushed to the sides above, for the humidity is drawn into the cavity of the clampcedra.
And then insert the end of the cedar stick into the urethra as we advised in the circumcision; and then push the moisture away as you push, for that moisture will reach the bladder quickly, and the disease will settle there.
The form of the subtle cristerry in which the bladder is cristerrized, and that is the form:
And it should be made of silver or tin, of which the head should resemble a small feather, and place the wick inside cotton.
And then take a bladder of mule, place in it the moisture you want to cristerrize in the bladder, and tie it tightly with double thread made of flax, and heat that moisture over the fire.
And then insert the end of the cristerry into the urethra.
And then strengthen your hand on the bladder with the moisture in a downward structure so that the disease centers where that moisture has reached the bladder.
If you do not have a bladder present, then take a piece of parchment and make from that circle; perforate it completely round; then insert strong thread through all those stitches, as they are twisted; then add the circle so that it is added alsofatur, after which you place in that what you want from the humidities, and oil and waters.
And then you tie that with the instrument and do so with it as you did with the bladder, and repeatedly move your hand within where the humidity will reach the bladder.
Capitol.lx.
Of the extraction of kidney stones.
We have already mentioned in the division the species of kidney stones and their cure with medicines, as well as the difference between stones generated in the kidneys and those generated in the bladder, and the signs of each.
And we have mentioned the kidney stones for which major surgery and sectioning operations are performed.
And the stone generated in the bladder properly is that which is inserted in the bladder.
And I am now narrating that matter in this exposition and abbreviation.
Therefore, say that the stone generated in the bladder mostly goes to children; and the signs of it are that the urine excreted from the bladder resembles water in its subtlety, and appears in that sand; and gout rubs its genitals, with veiled patches, and is often dressed; and as for this, one feels pain in the buttocks instead of those.
And this is the healing of children within which they have reached fourteen years; and it is a difficult cure in old age. More in the young, it occurs through that which is between them.
And of that from which the stone is greater and the cure is easier; And if it is small, it is contrary to that.
Therefore, when we arrive at the cure of that, begin with the modification of gout by applying a christeri, which extracts through all the aperture which is in his intestines; for that aperture sometimes prohibits the formation of the stone and facilitates its inquiry.
And then place the patient on their feet and stretch and bend them slightly so that the sole descends to the neck of the bladder, or swells in some places.
And then place the prepared cushion under your hands, and let the patient's things be placed by another, so that the bladder is made to slope towards the parts left.
And then apply that and all that remedy.
So if you feel the sole in the space, then quickly apply heat to it.
And if you do not feel the sole with your touch, then check that you anoint it with oil from the third finger of your left hand, if the patient is a child, or the thumb if the patient is an adult, and insert that into its anus. And apply heat to the sole while touching it with your finger. And gradually insert that into the neck of the bladder.
And then press upon that area as you have said, and expel that to the external parts. Look for the location from which it came.
And command the minister to press the bladder with his hand; and command another minister to extend the genitals to the upper parts, and with his other hand retract the foreskin which is over the genitals, at the part where the incision is made.
And then insert a spatula; this is the form of it: And cut in it what is between the anus and the genitals, not in the middle location, in front of the left testicle; and let the incision be on that stone as you said it is in the anus, and make a transverse section, so that the incision outward is wide and inward narrow according to the quantity that flowed from the stone is possible, and no larger, for we will grasp with our hand the part you said is in the anus the stone should have the incision, and it is formed as a hole.
And be aware that from the foot there is some angle and margins, because the insertion of it becomes difficult for this.
And of that which seems like a lion's claw, and is round, and an easy insertion is made of it.
And if that which has angles and margins, adjust in the fissure.
And if it is not thus pierced out, then you must either probe it or strengthen it with a gesture decently, the extremity of which should be thus like a file on which you strengthen the foot, and do not evade from it; or that you insert a delicate instrument under its curved extremity.
But if you cannot do this, then you enlarge the wound a little, and if you see a flow of blood, incise it strongly with vitriol trioxide.
But if the foot has more than one, then at the beginning you push your hand to the mouth of the bladder, and nearby incise it; and nearby push a little nearby there; similarly do if its spots are more than two.
And if the stone is very large, it is ignorance on your part to insert such a large instrument, for you will encounter one of two causes with the patient: either death or bring about a continuous difficulty in urination, which is why the place is not completely consolidated.
Administer the expulsion of the stone when it is inside so that it may be expelled, or use forceps in the fracture of the bone to extract it from the wound.
So when you have completed your operation, fill the wound with slices of aloe and dragon's blood, and strengthen it. And place it over that soaked cloth in oil and wine, or in infused oil and water, so that the abscess may yield.
Then raise the patient's leg above the side of the bed, and do not remove the bandage on the third day.
And when you have removed it, wet the area with water and some oil, and then treat it with ointment containing diafinicon and ointment containing diabazic acid until it is healed.
If in the wound you encounter an abscess that is hard and corrosive, and it appears as if the blood is frozen in the bladder, and because of this the urination is forbidden (and this is known by the passage of blood through urine), then insert your said instrument into the wound and extract that blood, for if Roman fever is provoked it can cause corruption of the bladder and its putrefaction.
And then wash the wound with warm water and salt, and oppose all species, using what you deem conducive to the cure while it is healing.
And mark the hours for the entire cure that you will apply to both thighs and administer the medicines which are placed over the area.
And if the stone is small and is in the meat of the penis, and urine flow is prohibited, then cure it by applying what I have recommended before reaching the section; for too many applications of this treatment are accused of causing dryness. Now I will describe this: you should use a metal drill, which is the form of which:
from a triangular excised piece, sharp, inserted in the stump.
And then take honey, and tie it around the vagina, placing the pear there so that it does not return to the bladder.
And then insert the iron into the vagina, perforating easily where the perforator will reach that pear. And you rotate the perforator with your hand in that pear little by little, and you complete the perforation where you will make the other part penetrate; for urine is quickly released.
And then press your hand on what is left of the pear from the perforation in the vagina, for that is cracked, and the hole is filled with urine, and the patient is cured.
But if this cure is not effective for any reason that prevents it, then tie honey around the pear, and another piece of honey above the pear. And then sew over the pear in that vagina with two sutures. And then extract it. And then remove the ligament and modify the ganglion, which is done in the area.
And there is no need for silk ligament on the kidney stone, but to prevent it from returning to the bladder. The other ligament above only serves this purpose, for when the bile is removed near the edge of the kidney, the calculus returns to its place and causes the disease.
And for this reason, when you remove the bile above, you must lift the calculus to the parts above, or it will return and cause the disease again as we have said.
Capitol. lxix.
On the extraction of kidney stones in women.
Kidney stones in women are not frequently generated.
Yet if a kidney stone does occur in one of them, the cure is difficult, and it is prohibited by too many methods.
One of them is that a strong woman should be a virgin.
And the second is that you cannot find a good woman who can describe whether she has been with the doctor when she is chaste, or whether she is one of the women having husbands.
The third is that you cannot find a good woman who knows this art, especially the operation more so.
And the fourth is that the location of the section above the urinary tract in women is far from the location of the urinary tract, so you need a general section, and there is fear.
But if necessity prompts you to do this, then seek out an old woman who is well versed, and rarely is one found.
But if you are deprived of that, then seek an old and subtle woman, or present an experienced mature woman who is skilled in dealing with women, or a woman who has some part of this art.
Therefore, have her present, and command her to do everything you will instruct her to do, from the inquiry about the urinary tract to the beginning; for this reason, she should check if the woman is a virgin, and then insert her finger into the woman's anus to feel for the urinary tract.
Then if you find it, cut it out and leave his said part, and then command him to lie down over it.
But if it is not a vein, then command the midwife to insert his said part into the abdomen of the patient and inquire about the stone, while placing his left hand on the bladder, and keep her there with good compression.
Then if you find it, gradually wash that from the orifice of the bladder to the parts, leaving some of its virtue so that it reaches the root of the thigh.
And then lie down over that application of the cloth, placing the root of the thigh from any part where it is stopped and center the stone in that part, so that his said part is not damaged by the stone, cut him off.
And the incision should be small at the beginning; then insert the probe over that section, and if it feels the stone, then adjust the incision according to the quantity he knows the stone will be removed from there.
And know that the grains of pepper are small: some are white and grainy, and lion and pungent, and long and round, and having ridges.
And know what kinds of spices are in it so that you may signify about what you want.
And if you want to induce a flow of blood, apply vitriol tincture to the area for one hour until the blood is absorbed, and then return to your operation after the pepper has been removed.
And make sure to prepare all the instruments you mentioned in the extraction of pepper from men, so that you can be assisted by them during your operation.
And if you want to induce a flow of blood, and know that the expulsion of blood is from the artery that is incised, then apply powder to the area and strengthen it with powder and allow the blood to descend; and do not extract the pepper, for strong bleeding will kill the patient. And then cure the wound.
When the heat of the blood has passed after several days, and the place is healed, then you return to your operation while the stone is forgotten.
Chapter LXII.
On the section about inguinal hernia.
Hernia aquoea is nothing but the accumulation of humidity in the white fibrous tissue which is left when the scrotal sac containing the testicles is compromised, and it is called fibrous tissue.
And sometimes it is in the own scrotal tissue which nature prepares at the part of the testicles, until it is cooked and then another testicle remains; and this is the scrotal sac which we have said, and it is not this but a tumor.
The generation of this hernia is due to weakness which occurs in the testicles, as this material infiltrates into them. Sometimes it occurs due to a blow struck on the testicles.
And this humidity having colored spots, may be yellowish or bloody or reddish, or black and floury, or white watery, and this is the most common.
And the signs by which it is known where this water addition is located: if in the white cell which we have said, then the abscess is round, slightly tapering in length like an egg, and the genetial region appears, for the humidity contains that from all parts.
And if the humidity is in the proper parenchyma, then the abscess is round, departing from the egg shape, and for this reason, one estimates that another egg shape is present.
And if the humidity is between the root of the genitival cells and the white cell, then cut away the scab.
And to know the color of the humidity, you should probe the color of the humidity in the abscess through a slit made where the form is preceded; and according to what happens in the mark of the slit, judge what is inside it.
Then when we come to the treatment of it, you should command the patient to bleed if this is within your capability, and sometimes let his body rest.
And then place them face down on some soft surface for a little while, and leave their body covered with the blanket.
And then set yourself on the left side of the patient, and command the minister to stand on the right side of the patient, who extends his arm from one side to the other side at the knee of the thigh and the part of the flank.
And then take a spatula flat and split the knee of the thigh in the middle lengthwise near the patella.
And the section should be made according to the correct method, equally distant from the line where you should divide the skin of the thigh, extending until it reaches the white fat.
And excise that, and observe, and guard it for this: do not let your incision go beyond that; your excision should be suspended at the uppermost and subtlely examine it during the incision according to the quantity possible.
And then pierce the fat full of water with a large puncture, and extract all the water.
And then separate between the two lips of the section with clips, and extend the clamp above the parts; and do not touch the chain of the genitalia, and incise the clamp in that manner which is possible to you. And incise that completely or in depths, especially its thin edge, for if you do not carefully examine the incision, there is no guarantee that the fluid will not return.
But if the humor processes from outside of its chain at the time of your operation, when you have completed the section of the clamp, return inside that, and properly adjust the two lips of the genitalia's chain with sutures, and properly treat that as well as the other wounds until it is healed.
And if you find the humor corrupted by another illness, then ligate the vessels which are above the suspensory, extract the humor, and properly treat that as we have said.
But if the fluid is present in two parts, then you know that there are two hernias; therefore, incise that part according to how you did in the other equally; and if it is evident to you that it is an operation, then you perform it.
And then you clean the wound, interposing in the sections soaked wool in oil or rubbed oil; and place another wool over which you have soaked in wine and oil, and extend that over two genii et mirabilis of the belly; and place above cloths folded and powders, and lay those above bran according to this form:
And then place two cloths and fill them with well-packed wool according to this likeness; and make the ends which are pressed firmly or with wet wool, and attach them to the structure in the girdle of the pants, one end holding behind the waist, and the other attached at the back of the knee, and the two ends over the thighs leave free and the other two ends over the ankles, and all the structure be fastened in the girdle of the pants.
And sometimes this hernia is artificially treated with a cautery instead of an incision using iron; you take a thin surgical cautery and incise at the cord of the genii, and then ignite it according to what we have recommended so that when the white chaff containing the water is discovered, then you use the cautery in this form: and it resembles Greek letters.
And then puncture that blister, and ignite within it to expel all the moisture.
And then enlarge the blister with scissors, and incise it with scissors, and excoriate it with a finely ignited cautery; and cut away that portion as much as is possible in order to eradicate it completely; and keep away the heat so that the fire does not touch it.
And know that this operation is safer and more distant from the flow of blood, and better than an operation with sectioning.
But if you find it contrary to perform an abscess incision or cautery at the time of sectioning or cautery, or during the flow of blood, then cure as the contrary condition dictates, and apply the treatment that is appropriate according to what is said.
But if the patient is faint, and does not expect the second operation due to its horror, then administer a puncture as I advise; and when you are certain, from what we have said about the signs, that that hernia is dangerous.
When you have to cut the malaise over some elevated cushion, then perforate the abscess at the lower part of it with a lancet, and pause the perforation according to the length of the body.
And let the view be wide within which runs all the water.
And place your hand over the exact spot, close it, and leave it open, so that the water continues to flow. And place it over what the wound is to be healed.
But if contrary to the flow of water at that time you perforate it: and this is not done except because the white lint causes a contrary effect and prohibits the passage of water. When you need to put a needle or instrument into the wound from which water drains from the hydroplets, the form of which precedes; or adjust a small tube in the opening of the wound.
And know that the water returns, and is agueguada (likely a term for purged or cleansed) for about two months or until it is; and when it is agueguada, then perforate according to that method, so that the malaise passes its days.
Chapter LXIII.
On the section about fatty hernia and its cure.
Know that in the section about this hernia, there is fear of harm to the major organs; for I have seen its removal and been saved by the better method.
And I am remembering the operation in that case and the types of abscesses.
Therefore, I say that abscesses naturally occur in the tissues where the glands are located, and this happens for various causes: either due to acute excessive heat, which spreads to the glands, or due to percussion.
And the color of the abscess depends on the color of the tissue, and pain is not present in it; this is a severe abscess.
And the abscess is hard and evacuated, of which the color is dark, and there is no pain in it.
And sometimes it occurs due to the constriction of the arteries, and due to inflammation of those vessels, as you can recall from memory, or due to inflammation of the veins.
More than that, when it is due to the inflammation of arteries, it is known as the dispersion of apstema when you press on those ties said; and note that you should not touch it.
More than that, when it is due to the inflammation of veins, it is not dispersed by any cause; you should apply compression with your hands.
And it is possible that sectioning be done on this type and on the other muscles; you incise the groove of the genii, then stretch the skin above, extract the one from the white cyst, and deliver the suspensor of the vessels, ligate them, and incise the suspensor after you deliver that from all parts of the skin.
Then if the skin has already adhered to the muscles, you should extract the skin and incise it.
And if there is adhesion due to any cause of the cyst, or between what is between the vessels, you should deliver all that adhesion and incise it with a round incision.
If the disease is a natural part of the flesh at the site of adhesion which is behind it, then thoroughly incise all of this area, and extract the humors as we have said.
Then when your operation is complete, fill the wound with wool soaked in sweet oil and wine; and then cover it with another dressing until it heals.
Chapter LXIV.
Of the treatment of hernia that is vitiated.
It is an ap Amesque envased by some covering similar to a boil, and causes difficulty in exercise, movement, and walking about the patient.
And in the treatment of this illness, one is often afraid of what preceded it and causes remembrance.
However, proceed with the operation according to what they did first.
And I say that you should incise the patient's abdomen on an elevated surface; and then suspend the testicular suspensory ligament to the parts below; and have the codena of the inguinal region on the ties or bands that are proven by trial; and have another minister assist you, extending those with a strong extension.
And then incise with a sharp knife transversely through the vessels among which the vessels are discovered.
And then excise from all parts thus as we have said in the extraction of the artery which is in the temples.
And then place a needle in that which has a double thread, and tie one end of the thread at the beginning of the location where the bleeding occurs, and tie the other end at the end of them. And then incise those in the middle location with a straight cut according to the length of the body, and extract what is accumulated from the foul and corrupt humors.
And then cure the wound with the treatment of other wounds in which you wish healing to be generated so that it causes the vessels which are not obstructed by either genius to become clear, and this is not harmful for that.
But if bleeding occurs in all the vessels, then consider that the testicles are extracted or that the testicles become congested due to the vessels, because it should be deprived of all nutrition due to the incision of the vessels, and should be established, or that it becomes sterile due to this.
Capitol LXV.
Of the cure for intestinal hernia.
The occurrence of this hernia is due to a contraction that extends over the abdomen from the inguinal region of the abdominal muscles. Because of this, the intestines from that rupture find their way into one of the intestines.
And this rupture is either of the inguinal region or of the external region. These two types of hernias occur due to various causes: through a blow, by jumping, from crying, from lifting some heavy cause, or from similar actions.
And the sign of this, when it is due to extension of the inguinal region, is that it occurs little by little over a long period of time, and does not occur suddenly. It is an abscess that gradually forms within the scrotum as the inguinal region compresses the intestine.
And the sign of this is when it is due to contraction of the inguinal region, for at the beginning it causes sudden and intense pain; it is an abscess that appears different from the apparent one nearby, and this is due to the displacement of the intestine, with its contents extruding through the openings in the inguinal region.
And sometimes the intestine or the mesh is left out, and this hernia is called intestinal bubal.
And sometimes it is due to distension, and sometimes a hole forms in the intestine, and here it is blocked, and this causes great suffering to the patient, and sometimes it becomes painful, especially when pressed.
And in the treatment of the symptoms of this illness, there is fear, because it is feared that the discharge from that area should be avoided.
And the method of the operation for that is to command the patient to return the intestine to its cavity with their hand at the internal parts of their cavity if they obey in their return, and then bind them over your chest between your hands, and elevate the patient's legs.
And then stitch the cord which secures the cord of the testicles above, and incise the cord of the testicles completely along its length; and then place two ligatures at the cut section according to where you need to open the section.
And if from that section according to the quantity that it is possible for you let the humor escape.
And then excise that scrotum which you leave the cord of the testicles, while the white hard part of each section is uncovered.
And then insert your thumb into what you are excising from the testicle, in the area between the white cord of the humor and the scrotal skin, and separate any adhesion that is in the rear part of the humor.
And then hold the cord of the testicles in the forward parts, and with this extend the white scrotal skin with your left hand, and elevate the humor towards the scrotum at the part of the section; and command the minister to extend the humor upwards while you dissolve the adhesion that is behind with a solution.
And nearby say that there is no cause for the intestine being enveloped in the white hard scrotal skin. But if you find any cause for it, then you peel that out to the abdomen, leaving it there.
And then incise in the part below the root of the testicles at that section where the blood and health flow as we have recounted in what we said.
And then apply wool soaked in oil, and place it on the wound; apply the lint which we have already described (and some times the white cloth is cauterized, which we have mentioned near the incision of this part due to a flux of blood, for several times such incidents occur). Leave the lint inside so that it may fall by itself.
And if the setting of it is delayed, then apply warm water to moisten it, and place it over that area so that it may fall as we have said.
And then cure the wound with another treatment for wounds as it heals.
Capitol. lxvi.
On Hernia Ventosa.
In this hernia, nothing has been seen that has been burnt during the treatment of it.
And the first ones said that it should be done as we have described in the hernia case; which is that you ligate the vessels near the section at that place where there is facilitation of it; then dry and clean in the middle location and apply an abscess there, so that the vessels may fall.
And cure the wound as we have said until it is healed.
Chapter LXVII.
Of the disorder that occurs in the ankles.
In some cases, there is a rupture in the ankles as we have said before, and you should treat the area accordingly.
And the physicians should not attribute any cause of the hernias to the intestines; and if they do, it is few; and return again in all hours.
But if the time is prolonged, there is an appropriate fissure in the cavity where we send back the intestine into the cavity; and this happens due to the extension of the cavity, which occurs in the ankles as we have said. The cause is that the cavity is stretched, and the area becomes softened, forming a suppuration, and you should treat it accordingly.
And the treatment of it is with a cautery as described in the preceding narrative.
And sometimes it is cured by iron according to this manner: and it is that the patient lies on his back between your hands, and then the place of the rupture of the abscesses dries out by exhalation according to the breadth as per the quantity of three fingers.
And strengthen the white wick that is below the candle when it is uncovered.
And place the wick and hold that over the top of the candle, and press it against the bottom of the abdomen.
And place the two top ends over the extremities of the candle wick, and adjust one to the other with the suture.
And extract the end of the wick, and do not extend it beyond the candle, nor any other cause like this as I have faith in the cure for intestinal hernia.
And cure that in the treatment of wounds, and when you incise the flaps, clean it and restore the wound while it is consolidating; for the candle contracts and the prominence of the rupture is not adjusted.
And cautery is better in this place, for it is more proximate to health.
Chapter LXVIII.
On the softening of the scrotal skin.
Spots on the scrotal skin in some men cause the flesh between them to soften, and it is suspected that this is due to such spots.
Then it is necessary for the one who is consulted in the treatment of this to make a incision according to his skill, and completely remove the scrotal skin that has softened over the natural scrotal skin; and then he should suture the two edges together.
And if you wish, make three or four initial incisions in the excess soft scrotal skin and perform a firm suture.
And then incise between the sutures; and afterwards, treat for the other wounds until they heal and the stitches fall out.
Chapter LXIX.
Of castration.
Know that castration in our law is excommunicated, but by cause it is related to me that I remember it in this treatise; and the memory of it is not necessary for two reasons, of which one is that when asked about it as a doctor, one should know the cure for whom it happens; and the other reason is that we may sometimes have need of castration for our young animals such as mules, oxen, pigs, and similar to beasts.
And thus it is said that castration is performed in two ways: either by incision or by making an incision and sectioning.
But in that which is performed by incision, the way of the operation is that we make the beast urinate in cold water while its genitals are soft and relaxed and hanging. And then take those parts in your hand while they are relaxed and no marks appear upon touch.
In castration performed through a crack and section, ensure that you have the animal and press the cord of the testicles with your left hand.
Then lift the suspensory ligament, and incise over each groove between two processes.
Then incise those glands that you have excoriated. And do not incise any of those on the scrotum for any cause, but incise the thin one which is over the veins.
And this method of castration is better which is performed by traction, for traction firmly leaves no cause of the testicles since the animal desires copulation.
Then cure the wound while it is healing.
Capitol.lix.
On the cure of hermaphroditism.
Hermaphroditism in males occurs according to two methods: one where there is a gap or appearance in the region of the testicle cord, in which it appears between the two testicles with some female characteristics on the skin.
And sometimes from that channel urine flows which is in the root of the testicles.
In women, it is special: and it is that the fold of the woman's阴唇 (vulva) is like two testicles of a man, a little bit from inside like the scrotum of a man and two testes.
And the cure is of three kinds: two for men and one for women. And it is that you should scrape the tight flesh where the pain escapes, and then treat those areas with the cure for other wounds.
And in the second kind for men from which urine flows which is in the root of the testicles, neither a cure nor an operation is done there.
Capitol.xxI.
Of swelling and flesh protruding due to conditions in women.
Swelling strong and tight is situated over natural causes that are strained and made noticeable by observation; and sometimes it is enlarged in some women to such an extent that it expands like in men, and passes during intercourse.
Then you should have the superfluity of phlegm in your hand or cup and insert it.
And do not stop inserting, especially in the upper part of the thigh, so that no flux of pus occurs.
And then attend to that for the healing of the wounds as they heal.
More hidden flesh is flesh that arises in the horror of the mother as it fills that space, and a strong cord is tied around the parts outside according to the likeness of a bow (and for this some first called this "caudate malady"); therefore, you should incise it thus as we incise the phlegm, and attend to it as it heals.
Capitol.lix.
On the healing of alratica.
Alratica is when the womb of the woman is perforated, or is slightly torn. And it can be natural or accidental.
Accidental is due to ill-health which has preceded, and that is caused by flesh not fitting well or by a thin or thickened membrane.
It is caused in the region of the uterus, or in its sides, or in the upper part thereof, or in the lower part thereof, and you prohibit coitus and conception and childbirth, and strongly you prohibit menstruation.
The knowledge of that is made by looking at the midwife, if the obstruction is apparent, carefully; more so if it is not apparent, then you should feel it either through the thighs or through the abdomen.
More so if the obstruction is due to a thin membrane, and is close to the two lips, then you lift and separate that area.
And you place powders on the two lips, and then place your fingers indicating both hands around them.
And the woman is on her back, her thighs extended, and then widely separate the two lips until that thin membrane is broken and the obstruction is opened.
And then take wool and浸湿它在油中，将它放在那个地方，确保那个切口不愈合。
And if the ulcer is large and deep, then incise it with a spatula or a leaf of myrtle.
And if the opacification is due to a clot, then suspend it with a pin, and incise it.
And use the medicines that stop the flux of sand caused by bites, such as aloe, dragon's blood, and ensete, mixed with honey.
And then administer an open lead tube to prevent the ulcer from healing too quickly.
And keep it for several days and administer cold water.
And then use another healing method for consolidation before it is fully healed.
And sometimes accidents occur in the natural abundance of other tissues, then you must incise according to this method. If this is due to an abscessed boil, for the abscessed boil which is in the greater part do not make any counter-irritation in any manner.
Chapter LXXIII.
On the treatment of hemorrhoids and of tail and of red boil that occurs in the groin of women.
Hemorrhoids are appreciated as diseases of the passages of small veins between which the blood continuously flows; and since ancient hemorrhoids are formed by ulcers.
And I have already said in the division the species of those and the signs of those, and to say likewise which receive treatment and which do not receive treatment.
Therefore, say that hemorrhoids and ulcers when in the region of the greater pelvis and do not appear by sensation, then for those do not make any treatment.
But those that are in the opening of the greater pelvis on which there is sensation, are those that are cured.
And ensure that you insert the female in more hot water and then extend the thigh with the scissors, or with a rough cloth, and incise there with the razor.
And then sprinkle on those wounds the flux of one of the incisive powders with seven bites, thus and seeming to the patient as if you were doing so.
And then foment the soles of his feet for an hour, and then immerse that in cold water.
And if the bleeding persists, then do that incision in a decoction of sumac and of seeds of millet grass and of squills and of seeming.
And then take flour of alum and apply it with honey and wine mixed, and make an ointment with this over his back.
And if the bleeding is stopped, that is good; otherwise, apply it with two woolen cloths, and to the breasts perform incisions.
And then take wool and immerse it in the juice of cumin or in the juice of agrimony or in the juice of geranium with bitter wine, and apply it to the area; and then cure the area with ointment until it is healed.
And cure that which is within and may be healed.
Capitol.lix.
Of the perforation of the vein in the arm.
Various species of apothemata occur in the arm, such as cancer, apothema lapis, ulcers, adhubelatum, erythromycosis, fistulas, gangrene, and thyphlitis, as well as other forms of apothemata. And I have already mentioned these ailments and their species, as well as the signs of them, and their cures in the division.
And covet that I mention in this treatise of apothemata the cautery which occurs in the arm when it is one of the apothemata that indicates health, and if you want to know how the operation of it is performed.
Then consider if the pain in the boil at its beginning is acute upon percussion and flux and fever, and sometimes that reddening and if it catches over that the sensation, when noting corners of its perforation, cure that with what helps on the maturation between that the acuity of the accidents ceases.
Then you must place the woman on a pillow that has two ends; recline her on her side and adjust her feet to the part behind her abdomen, and spread her thighs apart. Place her hands under her buttocks, and hold quilts with lint at what is appropriate.
Then the midwife follow straight to the latex and administer the instrument through the orifices of the vagina, the shape of which will come in the cases that will be discussed shortly.
When you want to administer this instrument, place it along the length of the cervix of the woman, and what part of the instrument enters the vagina should not exceed the cervix and treat the malady. If the instrument is larger than the opening of the mother, then cover it with powder over the tissue of the opening of the mother to prevent the entry of any instrument into the opening of the mother.
And cover it so that the vitrige that runs in the tube of the lancet is above, and that the minister holds the instrument and revolves the vitrige until the openings of the mother are open.
And when the excitement appears, and is touched with the hand and is like a lion and wet, then cover it by drying that part of his head with spatum (a type of sponge or absorbent material).
And when the filth is evacuated, then cover it with a sponge submerged in olive oil or green olive oil in which there is some astringency; and place the paste in the section at the opening of the mother.
And place over the wound and on the linen cloth submerged in water in which mallows are boiled.
And it is usually cured in about two days by applying the ointment that you apply until it is healed.
And sometimes the liver and wound are washed with an ointment made of honey and vinegar, then placed in water in which it is soaked for a while, and then returned to the ointment.
And if the wound is inside the liver enlarged, then take care that you are prohibited from treating it with iron, but follow what we have said in the division.
Chapter 75.
To teach midwives how to properly treat breast infections according to an unnatural figure or symptom.
Necessary is that the midwife recognize at the beginning the sign of a natural birth by its symptoms. When you see the woman expel the parts and desire to smell the air, and is soiled by what comes from her, and hastens the expulsion of the breast infection, then know that this part is according to a natural figure, and the expulsion is above her head, and the second one hangs or is suspended from the umbilicus.
When you see those signs, then cover the patient's abdomen so that the embryo descends gently; when it is on its head, turn it to the second position, and it should be cleaned of those superfluities with good hygiene.
That which is another to this part is unnatural and not permissible, for when the embryo is situated on its feet and the body of the patient is situated in front of the head of the patient, and its hand, one foot, or even the head, or the abdomen of the patient, strongly it is converted to its own back, resembling the figures that are not permissible.
Where necessary, the midwife must be wise and subtle in all those causes, and she must guard against error and deception.
And I show all figures of those, and which engine is in those, so that it may be significant and placed there.
When the fever is situated on its head by natural degree, and it is vehement upon the woman and is made to her part difficult, and sometimes the virtue of her already weakened, then make that cessation, or what women have her, and evaporate the congestion in her with fenugreek seed and with humid oils.
And then insert the probe between his so-called spatum a little and open the second one, or dry out that one with its nail through which runs what is in it of humidity. And press the woman's abdomen until the fetus descends.
But if it does not descend, then apply a paste of flax seed mucilage and fenugreek mucilage over her.
And then command her to inhale it, placing the inhalation at her nostrils; and cover her mouth and nose for about an hour until the fetus is expelled as soon as possible.
And if both parts of the fetus are already expelled at the beginning, then reduce those with facilitation little by little. But if it does not obey the instrument, then place the woman on a sieve and lift her feet off the ground, and shake the sieve over the earth; and hold the woman so that she does not fall due to the shaking.
And if the hands are not turned inside and the fist is tight, then incise there and extract the contents of the fist or grasp the body with a cloth and extract it equally, for that will be thoroughly extracted.
When the fetus moves on its feet, then push those movements upwards, and gradually reduce the size of the fetus, and gradually grasp one foot and extend those movements little by little.
More when it moves between the thighs, then command him to express it, and make that turn outward in a proper condition, for it will be thoroughly extracted if God wills it.
And if it is not thoroughly extracted as we have commanded, then return the fetus little by little into the position where you pause it according to the natural figure, for it will then be thoroughly extracted with slight movement.
And if all that we have commanded is prohibited, then take a mixture of alum and dissolved gum, and grind it thoroughly in the mortar with good pounding, and apply it to the part of the woman below the lower abdomen. And then make that cut in clear water, when you can reach the hypochondriac regions.
And when you see that the parts around it have become softened, then apply mirtle fumigation and place your hand over it. And when you have kept the sub-fumigation for an hour, then make that incision over a cushion, and then make that puncture at the mouth of it, and lift it, and apply a light compression to the lower part of the abdomen, which will soon cause it to be forced out.
Turn the fetus longitudinally with one of her hands. Gently reduce the hand of the woman, but if you cannot reduce it, then elevate the woman and perform a cesarean section.
And if the cesarean section cannot be performed, then make a incision on the abdomen, and shake the woman's thighs with vigorous shaking, and then apply liniments which you prepare from mucilages.
And if the childbirth has come, then make the cesarean section on the abdomen, and then study the reduction of the hand, and gently push the fetus according to its natural figure, and make the woman cough and command her to exert herself as the fetus is expelled.
Lift the leg and extend its muscles while the foot's fascia is held by the doctor's hand. Let the midwife hold the foot and gradually rotate it gently, so that it becomes easier to manipulate.
And when it is equalized and the swelling has subsided, then place it over the wound as we have recommended with oil and ointments.
And then command that it be soaked gradually, and when you have done this, place the compress on a cloth and command that it be inclined over the right side, and then command that it be well wrung out; and make the compress dampen with the mixture. The prepared fetus exits over the side.
When the mother experiences severe pain in this manner, consider it, and then incise the second layer with your knife so that it is evacuated of moisture.
And if the foot is suspended over the face and neck of the patient, then incise the superficial layer to ensure it is not retained and causes harm.
And then push the fetus into the parts inside, according to where it fits, and tell the woman to strain herself several times, and it will be gently expelled by effort, if God wills.
The exit of two infants or many fetuses. Know that twin spots or several spots are naturally born, and sometimes even three or four are born. But this is strange and worth investigating; yet they are causes from nature, not disease.
And regarding those, even if they are multiple, one more is born and is separated by ciphac. They distinguish between the ligament at the navel of each of them. And sometimes they are expelled naturally after several times, as if it were a fetus by light natural effort. Some remain in place for several times without being able to be expelled, as we have recounted.
And if they are difficult to deliver, you should assist the birth and proceed as we have said regarding non-natural figures, then care for them as we have recounted.
And if the midwife is subtle and does what she does with subtlety and delay, and is ingenious according to all form as prepared by her bringing to health.
Remembrance of that which is formed in the matrix from embryos and aborted.
Some weeks are formed in the matrix one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and more ten, and you must verify that a woman who aborts does not carry to term a sixth, and another ten all formed, the cause of which is made by the measurement of the glorious sages.
And all this covers what is in the science of the midwife that she feels for the child seeming to her, and then touches it with her hand that is fitting.
Chapter LXXVI.
On the extraction of the fetus when it is dead.
When you treat the dead fetus as we have said in the division of medicine and it is not outside the body, then you must use surgery if necessary. You must consider whether the woman is of good health and not among those accidents for which her safety is feared.
When the woman is placed lying on her back, and her head is inclined sideways, and her thighs are elevated.
The minister should hold that [part] with two hands or tie it to the surface so that the body does not extend during the extraction of the fetus.
Then moisten the mouth of the uterus with sweet-smelling oils and honey of almond and fenugreek and sesame.
Then the midwife should anoint her hand with those oils and honey, and place her hand with facilitation in the uterus, and seek with her hand the location where the fingers should be placed on the fetus.
Place the fingers accordingly: then consider if the fetus is prepared to be delivered through its head, and then place the fingers in the folds of the head, or the neck, or the mouth, or the palate, or leave the beard, or at the furcula, or at the proper locations of the ribs, or leave the hypochondria.
And if the discharge is from his feet, at the ankle, or in the middle of the back.
And keep the thumb with your right hand, curving it at that place which is between the fingers of your left hand, and insert your hand easily and place the thumb in some of those places which we have said, until you reach the root cause.
And place and keep the other thumb, or the third if necessary, in apposition to it, so that it is an equal traction, and not an extension according to its straightness solely.
And let it be grasped entirely, so that the extraction of it be alleviated as is done in tooth extraction.
And keep it there so that the extension be softened; and if any part of it is retained, then let the midwife apply some of her fingers with oil and insert them skillfully and rotate the retained part.
Then if the part of the fist is forgotten, let the fingers be placed in the location which is left; and do so before all the fist is forgotten.
If the hand is placed forward over the other, and it is not possible to reduce it due to its constriction, then wrap a cloth around it; and extract it before all of it is forgotten, and incise it at the hand joint or near the wrist.
And do so also with the other hand and on both feet.
If the head of the fist is large, or it suffers from constriction during insertion, or there is fluid in its head, then insert a cactus spine between the fingers, cut open the head, and drain the fluid, or use a tool called "alundat" to extract it, the shape of which will be shown in the forms of other instruments in the chapter that follows this.
And if the fist has a large head by nature, then incise it with a curved knife, or extract it using "alundat" as we have said; and then use forceps to remove the bones.
And if the head is swollen and constricted, you should open the furrow, when the humidity which is in the feet has infiltrated.
And if it is not complicated, nor resists incision, you should cut the head as soon as possible according to what will be possible.
And if the swelling of the abdomen is suppurated or in dropsy, then you must perforate it where the humidity is located.
And if the fistula is on his feet, then the attraction of it is slight and its direction to the mouth of the vein is slight.
And if it is constricted, you should incise the abdomen and the foot, when you must extract that with a cloth which you have wrapped around your hand, and cut the abdomen and the foot where what is within flows out.
And if the other members are swollen and return to the head, then the surgeon should insert his left hand; and if the mouth of the vein is opened, then he should insert his hand in the groin, and seek for the head, and pull that with his fingers into the mouth of the vein, and quickly insert one or two unciae, and pull them into those.
And if the mouth of the vein is constricted by an abscess, cauterize what accides to it; ensure that it is not irritated; before this, ensure that you administer an effusion of humid fatty causes. And administer plasters; and follow the patient with waters that soften and moisten.
And if the wound is on the side of the body, whenever possible, incise it: and administer what we have said about the live wound.
And if this is not possible, then incise it in pieces, and extract it.
And ensure that you do not leave any cause inside the wound.
And when you have completed your operation, then administer what we have said about the treatment of abscesses that occur from the vein.
And if there is a flow of pus, then apply compresses with styptic waters and administer the other treatment.
And I have already seen a woman in her abdomen where a child was dead, and nearby that fire another pregnancy began, and the dead fetus is the other. It happens that long ago an abscess was on his thigh; and when the fire was opened, it began to discharge pus.
And I was called to treat it, and treated it for a long time, and the wound did not heal.
Then I applied pressure to it using strong adhesive plaster, and placed an os on it. And after some days, I placed another os; and I was greatly amazed, for in the abdomen there is no bone.
And then I realized that they were the bones of the dead fetus.
Then I treated the wound, extracted the bones and the fetus, which existed in the woman's abdominal conditions, and having seen this many times before, I removed a piece of flesh.
And I do not consider this strange, but rather that in this there is science and aid to what the physician applies his hand for treatment.
Of the forms of the instruments that are necessary to extract the stone.
Form of vertigo at which the liver is opened:
This is the form of strengthener in which you equalize the forces, at which equalization there are two vertigos at the ends of two fuses. However, let this vertigo be more subtle in structure, and made of hemp or wood.
And let the width of each fuse be as wide as two fingers, and the margin on both sides be as wide as one finger. The length of each is one palm and a half; in the middle location between two fuses, there are two adjustments of that same type of fuse, which are already fastened together, with their length being about one palm and a little more, and the width of each is as wide as two fingers, or a little more.
And these two additional elements be inserted in the mouth of the uterus so that they be open when you revolve the two prescribed virtues.
Form another shape like that one, but more subtle and lighter:
Make it of wire or of steel according to the likeness of forceps. But at the extremity of it, there are two additional elements as you can see, and the length of those elements is about one palm, and the width of each is two fingers.
And when you want to open the uterus, then place the woman on her side with her feet hanging down, opening what is between her thighs. Then open your hand with the instrument as you would with scissors equally according to the quantity you want of the size of the mouth of the uterus, while the forceps do what you desire.
The form of virtue which the ancients described:
Form of pressing which is applied to the part affected:
Form of compression in which the large pad is contained:
And it is assembled to tongs whose teeth are at the extremity, as you see. Sometimes it is made long like tongs according to this form, as you see, with teeth like fish hooks from which it is cut and contained. Form of compression slight:
Form of a hook having a spine:
Form of a hook having two spines:
Form of a spoon having two extremities to which the head is cut off:
Form of two flat spoons:
All these instruments are exercised, and when more species of them are multiplied, the craftsman should prepare them, making their operation lighter and more convenient for the operator.
And do not delay in preparing those instruments, for the need is urgent.
From the extraction of the second child.
When the second child is retained, you should induce labor, then make sure that the patient holds her breath, and immediately apply this stimulation and strengthen your hand over her mouth and nostrils. If by this means it comes out, that is good.
And if not, then take a spoon and perforate in the cover a hole and pause there over burning herbs near the mouth of the uterus, as with calamus, rue, anise, camomile, scikatols Arabic, and cinnamon. All these herbs or some of them may be submerged in water in the spoon, and pause that over the fire.
And place a cannula of cane in the mouth of the uterus, and hold that there so that the vapor comes to the cavity of the uterus.
And then perform that sneezing as we have said before, and the second one should be done quickly.
And if it is necessary to apply this cure and it does not succeed, then command the midwife to submerge her left hand in sesame oil or honey extract, and then insert that into the wound and search for the second one with that, as you have found. If it is attached at the base of the hand, then insert her hand according to what we have recommended, and when she has found the second one, extract it little by little so that the hand does not fall due to the force. Before the wound is moved to the right and left sides with ease.
And if the mouth of the wound is narrowed, we have already recommended the cure with sneezing and medicating the area with herbs.
If not completely dismissed all the causes we have recounted, then guard that you do not fatigue her repeatedly in abstraction, but instead apply what is extracted from her to the mouth of the large intestine at the woman's vagina, and proceed to chrism it with ointment and tetrapharmacos; for that will cause it to loosen up within a few days and be dissipated and forgotten.
When it will loosen, it is raised to the head, and this leads to the illness; then you should administer fumigations and what is appropriate for this.
Some of the Ancients already recommended fumigations with nutmeg and dry figs.
Form of the instrument with which the woman is fumigated, you should retain her menstrual flow and the afterflow:
It should be made of wool or linen.
And place the thin end inside the cone and the broad end above the fire, and position the fumigation over the coals of the fire.
And hold that there as the sub-fumigation is consumed and they iterate another.
For the treatment of an unperforated anal condition.
The child moves about and its anus is not perforated, which have been gently closed and held. Then have the midwife perforate with her own said closure; or, if not, perforate it with a sharp spike, and guard that it does not touch the membrane.
And place it on the area infused with wine and oil; and cure that with ointment as it dries.
But if you fear it is held shut, then place a cannula for days, and wait until the child wants to defecate.
And if anopilation of the anus occurs due to consolidation of a boil or abscess; then have that consolidation incised, and cure it with what we have said for treatment and with lead.
For the treatment of fistulas that discharge pus.
The fistulas that discharge low pus are swollen and large, which occur close to the anus outside or in the space of one side.
And it is a fistula or abscess.
And when that swelling is old and flows from watery white or subtle pus, sometimes some of these fistulas penetrate.
And those that penetrate are known as those arising from them due to the outflow and wind condition; sometimes they involve the patient's outflow, and a strong discharge is characteristic of those caused by worms.
And of these fistulas, sometimes they penetrate into the space between the bladder and the meat of the groin; and of those that penetrate between the thighs and between the scrotum.
And to distinguish between a penetrating and non-penetrating fistula, insert your finger into the anus and gently probe with a thin stick of reed or iron in the fistula when there is no pus discharge.
If there is hardness, then insert a thin rod of lead or horsehair between the layers where you feel the hard part.
And if you do not feel that hardness at all, nor any cause of obstruction due to feces, worms, or wind, as we have said, then you should know it is non-penetrant, and proceed with the treatment.
And when the fistula is penetrant into the bladder or into the meat of the penis, then the sign of this is either obstruction of urine from that side and prohibition to it, so that the area treated by medicine becomes consolidated.
And if it is penetrant into the joint of the thigh or into the bone and causes pain in the circuit, then the sign of this is that the hardness permeates here if there is no hardness in the bone, and pain in the circuit of the area; and that pus constantly flows from it; and that it does not respond to treatment, nor is it consolidated by ointment.
And in all these penetrant fistulas, complete cure is not always achieved, and the treatment of those is hard work and the diligence of the medical leaves upon which they operate.
In that which is not penetrating and not ancient, heal with iron as I will recount to you later, and what is already there and prepared.
And it is that the patient lies on his side with his knees bent towards his chest, the thighs inclined towards the abdomen of the patient, and then insert a lead tube or an iron one if it is in a tortuous fistula, into which you can feel the location where the tent passes.
And if the patient feels pain around the throat, then you must insert your finger into the throat.
And if you feel in your finger that the tent already by itself is penetrating, or something between your finger and the siphon or flesh, then you can certainly determine that it is penetrating; and then do not work on that, for there is no healing in that, as we have said.
But however, some may say that it is healed in some men after a while.
And for the treatment in which hope for healing is placed, you must heat a cautery finely according to the size of the fistula, as previously described, and insert that heated instrument into the fistula until it reaches around the throat; and then repeatedly insert it two or three times until you can feel that all those flesh tissues adjacent to the fistula are firmly adhered, resembling the feathers of a bird's pen.
And then treat that which is a swelling wrapped in bandages between where all those muscles adhere, and then treat that which is with medicines the flesh generating and consolidating, and if it is healed, well; and otherwise, then it is not healed in some time by another treatment.
And if the tent comes in but does not penetrate inside, you have said which is in the buttock, and between that and the tent that is a veil of flesh or of cloth, and touch the fistula in what seeps from the surface of the wound, then dry the wound at the beginning of the fistula, and you moisten the tent, and it is in the fistula where the drying reaches the place where the end of the tent passes, and through the tent it is relieved and healed.
And then cleanse those fistulated tissues which are similar to the quill of an eagle and do not rupture from any of these causes.
But if a flow of pus comes between you and your operation when insides those tissues, then let that which is more and of the lighter instrument be cauterized with fire or with sharp medicine, for cauterization with fire makes good double use: it adjusts those tissues tightly, and the removal of pus by its excision of humidity.
And then cure that which is with inflamed veins wrapped in bandages or incised threads around the area, and then cure the wound with an ointment of hard flesh generated and consolidated.
And in medicines where there is stiffness and excoriation; when this is restored, it is cured, and you fear no recurrence.
And if the fistula has penetrated into the prostate of the anus and is long from the surface of the body, then insert your finger into the anus and inquire with it.
And if the wound is touched and between you and her there is only a thin membrane of cicatrix or of flesh, and it is close to penetration, then do not operate on it but rather by way of trust and hope.
The cause is to treat it in one of three ways: either by cauterizing that as we have said; or by excising it until you achieve its cavity so that you can insert and cure it properly; and do not proceed with excision lest you damage the bowel containing the cord, and act against the patient's will. Then cure it as we have said, for strong healing is desired; or by extending that thin membrane and cleansing that area near the anus as we have said, either by touch or by another sharp instrument, and then modify those fistulized tissues which are in the excised section where you can avoid necrosis; and then strive to restore the entire wound with cauterization, and if the opening above is not consolidated, and open the fistula at the part of the anus, it will be easier for the patient. And sometimes the fistula is closed in this manner: when you insert the probe into the fistula, and place it at the cleft of the buttocks near the surface of the body and along the margin of the anus, then take hold of the perforated extremity, which is like a needle preparing the veins according to this form:
and insert it there with threads or around those; then insert a probe with thread into the fistula until you achieve its cavity.
But if it penetrates into the margin of the anus deeper inside, then you withdraw the thread as you insert your thumb into the anus; then extract the end of the thread and adjust both ends evenly, strengthen each one, and leave it for a day or two. When more of the thread is embedded in the flesh, thoroughly strengthen that part where the muscles are incised between the two ends of the thread and which fit snugly.
And then cure the wound once it is consolidated and healed.
But if the orifices of the fistula are not penetrable, then make them penetrable in any manner you prepare, but ensure it is moist on the outside, for it is not your task to do this so as not to injure the skin; and then apply something within that will heal it.
The shape of the spine of the spatula used where the fistula is split: the curvature of which is acute and the other part is not acute, so as not to injure what is unnecessary, thus you see.
For suturing hemorrhoids where there is pain at the site of those hemorrhoids.
Hemorrhoids can be of two kinds, for some appear as if they are like coal, or as if they are like the fat of a date. And of these, some are small and large, and the pain comes from them at times and is one, and they are lumps, and are outside the anus, in the extremities thereof.
But the ones that are outside the anus are according to those with less humidity, from which yellowish water or a bit of continuous bloody discharge comes, and are according to the color of the body.
And the cure for that which is within the bowels is that you command the patient to lie down and to press between where the belly bulges and the veins appear. Then you knead and suspend with your fingers those that you feel in the depths of your hand, and then apply those to their roots.
But if the fingers cannot feel those due to the moisture and softening of them, then take those with a rough cloth or a hard or flannel cloth, and extract those with the clamps called tweezers, and then apply them and sprinkle over them some powdered cauda near the application, so that they may be applied like a cautery; or cauterize those as described in the chapter on cauterization. And then cure them with the other treatment until they are healed.
And if the anus does not yield to evacuation, then sit the patient on a cistern in which there is a small hole, and have it washed with water from the bowels that yields to evacuation when the patient strains.
If the hemorrhoids are outside the anus and the cause is slight, then you grasp them with your finger or grasp them with a needle, cut them, and place a remedy over them as we have said until they are healed.
And if you have an incision, you must administer stitches in this manner: take thread wrapped around a needle and carefully extract the hemorrhoids from above, and make the thread penetrate through the edge of the other part, wrapping both ends of the thread around the part below the needle, longitudinally; and strengthen the hemorrhoid with strong suturing, and then remove the needle.
And do this to all of them, leaving one unsewn, so that the excess blood can flow from that one.
And place a soaked cloth in olive oil or ointment over the anus; place it there and command the patient to rest. And leave it there until it heals; when healed, treat them with ointments or other treatment until they are fully recovered.
And since they are old and do not work in that medicine, you should cauterize them with the point of a needle or with your finger where they are made wet and then cover those with the outer part, which prohibits their consolidation; and place those that are consolidated inside.
And when you cauterize them with stronger heat than the first time, where they burn and are excoriated; and place those that are healed inside.
Know that abscesses, this is key, and they are round, according to the color of the body, resembling a quail's egg. They form in the entire body but especially in the parts near the feet and fingers, and for those pains, you should relieve them.
And then cut what is in the circumference of the clave, and hold it with tongs or forceps, and eradicate it from its root; and place care there.
And if you wish, cautery the next as preceded in its chapter.
More commonly, a veruca is a small, rough, rounded fistula protruding on the surface of the body, and spots or stains are often seen in most children.
And the treatment for it is to extend and cut that area, or to tighten it with a thread or with a pin that holds it. And if you wish, cautery this as we have said, with fire or with sharp medicine.
More commonly, a formica is a small, fibrous or fistulated protrusion on the surface of the body. When you cauterize it, it appears similar to a bite from a ant, and it forms around the body.
And the treatment is that you take a needle of awl or of thorn, and it should be sharp, and place that over the blister between which you contain the circle of the needle from the parts of the patient; then return your hand around the needle as you enter what is in the circuit of the blister, and place that in the prominence of the flesh, and that you eradicate the blister from its root.
And if you wish, do this with a needle of reed or of iron according to this form:
Let the upper part of the needle be fine, solid (i.e., non-perforated), wrapped so that on the tip the learning of the needle is concealed and its rotation is facilitated.
And if you wish, cauterize the blister as described in the cauterization of athylos on the head of the cautery.
In the manner of the instruments you use to give cauterization.
Sometimes cauterization is done with silver or tin or reed that has been melted or beaten; sometimes it is done with those instruments of various sizes according to those you use, for the one used in the treatment of small children should be small; and for those whose buttocks are swollen or painful, the cauterizations of these should also be small.
The form of piercing large and small:
The head of the cannula above which the bag is tied should be broad according to this manner; and it should be placed in such a way that the bag is tied as you see.
And the lower end of it, which is inserted into the anus, should be solid (i.e., not open) like a lion's tooth, made very fine; and on one side of the blade there are two openings, and on the other side one opening, and the width of the opening should be according to the size of the rays, with the larger ones having a small opening.
And the bag in which the medicines for the beast's bladder or sheepskin are placed should be about a palm in length.
And it should be pierced with several openings as it is wound; and the space between the openings should be about the thickness of a finger.
And then insert into these openings strong raw honey made from ten honeys or around them; adjust the bag to that. When the bag is placed in it, make the cannula straight at the head of the piercing between two distinct positions with firm constriction, and pierce each opening: The quality of piercing each one is that you fill the bag with the medicine, which should be warmed according to the quantity of the patient's tolerance; and ensure that it is neither too hot nor too cold.
And the patient is laid supine on his back, elevates his hips and places them on a cushion; another servant holds his legs, and another on his chest holding his hands. Then he applies oil or honey or fenugreek paste to the tip of the cautery, inserts it into the anus, and the minister takes the bag and expresses it twice vigorously ensuring that all that is in the rectum is evacuated into the cushion; then removes the cushion and the patient raises his hips against the wall.
And if the medicine forces it to evacuation, have it as much as it can; and if it sleeps all through the night, it is more favorable in recovery.
More so if you evacuate that for the solutions of the belly ailments and the evacuation of its bowels, then iterate the cautery until it is healed.
And if in the anus there are hemorrhoids or abscesses, then use a thin cautery or a lancet, among the cauteries of which children are the criteria.
Of the treatment of the plaigues.
And I have already said in the division of the treatment of the plaigues what is suitable for the free and I now say so the treatment of those both by means and medicines according to need.
Therefore, it is said that the plaigues are diverse according to what they are caused by and according to the place where the plaques occur.
And the causes why you see plaigues are thus: by a stone in the bladder, or an incision of the side or with a knife, or a blow with a lance, or with a stick, or with an arrow, or resembling those caused by such movements.
More specifically, the plaigues that are in parts of the body are thus: a plague that affects the head, or the neck, or the foot, or the abdomen, or the flank, and resembling those of the limbs.
And I am now recounting the treatment of some plaigues in order to apply that reasoning and rule to other plaigues.
And I will begin with simple head ailments, for the memory of compound cases will come at the beginning of the third book.
So say that when an accident occurs in the head with a simple injury and it is not a fracture, consider: if it is due to a stone or something similar, and has already struck the brainstem just barely and is a large wound and you fear the sudden onset of an abscess there, then you should incise and bloodlet from the cephalic vein immediately, without delay; and extract as much blood as the quality of the blood warrants if no other cause prevents bloodletting, especially if the blood discharged from the wound is small.
And the bloodletting should be from the opposite side of the injured area; and care must be taken to prevent swelling and the intake of large foods.
But if some cause prevents the incision, then reduce the food intake and do not approach meat or wine.
And place your hand over the injury, if there is an abscess forming, applying hot oil or wine in which astringents are dissolved.
If it is certain that an abscess has formed, then place yourself over the wound, if it is fresh with its own exudate and the air has not changed there sprinkle the powder which I will describe shortly.
And if the air has already changed there, then place yourself over some ointments until it is healed.
If the wound is large or due to a rupture and disfigurement, and the edges cannot be approximated with pins, then adjust those with a suture as I will describe the suture technique for them.
If the wound is already exposed to bone and muscle, and it is not retention but only a small suspender, then incise there and properly cure the wound with medicines, restoring the flesh in its place. Command the patient to eat foods in which he excels: porridge and dishes similar to his usual diet, until it heals completely.
And if you find putrefaction in the flesh and it does not adhere to the bone, then incise all of that and drain it, and properly cure it.
If in these plaigas the artery or vein from which the flux of sang can occur is present and cannot be abscindida by medicines, then you inquire about the artery, and if you find that uncut one, you incise it with a spatum or ligate it; and if necessity prompts you that what we have said does not agree, then you cauterize between where the sang is abscidit.
And if these plaigas are simple and small, then the cause of them is light; sprinkle this powder over them when the air changes to harden those.
And the manner of the powder is this: take oil of enses divided one part, dragon's blood divided two parts, and undiluted wormwood divided three parts; let all be mixed thoroughly and sieved, then fill the plaigas with it, confine it well within a good confinement, and coagulate it with the sang.
And then strengthen it above with powder and leave it, and do not remove it while it is still fluid, for the medicine will not be effective until it is healed.
And sometimes one makes this cautery alone, when it is not in your presence the sign of the dragon.
And this operation is performed on large boils when it is necessary to pause over them and straighten them out, especially on recent boils whose blood has not yet altered.
And if the air has altered them, especially when it is in summer, then I do not need to place this poultice in its position, but then care for those as we have said, try that you pause over those small green enguents, or that you pause over those grains of flour from the oven in water and honey before they fester; and then care for those with another cure until they are healed.
And if the boil fractures in bone and is small, then you extract this with forceps.
And I will speak of the treatment of fractures of the head in what is poisonous.
Of the boils on the neck.
If the wound occurs in the neck, there is no difference in treatment, and between wounds of the head when simple.
But if the nerve of the neck is incised or an artery, then if it is a nerve, no engineering is necessary but rather to avoid any curative intervention that causes strong compression, just as zinc and zegi are said to be vitriol and similar to them in their effect on nerves and counteract those. And do not place any cause of cold on the wound, for the substance of the nerves is cold and their continuity is in the brain, which is the lifeblood of all members.
And if it is to be treated with light medicines, such as a wash with cold water twice, sometimes infused in oily or non-oily olive oil, and thyme when washed with cold water and the other herbs prepared according to this manner, apply a moist ointment.
But if the wound is large, then perform缝合，或收缩其边缘，然后在其愈合时用粉末治疗。
If there is depth to the wound or accidents at the lower part close to the bone, then puncture that area in the most compressed place.
If the wound has already severed an artery and a flow of blood is obtained, then separate or dry that area, or ligate it, or cauterize it if necessity dictates so.
If the spinal vertebrae of the neck are already severed or all, and the veins of the neck have been saved, then you adjust the lips of the wound and suture over the spine without touching that area. Advance equal to that and return it to its natural figure, and strengthen it with a proper structure for some days. Then cure it with ointments in which there is stiffness and excitation until it is healed.
If the wound has already infected the bone, then percute that area, and if it contains fragments of bone, extract all that you can from it; what appears unremovable, leave it until the wound suppures, and is separated and the inflammation around it alleviated.
And if the injury is recent then powder it over that powder which was recommended. And if in the injury a fistula is formed, then cure that part from which the memory will come soon to its chapter.
If it is a spear or sword blow, and you percuss its depth, then consider more if the injury has swelling when the pain is severe; then know that the injury is fatal.
And if there is no depth and the injury is recent with its bleeding, then you apply powder for the first hour, and do not press it so that the blood does not get retained in the depth of the wound and return to the heart, which would worsen the pain; instead, apply atractylated ointment, and remove it after two days.
And if the ointment is not at hand, then you apply to the wound's orifices enough to let out what has of moisture; and make the pain sleep over the wound so that what is in it flows out properly.
If however more than three days have passed since the onset of the plague and no spasms or heart tremors nor constriction of the lungs occur, and other good dispositions improve, then you may know that the plague is healed; then treat both with laxatives and another treatment until it is cured.
If the healing of the wound is impossible, and the space has been open for too long, you may know that a fistula has formed; treat it accordingly according to its own principles.
And if the plague is due to a stab wound or cut, and it is simple on the surface of the foot or the hand, then treat it with what was preceded by suturing, if it is large, or with powder, if it is small.
If however it has already inflected the bone, and you are cutting into the flesh, then twist the wound and pull to extract those pieces, if they are separated. If however they are not separated, then leave them alone until the wound heals, as their extraction is alleviated by healing.
And for other accidents of pain in other members, the cure is the treatment that we have said.
Of the pains in the abdomen.
The discomfort that occurs in the abdomen is either great, little, or intermediate.
And a small disruption is made difficult by another method, and I believe that the reduction of it is more difficult if you do not prevent the intervention in it from reaching its place quickly, because it opens up and becomes enlarged, making the tool difficult to use.
And therefore, the best disruption is intermediate, for in that case, the reduction of the intestine is not difficult, as it is in the two species mentioned before.
And know that the suturing of the abdomen is according to four methods, but two sutures are common and apply to the sutures of other bodily wounds.
And two other specific wounds communicate to the other wounds, more so indeed in the wound of the belly.
And I advise you concerning each exposure and declaration.
Therefore say that when the wound is small and some cause of the intestine penetrates through it, making it difficult to reduce that part, this occurs in one of two ways: either due to the smallness of the disruption, as we have said, or when the intestine is swollen due to the coldness of the air.
And when this is so, then know that you should apply the attempt to submerge a sponge or a wet cloth in clear water alone, or that you soak it in squintern, cyperum, and spice, and place the intestine into that while the swelling resolves.
And on some occasions, I have seen where there is stiffness, and it is better to use water alone in resolving the swelling.
And when you see the swelling resolve, then moisten the intestine in water in which it is soaked high and vetches, for by this means it is relieved of the instrument due to little cause.
If it is necessary to use an instrument near this cure, then divide the disruption with a small instrument through which varicose veins flow.
The primary cure is better when it is appropriate that no sectioning be done, and not an occupation to dry out in necessity and starvation.
Of the instrument, note its shape:
One part of the blade is sharp, and the other part blunt, with the tip fine but not too fine like a needle; it should be slightly rounded.
And therefore, when the wound is enlarged and the intestine is pushed out, ensure that its reduction follows its natural form, in its proper place. If possible, do it over the same area; for this is better.
If the disruption is large and located in the lower part of the abdomen, then place the patient's back on a surface, and position their legs farther apart than their torso; if it is in the upper part of the abdomen, then hold the patient's head and legs farther apart than the other parts.
And if the rupture is in one of the two parts of the abdomen, then pause your understanding and consideration for a time so that the part where the wound is may be lower than the other.
And thus you should administer this for great wounds and for medium wounds.
And for small wounds, pause the preparation that you have made, and then ensure that it is administered by your most skilled assistants, who hold the rupture with their hand and adjust its edges, and then uncover that to this one who needs the suture for any other cause nearby.
And this is the common method of suturing: take the needle, or a counteagle according to the width of the wound; then leave the tip of the rupture near the extremity of the ring finger, and thread the needle once, or another that you do not put a knot at both ends of the suture thread, but at both ends of the counterpiercer which is left from the inner parts, before making it penetrate from one part to the other; and you have already added two ends of the thread and two ends of the counterpiercer, and so four orders are made.
And then strongly fill the double needle around the needle, and several times on both sides together, and then join the two edges and the flap by decent joining; and let the thickness of the digit remain and put another needle in that place, and let that be filled with thread as was the first needle; and do not cease to do this if necessary among the needles until you complete all the contraction of the flap.
And the needles should be of medium thickness between coarseness and subtlety, for the subtle ones lightly incise the flesh; and the thick ones are difficult to handle in the缝合中，因此应该在粗细之间适度。
And it should not be that the needle is placed at two ends of the wound too close together, for then the flesh would be lightly incised and the flap would hang before its healing.
And do not make the sutures too long so that the flap is not prohibited from healing.
And then incise the ends of the needles so that they do not lead the wound away from its proper healing; place your hand over the sutures with powdered substances from all parts, which hold the ends of the needles; and leave them there until you can see that the flap is already consolidated.
And these types of suturing with needles is more convenient in small wounds, for only one or two needles are needed for their suturing.
And the second suturing method is as follows: for you to suture the four extremities, from the tendon and two ends of the ligament, all at once with a needle which is wrapped in equal subtlety and thickness.
And then, when you have pierced the four extremities with the needle, draw the thread from that side of the incision where you started, so that the thread retracts and rises to the wound, thus securing the suture with a fabric-like stitch where the threads are tight.
And pause between each suture the width of a little finger.
And this suture I know the men.
And with this suture, I healed the wound that was inflicted on a man in his belly, which had been cut by a knife, and it was the disruption of the major wound about two palms from the center of the abdomen; it was the disruption in the middle of the member; and then I returned that part after the intestine had passed through the wound for twenty-four hours.
The wound is consolidated in the space of fifteen days or so, and cure that and it is healed; then those viscera are moved back to their positions.
And other doctors had judged that it was not healed; by miracle of fire, for if I did not cure that with ointment, for it was in a place where ointment could not reach nor any medicine, but placed my hand over the wound as an old healer does all day and applied frequent washing with honey water until the fire healed.
And I will speak of two kinds of suturing properly according to the narrative of Paracelsus.
And you should begin with the chain stitch, and insert the needle from one side through to the inside of the other side.
And thus, as the needle penetrates through the chain and follows the straight and lengthwise direction of the entire body, you leave the end of the thread on which the needle has been inserted; then pass the needle from inside to outside in the other extremity of the wound.
And when you have made the penetration, then make another penetration in that same extremity of the thigh from the outside to the inside; leave the end of the probe that is on this side, and insert the needle into the other internal part from the outside.
And make the penetration with your penetration, which you make penetrate into the probe in the extremity of the thigh which is on the inside until all of it penetrates.
And then begin from this lateral side, drawing out the needle which you have penetrated into the probe on the other side, and return it to the sheath with the end of the probe that is on the opposite side of the thigh; draw out the other from the sheath which is on its part.
And do this one time and another, and do so one more time or two more times before you sew everything that is on the outside according to that example.
And the sum of this manner of suturing is that you sew with thread skin, and try to sew the probe once from the part of the end of the sheath, and leave the other stitch until after you complete the task.
The second species of suturing which Gualia teaches and is about the speech of it and by it recounted, is that you suture that according to semilitut, upon which some surgeons suture that, endeavoring that all parts are attached to their corresponding part according to nature; and they apply the extremity of one to the other extremity of another, and this is done as I have told you.
Hold the needle at the extremity of the thread on your proper side of the part from outside, and make that penetrate into the part inside at that spot, leaving two ends of the suture; then turn the needle and make it penetrate from outside to inside through the two ends of the suture.
Then turn those around, and make each part penetrate from inside to outside through the two ends of the thread on the opposite side.
And this method of suturing is better than the light common suturing, and it is the suturing about which I previously reminded you.
This is the saying of Gualia
And some would say, to correct the stomach缝合，你应该将线穿过这两根针中的几个，从一个开始穿针引线，然后让那根线穿透另一侧的组织，就像那些将器官缝合在一起的线一样。
And know that when the disruption is in the middle part of the abdomen, the suturing of this area is more difficult than in other parts of the abdomen.
More the judgment of plague medicine is the judgment of other plagues.
This cause is when you obtain the recent plague from its own stain before the air alters it, and you reduce the intestine, sew it, and properly treat it, then pause over it with that flesh-colored powder.
And if the air has already altered the plague, then pause over it with some ointments that are present and allow them to harden and draw the threads, and be consolidated and inspected; and then cure it as is the treatment of other plagues until it is healed.
But if you do not have the medicines at hand, then pause over that for a while, until he starts to shiver and shake, and change it every two hours during the day as I have shown you, until he is healed, for you will not need any other medication in minor cases when the swellings are simple.
But if you fear that the swelling may communicate infection to the main limbs, then soak a lion's wool in good-quality olive oil or in pressed oil, and place it around the area between the joints, leaving the armpits uncovered.
And if there is pain or putrefaction in their intestines, then apply it for several hours, then compress that with a strip of black tincture wool, especially if the inflammation has affected the intestine and caused an exiture penetrating into its cavity.
And know that the swelling of the large intestine is less serious and easier to heal than that in the fine intestines.
And it is difficult to heal, for the intestine called "gundul" does not receive healing from swelling that affects it completely; this is due to the great number of veins in it, its large size, the subtlety of that part, and its proximity to the nature of nerves.
If what you are treating is the skin, and you succeed in obtaining the recent (fresh) one, treat that according to your skill with which you return the intestines equally.
If it has passed into the space and is already green or black, when you strengthen that with a cauterization over the area that is darkened, to cause flux of pus, for in the skin there are veins and arteries.
Then cut what is another of that ligament, and place two ends of the cauterization hanging from the part left of the wound open, so that over you the attraction of the wound may be alleviated by the closing of the skin and emission of the arm of the wound.
Remembrance of the wounds when they occur in the intestine.
When disruption occurs in the intestine and is small, then it is possible that it may be restored in some people, therefore I saw one who had been wounded in his belly by the impact of a lance, and the wound was on the right part of the stomach, and the wound was old and caused a fistula, and healed from the operation and distension.
Then I pursue the cure of him whether he was not fixed in the healing of him, but cease to subtlety place that which is healthy within and let the area consolidate.
And when I see the area already consolidated, apply heat to the patient that brings it over the illness of harm in his stomach; and do not allow any to suffer from this ill accident and damage their vital organs by eating and drinking, and further immerse in baths and exercise too much.
And some experienced ones have said that when an abscess is in the intestine and small, then you should draw it out by this method: and you take grains of frankincense; then place both lips of the abscess together and put one of those grains with its mouth open over both lips of the abscess; therefore, when it sticks to those and firmly closes its mouth, cut off the head of it, for it adheres and does not dissolve.
And then place another grain of frankincense nearby, and do not cease to put grains one after another according to the quantity of the entire abscess.
And then reduce that and the wound; and drain those adjacent capsules within the intestine until the intestine is healed; and do not damage the patient during this process.
And it is possible that the intestine has been injured by fine thread made from the intestine of an animal, which is finer than a needle; and you should take the end of this thread of intestine, making sure it is bare, then tie the end of it with fine thread, wrapping it up, and insert that thread into needles and put it around the intestine, then reduce it in the disruption.
And this method of suturing with fine threads is simply done out of trust and hope.
But if the wound is large and extensive, especially if it is in one of the fine intestines, where there is no engendration only infiltration, and does not heal on its own.
For the treatment of abscesses and fistulas.
Know that any wound or abscess when it is wrapped and allowed to become old, and forms a ulcer, and does not heal completely, continues to discharge pus constantly, then in any part of the body, it is universally named a fistula and we call it an abscess.
And according to truth, a fistula is a furred, hard, white node at which there is no pain and which is cavitated just like an abscess; therefore, it is called that same ulcer, i.e., a pain.
And in that ulcer the moisture gathers; and if the humidity is strong, it is absorbed within a few hours. And in some cases, this moisture is thick, small, and fine.
All those causes have now been shown, and the signs of them and their cure by medicine in this division.
And thus I will show you how to cure a fistula which is caused by surgical operation with the hand.
And know that fistulas can occur in all parts of the body; some of which reach the large veins and arteries, or the nerves, or the bladder, or one of the ribs, or one of the vertebrae, or a joint composed thus of the hand and the foot; and these are those near the main part of the body and similar.
And thus, of these fistulas that are caused in this manner, they are among the ailments difficult to cure, and do not readily receive treatment or occupation. And the handling and ignorance of it is labor and negligence.
And if any of these fistulas is so deep that it does not reach the location mentioned, and you hope and trust in its cure, and want to gain knowledge of it, then take a probe or a needle, and if the fistula follows the right path, inquire about it.
If the fistula is tortuous, then investigate that with a fine lead probe, for lead has lightness due to its body and is bent to alleviate and straighten the tortuosity.
And if the fistula has horrible movements, it is not possible for you to signify about it with a probe.
Then christerize the orifices for their orifices, for the humidity with which you christerize that one should relieve the other orifices and flow from them.
And then inquire meticulously, according to the manner by which you can know if here you have or nerves, and is the cavity of the fistula distant or nearby, or it is a fistula with only orifices that is beyond what your strength, through your inquiry, through which you inquire about the patient, and by your compression on the area, you alleviate the pain. You observe the appearance of the significations and the causes of accidents in the apostema.
And when you have stood by all those causes in their true station, then go to the cure according to confidence: for you consider then if it is a fistula apparent nearby or in a place solid, distant from a joint, or from a nerve, or an artery, or a vein, or one of the places which you and I have named.
When you dry the fistula as previously described in its narration, and stop what is within that filtration and of corrupted flesh, and what is born in the orifice of the flesh, or vein and similar, cure that entirely until it is healed.
But if the fistula is of great depth and straight, then delve into the preon until it is as deep as possible, and remove all corrupted flesh; then apply dressed medicines with sharp substances, and insert those into the cavity of the fistula, which you have understood through iron.
And do this with that several times until the sharp medicine corrodes all that is rotten in the cavity of the fistula.
And then restore it by applying ointments that generate healthy flesh until it is healed.
But if it is not healed by this, then cauterize it as we have recommended.
But if the cause of the fistula is bone and you must certify this, then inquire about it and dry it as we have recommended, provided that you do not prohibit any cause related to a vein or a nerve or a main limb as we have said.
But if the bone is exposed and there is some corruption and blackness, then you must hurry to that place where the corruption should be stopped completely; and then care for that as the flesh within that should be healed.
And if it is not healthy and you graft it thus as you did before, then know that you have not completely eradicated the corruption; then expose again over it thoroughly make the reason of it and the purification of it with your last strength, and then restore that.
And therefore if it is healthy, that is good; and if not, then know that that corruption is deep within the body, which you have not reached, and then in that place there is nothing for you but to leave it.
And if the corrupted bone is small, or if it is possible to extract it with forceps, then you extract it with fine forceps that fit well.
And if there are several bones, then thoroughly extract all of them, and from these do not leave any part due to your strength.
But if any contrary cause of the humidities affects them and in their incision there is neither fear nor error, then incise those ligaments or flesh if they are here, and deliver the bones.
But if you are not prepared to expose the bones at your hour, then pause over the wound that may let the wound there, and leave it within where that is near those bones of flesh and ligaments, and guard the wound that is not consolidated, and constrain the section which you have incised in your operation.
If you fear, pause over the wound submerged in hot oil, or a wound submerged in Egyptian balm, or in some of the green ointments, for when these ligaments may relax, and the bones are freed from them, the swelling is alleviated.
But if it is a large bone such as the hip bone or the rib bone or similar to those, and what is corrupt in it affects only the surface of the bone, then rush that with resin only behind where the darkness and corruption are stopped, and then restore the wound.
But if what is of him is corrupted and the corruption has already reached the medulla of the bone, then it is necessary to close that and incise entirely into the place where the corruption has reached, and then cure that when it is consolidated.
And I advise you when you treat a man in the thigh to place it as an example and helper for your operation.
A young man around xxx years of age, who experienced pain in his thigh, and where the painful part inside is on the material inside the body where the material has reached the thigh, and the material is that of an abscess, a large abscess, and it was not due to an external cause.
And then it was extended for a long time due to the error of the doctors where the abscess became enclosed, and the material parts rotted. Its cure was almost paused when the leg became fistulated, and you made several openings in the sore which all drained pus and the body's moisture.
And then the master doctor around two years, and not fire in those who know more in the art, while I was called.
And you see the leg and the fluids flowing from those openings throughout the body; and by that time, the condition of that man was completely stabilized, and his color was yellowish.
And then I inserted the probe into one of those openings and directed the probe to the bone.
And then I examined all the openings closely and found those that connect to them from all parts of the leg.
And then I opened and incised over one of the openings where I exposed a part of the bone, found the corrupted tissue, which was already foul, rotten, and discolored; and a part of the leg had also become corrupted where it had penetrated into the marrow.
And then I clamped what was revealed to me and prepared the exposed bone.
And I judge that it is not in the bone but that corruption which causes abscess and constriction, and I already understood the reason.
And then allow the restoration of the wound with consolidative medicines for a long time, and it is not yet consolidated.
And then you iterate and discover over the bone according to the first discovery, and find continuous corruption in the bone.
And compress what appears to be that corruption, and then you are forced to perform the cure and restoration, and it is not yet restored.
And then you discover over the other side and do not cease to incise the bone little by little particularly and perform the restoration of it, and it is not restored until you incise around a palm's width of it, and he extracts its marrow, and then restore that with medicines, and it is slightly consolidated and healed.
And no iteration is necessary in the operation of the section of it but for the disposition of the fragments of it and for the lack of tolerance of it and fear of death, since he suffers constantly due to excessive evacuation and malignant syncope.
And thus health is through complete healing, and nothing is in lieu of firm flesh; and it is done well the disposition of him in his body and return the virtue of him; and it is conversed in his dispositions and not forced to him contrary in movement nor injury in any cause.
If the bone is prominent in the affected area of the body, then draw it out in this manner: take hold firmly and strongly at the extremity of that prominent bone, command someone to extend it; place a larger woolen pad over the flesh where the bone was left, extend the end of the pad so that you can pull the flesh towards the space left, and uncover the flesh over the area you wish to cut for the blade not to pierce the flesh.
And place a stick or board properly over the bone, for when you do this, the blade of the knife is not forbidden to cut through the damaged flesh.
And ensure that the incision is over the damaged area little by little, for if the corruption is inside the bone and does not appear in its manifestation through sensation, you must make another cut.
And if the bone is corrupted and not protruding, first there is one continuous part connected to the other, and the corruption is in the middle of it or a part of it, then you uncover the flesh from all parts; then place fusts there, and apply that of the first part where the corruption is inside, ensuring the continuity of the closure of the other part.
And the closure should be small according to the location of the corruption, as we have said.
And if the corruption is in the joint, incise that corrupted joint, and set the bone where it continues from the other part.
And if the corruption is in the continuity of two joints, then it is not in its proper place but displaced.
And if the corruption is in the axilla of the arm or shoulder, it is very difficult; however, you must inquire how the corruption appears to you, and incise and dress that area according to any disposition which is within your ability. In every case, it should be corrected to your satisfaction, provided it does not interfere with veins or nerves.
And consider what are incisors and the saws to cut these bones are made of according to the position of the bones, and the preparation of those, and their size, and their subtlety and greatness and smallness, and their hardness and their rarity; so that you prepare for every operation an instrument suitable for that operation.
And consider that operation to you concerning the type of instrument on which you will depend; when you have great study and long knowledge of the ways of this art, and experience of the ways of diseases, then when you have seen them for yourself, you will choose what is convenient for it from the instruments for all diseases.
And you shall learn from the end of this chapter the number of instruments which you will use as simples on which you will act according to your prohibition, which you will experience with the others. Form of the saw:
Form of another saw:
Forma of another will be great:
Forma of the ray: Let the head of this ray be according to the form of the head of a star key, and its points be according to the form of the prongs of a lobster.
And you should only rub those heads of the joints when they are corrupted, or the large mouth is widely open.
Forma of the smaller razor:
Forma of the flat razor:
Forma of another saw properly made: let it be made with an arc above and the sharpness of its edge of iron, and the handle of its body of well-made dagger. Forma of it:
Forma of the razor which has a cavity:
Form of a razor or other fine:
Form of another razor with a curved end:
Form of a small razor resembling a needle:
Form of another cutting instrument, smaller:
Form of another cutting instrument; this resembles a spear, and its end is like a sharp point, and it is used in specific locations along the bones:
Form of a spear-like instrument which is used in relation to the bone that needs to be pierced:
And its end is triangular and sharply pointed.
And it is made of iron from India, and similarly grooved like all the causes we have said regarding razors, cutting instruments, and saws.
For bone cutting edges and the jointing of bones.
The extremities suffer either from an intrinsic cause or from an extrinsic cause, or as you have medicated that corruption through the cure of those medicines and if the cure does not succeed, or sometimes the corruption goes to the member which you do not perceive by any cause, then you must enter that member into this so that it accedes the corruption, in order that the evil escapes through this either of death or of malice which is a greater affliction of the member.
The sign of him to whom this happens is that the member turns black before it is cut, as if it were already burned. Or you may notice the blackness in the area where the burning has entered that member and has taken hold throughout the body; therefore, you must carefully enter there.
And similarly, if the cause of the corruption is a blow from some venomous causes such as that of a scorpion, viper, or rattleSnake.
And if the corruption or blow is at the extremity of the finger, then you must cut the finger and do not give space to the corruption so that it enters your hand.
And when you approach the hand, then incise that of the thumb, and do not give space for corruption to enter within the arm pit.
And if you prefer that, then incise the arm between the elbow and the joint.
And if corruption passes and surrounds the elbow, then there is death for the patient; and to administer another cause other than this for cure is a measure of virtue.
And similarly do for the foot when corruption surrounds the toe, then incise there between one of the bones.
And if it takes in the sole of the foot, then incise the entire foot. But if it enters the ball of the foot, then incise the leg between the joint of the ball.
And if corruption has already spread to the ball of the foot, then there is no remedy but dismissal, and let the patient die.
And the way to incise the member or to sew it is that you hold the ligament in one part and leave which you want to incise, and hold another ligament over the place; extend the minister a ligament to the parts left, and extend the minister another ligament on his side; you separate the flesh which is between two ligaments until all the flesh is exposed; then it is to be incised or sewn.
And ensure that a cloth of linen is placed from all sides so that it does not touch the affected area, and that the wound and abscess are properly aligned and cauterized.
And if you happen to experience bleeding while working, then cauterize the area frequently, or place some astringent powders on it to stop the bleeding; then return to your treatment until it is completed.
And then ligate the injured member with a ligament as needed, and care for it until it is healed.
And I advise you that if a man experiences pain in his foot, this method of accident which you and I have advised, is due to a blackness in his foot caused by a burning that resembles the combustion of fire.
And that corruption accidently first occurs within the said intestine.
And then that person prepares himself to wait until he sees the cure going to the limb with the intensity of his pain from the discomfort and heat, and the inflammation of that foot into the joint, and the wound heals.
Long ago this corruption accident occurred in the hand of the aforementioned surgeon.
And then it comes to me, and I perforate the hand of the aforementioned surgeon to reflect on the excess that I place over the hand of the medicaments; and the reflection does not affect the excess but begins to go into the other part where it began in the hand.
And he asked me to inflame the hand of the patient, and I did not want to do that hoping for the reflection of that excess, more because I feared the inflammation of the hand of the patient dying, as the virtue of the medicament was powerful.
And after he awakened from me, he returned to his land and informed me that the person prepared and inflamed his entire hand, and it healed.
And I have added this narration only to serve as an aid regarding what is known about this illness, and as a guide according to which it should be treated.
On the care of colic and the quality of clysters with medicines.
When an apostema occurs in any fleshly member and the space of the apostema is prolonged such that it collects pus, and then breaks and perforates, and the pus is discharged, and the site is left as if it were a vessel, and the cloth over it remains like a thin covering, and no further corruption occurs, and does not imprint on bone or nerve or ligament, it is called colic, and is not named fistula.
Moreover, if the space is prolonged such that the corruption imprints on any member, then it is called a fistula and we stop.
And the treatment for it is to insert that cloth completely as if it were rotated, especially when it is thin and made like a cloth, and ensure that it does not adhere to the site due to its corruption.
But if you hope that the string adheres and that the corruption has not reached by retrograde consequence, and on the string has passed toward it, then you cure that with a clyster.
And you consider the string, and if it is large and the hand that holds it has an unpleasant odor, then treat it with a clyster using a medicinal Egyptian remedy which consists of oil and wine mixed equally, and be sure to place them in a vessel, and keep the mixture near the fire until the medicine boils and permeates like honey.
And then you take what is necessary from it and dissolve the medicine in water and honey; then treat the string with this clyster, strengthen the orifices of the wound, and leave the medicine in it for a duration of two hours.
And then extract that medicine thoroughly; do this for several days until the string is cleansed and the wound is healed.
And sometimes a clyster is made with water of ashes when this medicine is not available; you take the ashes from vitriol, put them in water; and then extract that and use it to treat the string until you are sure the string has been cleansed.
And if the patient does not tolerate the Egyptian medicine or the ash water, then prepare a mixture of water and honey mixed with zaniar trias, and administer it as a cleansing enema, and prepare another mixture of wine and honey mixed together, for the property of honey is to purify and wash, and wine makes the sinew adhere, especially when there is an excess of stringiness and dryness in the wine.
And when you have passed it several times and you are sure that the sinew is already softened, then administer a mixture that causes flesh to grow in it.
And you take a salve of hyacinth and dissolve that mixture with well-roasted oil and wine that isstringent; or you administer a mixture of several medicines as an enema and apply other salves that have the properties which I have already written about in the treatise on salves.
And if the opening of the sinew is wide in which the enema cannula cannot be inserted, then you gradually enlarge it with a small iron tool, and place it in the opening wrapped in Egyptian salve or basilicon salve while it is being enlarged.
And if the opening is large, then you should suture the lips of it and leave enough quantity in which the enema can be added.
And if the opening from which the stream flows is elevated above the upper parts, then dry that area below it so that the stream can flow into it. When the stream is contained in the curvature of the sinus, flesh will be generated there.
And if you are not able to dry the sinus in the region below as desired, then you should perforate the member for a preparation through which the stream can flow slightly according to your ability and ensure that no cause of the stream is retained.
The one who is over the opening of the sinus, whom you heat at all times so that it does not come out of its place in the arm. And so that you may know if what flows from his arm is much or little, or is digestible, or is non-digestible.
And thus you consider the location of that sinus, if in it the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess.
And as your medication is prolonged in this manner, and you see the matter that is discharged over the opening of the sinus already adheres, or has a growing adherence, then you keep it loose or remove it on the seventh day, and when you remove the bandage, then change it for another and renew the ointment.
But if from the sinus there is a subtle pus, then do not neglect its adherence, for the healing of it takes hold, for some people whose flesh generation in their wounds is slow, and in those, the opposite occurs.
And if in the sinus for several days is seated bran indigest, then perceive that the sinus does not adhere; and if the adherence of the sinus is delayed and the cause is prolonged, then you adjust in drying of the medicines, and if the medicines are moist in their substance and in their virtue, they are dried thus as an ointment daphinicon when there is an excess of addition of zyg.
And the one that is most recently injured, you should take of ointment daphnicon and dissolve it in sweet oil, and apply it over an old piece of cloth in its substance, and then cover it well, and use this.
And make it appear in that action, when there is no brand, ointment daphnicon, honey when it is cooked until it thickens, and use this. Or what you take myrrh and aloes and incense, mix all and powderize over the honey which is on the fire, and then line it over cloth and strengthen it over the sinus; and line it with the honey which you have cooked until it thickens, and powderize over cloth and strengthen it.
And sometimes it is administered to her with long spoonfuls and doses of celestial lily (and the celestial lily) and powdered err and centaury, and use those simples or adjusted ones, sift them, and mix over honey which I have recommended; and use it.
And if the sinus is prolonged and does not heal with this treatment, then you should know that the corruption is in the root of it, and proceed to investigate in the bones or in other hard members or ligaments; then you cure it with a fistula treatment, as described above.
For the cure of tumors, nail attrition, and incision of the digit with additional sectioning.
Panarici is an apostema which leaves the nail of the finger or foot detached, and is firm in other fingers, and as it prolongs, its cure is less prized, or it becomes a caut apostemat, or it corrupts, and inserts a sprig into which you cauterize the root of the nail, and thoroughly corrupt that entire part, and thoroughly permeate its corruption to the bone within which there is an offensive odor, and the extremity of the finger is amputated, and its color becomes dark.
And when you have done that as we said in the division and do not relate your cure, then you must remove all the superfluous matter that is discharged from the joint and place a cautery on it, for a cautery movement is helpful in this.
If the bone is sound and the joint is healthy, and the additions of the joint have already compressed the flesh into the inner parts, and begin to pierce and lead it, then you must pause a thin ray under the angle of the joint that pierces the flesh, and push it out and incise that flesh with ease, and place your hand over what remains of the flesh as the medicines corrosive burn inside until it is thoroughly destroyed; then apply an ointment when it is healed.
If the corruption has already penetrated the bone, then you must incise the bone there and remove it, for no time will heal what is corrupted in the bone.
And if you see the corrosion and corruption spreading to the same area, then you must incise there in one of the joints according to where the memory of its location is retained, and heal that area until it is healed.
If at the joint there is percussion or friction, and there is pain in that place intense, then you at the beginning phlebotomize the patient, and soon dry the joint with sharp spatum in transverse section above in juice, and guard yourself so that the drying does not penetrate into the flesh which remains in the joint; for you will cause the patient intense pain, due to the nature of the excess adjusted flesh in that place; and cure that place with what alleviates pain.
But thus adjusted, which is native in many people, the flesh is very light and loose, or the joint is very light and loose.
And some of it is native in the region of the joint, or the nature of it is in certain nodules of the fingers. But that which is native in certain nodules of the finger is not troublesome, while that which is native in the joints is more loose and troublesome.
And for those that are native fleshly, the drying is light, and you should incise it in its region with a sharp knife.
More difficult for those born near the joint, the cure is hard; therefore, beware of its removal.
More difficult for those born near the knuckles, cut into the beginning of the flesh around in a round incision into the bone, and nearby will be one of those suitable joints for this, and carefully heal that until it is sound.
More difficult the consolidation which occurs to the fingers between their knuckles due to observed changes or by nature of the person who is born with such issues, or due to the consolidation of plague or from burning, or from a similar condition, then you must cure that consolidation until the fingers return to their natural form.
And place between the bandages what you have infused in olive oil so that they do not consolidate lightly, and separate between them, or place a thin sheet of lead between them until it is properly consolidated.
And similarly, if consolidation occurs in some fingers on the palm, then you must cure that consolidation according to preparation and conform to the figure of the limb.
Of varicose veins, these are such.
Varicose veins are such, and these are thickened veins full of melancholic superfluities that occur in the parts of the body, with the greatest occurrence in the groins, especially in the groins of travelers and workers and those who carry things.
Then you should administer a purge of the body with black bile several times until the expulsion is strong, and then bleed the patient from the internal jugular vein.
More importantly, the treatment of varicose veins can be done in two ways: one is to incise and extract that black blood, and the other way is to elevate the vein and remove it entirely.
The procedure is as follows: apply a cloth to the groin area with warm water until the thick blood has resolved, which is due to the swelling of the groin. Then strengthen the patient's leg above the knee by placing a bandage between the lower part of the thigh and the upper part just below the kneecap. Next, elevate the vein in one, two, or three places with a wide incision, and using your hand, raise the black blood from below the groin upwards into the thigh, until you have removed the quantity you desire, which is sufficient to neutralize the effect of the black bile.
And then tie her up, and command her to abstain from foods generating black bile.
And continue the cure through phlebotomy when the veins are filled and this is noticed by the patient.
Raise the limb in this manner: you raise the leg of the patient, if there are any sores on it, then immerse it in warm water and wrap the leg with wet cloths until it becomes red and the veins are prominent; or exercise it with strong exercise if warm water is not available, until the limb is heated.
And then dry the bandage along the length of the vein by wrapping it tightly, either at the front or at the back of the limb.
And then cut the bandage with scissors and incise the vein from all sides until blood appears, and you should notice the color of the blood darkening as it flows.
And then, with the bandage in hand, you should notice that white which appears like a cord.
And then you place that ligament elevated and extended from the knee, and suspend it on an onion or a lion's heart.
And then dry another section near that section for three digits, and then scrape the knee from above the vein where it appeared.
And then elevate that and incise the rear section of the tendon, and then extract that and elevate it where it enters through the second section, and then extract it from the section that is above that.
And do this where you extract that from the section that is highest above or above all sections, where everything enters; then incise that.
And if you do not obey to extract and elevate, then insert a strong doubled needle with a thread and tie that, and then extract it. Or insert another of the ligament and rotate your hand in all directions where it is extended. And make sure it is not incised; for if it is broken, it will be difficult to elevate that part and has come over the wound through that damage.
And when all that is done, then place over the wound wool soaked in wine and oil, whether rubbed or not rubbed with oil, and care for it until it is healed.
And if the vein is contracted having a tortuosity in which there is an envelopment at the parts, and it is not according to rectitude as we have said, then cut into that entirely at all parts of its tortuosity and at the locations of its envelopment, and suspend that with threads so you lift that entirely.
And guard yourself in your section so that you do not cut the vein and that you do not damage that, for it will be difficult to lift that; and use your prudence there.
Form of the incident where the vein is dried up:
It is not made as with other stitches orp, nor of sharp point for fear that it damage the vein; and it is of large flexibility leon, for if it were subtle, it would cut the vein by its subtlety; having this in its superfluous thickness as we have said.
From the extraction of the crus vein.
This vein is generated in the legs from the calf muscles as described by Al-Ategi in the lands of Arabs and in the lands of India, in those dry and poor soils with little resilience where neither grass nor trees grow.
And this vein is generated in other parts of the body besides the calf muscles.
And its generation is from putrefaction that leaves the chain as if venom inside the body, serpents, vermin, and worms breeding between the chain and the flesh.
And the sign of the susceptibility to the onset of this is when you encounter inflammation in the calf; then, nearby, the area becomes vesicated; and soon after, the vein starts to protrude from the site of that vesication, as if it were a plant sprouting.
And then when the extremity appears, then cover that area with a piece of lead weighing as much as one drachm, or two thirds of a drachm. Press it there and let the lead hang from the calf.
And as often as there is any cause for the parts outside to swell, wrap this in lead and apply it. And if the wound is prolonged, then you incise a part of it and wrap the remainder; and do not incise that which is inside while it is outside, for if you incise it, it will contract and enter the flesh, causing an abscess, inflammation, and a bad ulcer.
To treat the wound adequately and extract it little by little, until it is expelled from the fundament of the patient and do not cause any inflammation in the body.
And from this vein, some men have been stretched out as long as 5 or 10 palms and I have already been told that one was stretched to 20 palms.
And if it is incised during its medicatio time, then insert the probe into the tract of the patient and perforate that along the length of the body, until all that is in the material is evacuated, and administer putrefaction to the area for several days with medicines; and then cure it through the treatment of abscesses.
And this vein sometimes has many openings, especially when it appears at the joint of the foot or in the foot, and brings into it many openings, and is derived from each opening.
And therefore cure it in this way as we have said in the division and above.
Of the section on worms generated under the skin, which is called bovine illness.
This illness is named in some lands as the bovine disease. For many times it appears among cattle, and a few worms are present within which are native between the bone and the flesh, and ascend and descend throughout the body, and are shown by their own movement from member to member while they disrupt the bone and come out.
And its generation is through the putrefaction of some humors, just as worms and snakes and larvae and roundworms are generated in the belly.
And it is feared because of its malice, for when it goes into the body and rises to the head, and penetrates the brain, then strongly affects it and enters and destroys the brain, and this occurs many times.
And when you want to cure that and extract it, then do not perform so without observing its natural movement and appearance in relation to the sensation, then see that you have what is upon it and what is left it in softness and strong constriction, and dry upon it and extract that.
And if it is found in the flesh and you do not find it, then place a cautery on fire over the area where it resides, and the major fear is corruption of it, which corrupts the area as we have said.
And if you see that it has reached the head near the ear, then bind strongly over the brow with a strong constriction, and dry upon it, and extract it; and know that the disease uses modification of its body with medicines expelling foul humors, and beware of foods causing putrefaction.
Of the section regarding the disease of the kidney.
This disease is called nafir in our land, and it is pain which occurs in some members, and often is displaced from member to member.
And now I have seen that according to which I will recount. I was called to a sick woman at a village, and examined her arm and found a small swelling in the vein network of the arm. After it had risen for about an hour, I saw that this swelling went up like a worm rising from one place to another, though less urgently than feared, appearing as if it were living silver moving from place to place.
And then I noted the pain in that area and fixed my finger on the muscle, and there it remained for about an hour.
And then I corrected on the other side of the body near where pain occurred in the other arm.
And then I was told that she should move her body around; and it was too wonderful to see the change in her and the speed at which the pain moved from one part of the body to another. And I had already seen this before in my own patients in that manner, but I have also seen many cases where the pain is found to be permuted from one limb to another. But not all have heels thus in women.
And I do not consider it to be so, but rather because the woman was emaciated, with a dry body and veins exposed, and in this appearance there is a perception of that distension changed.
And it is necessary that this backward curvature not appear in those who are delicate and have a humid corpus with engorged veins.
And since you want the cure for it, and the patient feels that pain, if it does not appear to you as a heel in the way we have said, then strengthen that area and gently and thoroughly over it until the distended vein subsides, and cauterize the place.
But if you do not see it at the heels, then cure that by evacuation of the body and what you expel from distension, and purge those with stinking pills and with snake root pills and similars.
From the extraction of arrows.
Arrows are diverse according to the species, and according to the places of the body in which they occur, for their diversity is that some have large points, small, concave, and silent, being solid; and others have three angles, and those to which belong tongues; and those to which belong feathers.
And of the signs of fever, when the arrow hits it and pierces through the bone, and is situated above the brain, which is on top of the skull, for it happens by intense heat, scotoma, vertigo, redness in the palms, inflammation and redness of the tongue, spasms and confusion of understanding, and vomiting of bile, and the body becomes weak, speech is cut off, and voice destroyed, and situated at the location of the wound a white moisture resembling dust, and its appearance similar to the humidity of flesh.
And if you see these signs in this manner, then abstain from the cure and extraction of the arrow, unless it is outside.
And the signs of the arrow when stuck in the heart are that it is close to the left nipple, and one feels a hard lump there, which is not visible; and the strong movement of the arrow seems like the pulse, and the flow of the black and foul blood, and the coldness of the extremities, cyanosis, and syncope; and from this you know that death descends upon him completely.
And the signs when the arrow has wounded the lung are spitting of frothy blood from the wound, and the vessels near the neck are swollen, and the color of the patient changes, and he breathes great sighs or demands air violently.
And if the arrow is stuck in the membrane which is in the foot, and the pain at that time is near the small bones, then it causes a great and violent pain and breathing difficulties, and not all the members' muscles are affected.
And if you touch the arrow in the stomach, then strongly press the wound with a piece of undigested food.
And if you touch the arrow in the abdomen, and it is stuck there, place a piece of the torn skin, or intestine, over the wound, or do not hope for its recovery through the removal of the arrow.
And if the arrow touches the bladder, and it penetrates through urine, and any process from it affects the parts outside, then strong pain over the wound indicates that it is fatal.
Moreover, the other limbs such as the face, neck, shoulder, arm, auxiliary muscles, spinal bones, furcula, costal cavity, and their counterparts of the limbs are also saved according to major dispositions when the arrow does not find a vein or artery and is not a venomous arrow.
And I will recount to you what I have seen about the nature of these arrows, so that you may understand its significance for treatment.
The cause is that in a man an arrow struck the lacrimal of his eye in the root of his nose, and I extracted it from one side, left his ear gray, and he recovered, and was not damaged in his eye.
And I extracted another arrow from a Jew which struck him in his eye gray, left the eyelid, and the arrow was already hidden so that only a small extremity attached to its shaft could be found, and it was a large arrow among the sharp arrows of the Turks, with iron lion on which there were no ears.
And the Jew recovered, and was not damaged in his eye despite the severe injury.
And I extracted another arrow from a Christian man which was struck in the shoulder, and it was an Arab arrow, and that one had ears; then I incised over it between two ribs, and it was already submerged in his shoulder; then I separated it finely, and soon extracted it, and the Christian recovered.
And extracted another arrow from a man which was lodged in his belly, and perceived that he died from that; and therefore, after passing thirty days and no change occurring due to any of his dispositions, incised over the arrow and managed it, and he was healed, and did not suffer any ill accident.
And there was a man in whom an arrow struck his back, and the wound had healed over. And after approaching seven years, incise the arrow at the root of the thigh.
And there was a woman to whom an arrow struck her belly, and the wound had healed inside her, and no change occurred in any of her natural operations, and the woman did not experience any discomfort during her operations.
And there was another man to whom an arrow struck his face, and the wound had healed, but broke the arrow, not experiencing any more pain, and appeared similar to this.
And I extracted the arrow from the prince of the king, who was struck in the middle of his nose, and it had slightly tilted to the right side, with the entire arrow hidden.
And I was called for the cure around the wound within three days.
And then you will find the wound of the arrow stretched out; and then you will inquire about the one that feels subtle, and does not feel it; but he felt the puncture when you touched his right ear, and then suspected that this puncture was at the tip of the arrow.
And apply the place to be applied with an attractive and digestive plaster, trusting that the place we apply it will show me the location of the arrow, so it can dry on that area.
And do not miss the significant location where the arrow hit; and continue applying the plaster over it for several days without missing any spot; and meanwhile, the wound consolidates, and the patient experiences pain from the removal of the arrow after a few days, and this happens to me.
And then place a sharp corrosive medicine on the wound for several days until it becomes inflamed, and then inquire about that area, finding the tip of the arrow, which adheres to the shaft.
And then you adjust in the opening of the wound with that sharp medicine until I visibly see the tip of the arrow, and pass to my time after four months.
And then, once the wound is enlarged and I can insert the forceps into it, I repeatedly work on that, without using any aid, so that I do not cease to finesse and invent various methods of handling it until one day, by chance, I successfully grasp the object with the forceps in a descenting manner as described at the end of this chapter. Then, I restore the wound.
And some doctors judged that the cartilage of the nose is not restored, but I restored it, and the wound was consolidated, and the patient recovered completely, with no scar from any cause.
And I recount to you the quality of extracting some arrows, so that you pause and consider this rule and meaning behind what I have not said, for the parts of this art and the definitions of those are not understood in narration nor do they comprehend those freely.
And the wise craftsmen compare little on motion; and on what is present they compare it to what is absent; and find new operations and new instruments for the descent of foreign causes when they occur.
And thus I say that arrows are not extricated from the members in which they are inserted but according to two manners: either by attraction of the place in which they enter; or by the contrary part.
And that which is extricated by the place where it entered, or the arrow penetrating a fleshly part and being inserted and then extricated.
And if it does not obey the impression of the hour in which it entered, then you should leave it for a few days until the flesh around it heals and the attraction and its exit are alleviated.
And similarly, if it is inserted into bone and does not obey your impression, then leave that for a few days and apply attraction and movement to it each day, and it will eventually be extricated.
And if you do not obey your attempt for some days, then you must make a perforation in the circuit of the arrow at that bone of any part moving subtly within which the area is amplified by the arrow.
But if the arrow is already hidden in the place of the body and hidden from sensation, then you inquire about that area with your hand, and if you feel it, then probe with some instruments which are suitable for its extraction.
And if you cannot remove it due to the depth of the wound and the length of the arrow, and here there are neither nerves nor veins, then you cut into the wound to expand it and make it possible to extract the arrow.
And if it is in the ears where it is lodged, then you cut into the flesh in which it is embedded, completely dislodging it with all that you can do; and use your skill here, if you cannot withdraw the flesh in the fracture of the ears and in the torsion of those parts that must obey.
And when you administer the extraction of the arrow in any place where it is, then you use your hand twisted with forceps at all parts to make it obey; and with subtle skill, ensure that the arrow is not broken and that it is made easy for its extraction.
And if you cannot operate on that side during your turn, then you let it for some days until the parts that are in the circuit of him heal, and then operate on the other side which is then alleviated. And if it causes you contrary effects from the blood, then you administer what we have said about cure in its chapter.
And preserve your virtue in the incision of veins or nerves, or cords, and administer ease in every manner for the escape of the arrow; and do this with facilitation, tranquility, slowness, and firmness as you advise.
And therefore make the arrow contract by itself so that the patient is according to the figure according to which you should place the arrow in him, for this is more advantageous. And if this is not possible for you, then administer what is possible for you according to the figures.
And for arrows that are deflected contrary to the other part, or that you have already treated some part of them from the external parts, or cause congestion in the proximal end of the arrow by the feeling of the part above the femoral pulse; then extract it over that; and let the extraction be according to the quantity in which the forceps take hold; and then remove it, for it is made light with evisceration.
But if it is retained in the joint, then twist the leg according to the opposite direction where the arrow presses on the joint, and enlarge it slightly, and then extract it.
But if not, leave it for a few days, and then repeat the procedure where it is sore.
But if the shaft of the arrow is there, then push it into it.
But if the shaft is embedded and you wish to administer pressure, then insert it there. If it is difficult, stir it gently so that the concavity of the shaft aligns with the channel of the arrow, and then push it into place.
But if the arrow is concave, then push it with strong stirring into it, for the arrow will be expanded by this.
And if the arrow is poisoned, then ensure that you concave all the flesh where it is located, if possible, and then treat it with whatever is appropriate.
And if the arrow hits the foot, or the abdomen, or the bladder, or the side, and is close enough to where you touch it directly, and it is possible to extract it there, then extract it and carefully remove any clots of blood or nerves, and stitch the wound so that it may heal.
Form of forceps with which arrows are extracted:
If their ends are shaped like the beak of a bird, made such that they grasp the arrow when placed on it, so as not to let it slip.
And from these are made special forceps, large, few, and medium-sized, according to the size of the arrow and its smallness, and the width of the wound, and its shape.
So that it may be alleviated for the patient in the concave groove and is pressed towards it.
Of phlebotomy of the veins.
Of phlebotomy of the veins. The veins for phlebotomy from which it is customary to bleed are xxx, of which are in chapter XVI, are two pulsating veins which are near the ears, called by the Alhacen; two herbs that are on the two temples apparent; and two veins that are under the two eyes called aspirants; and one vein in the middle part of the forehead, and one vein that is at the extremity of the nose; and two guidegii that are at the neck; and two veins that are in the upper lip; and two veins that are in the lower lip; and — these are the veins called algelic —; and two veins that are behind the tongue. Moreover, the veins that are phlebotomized in the wrists are V; of these, one is cephalic, and is from the wild thistle; the people call it "the vein of the head," and it is a midline vein, composed of one branch of the basilica and another branch of the cephalic; they call this one the people "vein of the whole body," and basilica is the vein which is located in the domestic thistle, and is called "citullar," and the common people call it "the vein of the belly"; funis of the arm, and is placed over the brachial, and it is this one on which phlebotomy is performed, and it is the one that appears above the elbow by obvious appearance; and salvatella, and it is the vein between the said auricular and the smaller said, and it is in it two branches.
In the foot and the thigh there are three veins; one of those is that which gives the curvature to the horn of the wild beast; and the second is sophena, and its place is given in the thigh of the domestic animal; and the sciatic vein, and its place is given in the thigh of the wild beast; and in the thigh there are other veins similar to those.
The disease of the veins that are near the ears is catarrhs, migraines, headaches, and ulcers of the head from ancient illnesses.
And the quality of sanguining those is according to what I will count to you: it is that you rub the patient's head, and rub the patient's head at the occiput in the place of both veins with a wide cloth with good friction; then strongly press the patient's neck with a band where the two appear and their places are close to the ears in two pressed areas of the head; and you want that at your right hand, and if you feel the pulse of those at your right hand here it is attempted.
Then take the surgical lancet, which is the one that will be inserted, and then insert it into the vein between where the phlebotomy will reach the mouth. And then raise your hand to the vein and its branches above and cut the vein with an incision oblique. And let the length of the incision be the size of two digits adjusted or around that; and let the blood flow out as much as you want.
And then apply powders and leave that there until it is healed.
And already it was mentioned at the beginning of this book regarding the incision and their cautery.
More of the two arterial veins that are at the temple for the youthfulness of phlebotomy is ancient and evil, as well as continuous headache and a body full of acute effusions in the feet.
And the quality of phlebotomizing those is as I will recount to you: constrict the patient's neck with a ligature until the two veins appear by sensation manifestly, and feel the pulse at their location with your finger; and then you can proceed.
And then you elevate the codena above the vein at the parts above as you have just indicated, and insert the fleurotomus incidently, and elevate the vein in them; and incise that thus as you have done in the two other veins; and let the blood flow according to the quantity of your necessity.
And then release the compression of the thigh, and place your hand on the vein for an hour, and then place a cube and powder there and strengthen that above with a strong bandage, and leave it until it is healed.
And already the memory of them is recalled, and after that the incision, and the puncture at the beginning of the limb.
And therefore the treatment of fleurotomia of the vein of the forehead is close to the fleurotomia of the cephalic for ancient illnesses of the face and migraines, swelling, and foul ulcers.
And the quality of the fleurotomia of the forehead is according to what I will recount to you; it is that the patient strengthens his side with a bandage under which the vein appears; and then take the instrument which is called fossori, this is its form:
Pause the puncture at the point which is at the head of the outlet over that vein, and strike it either from above or another cause in the manner of it, and let the blood flow according to the quantity you wish; then remove the perforation of the patient and strengthen it so that it may be healed.
Sometimes the space is opened by lateral puncture, but I do not know if the lateral puncture is as acute as other punctures, being more broad in nature, and one should puncture it transversely, because the bone is close by and strong, so a puncture that is too thin would likely break through the bone.
More the youth of the two veins that are at the corners of the eyes through the wrinkles of the eye by heat and inflammation in the eyes, and for facial ailments.
The quality of the puncture is that the patient's wound strengthens with a bandage, and then one should puncture those areas, and you stand over the head of the patient.
And the puncture should be made transversely along the length a little, for in that place there is no flesh; and if the puncture is thin, strengthen its extremity lest it break.
And then let the bleeding continue as long as it is necessary, and place your hand over those wounds, strengthen them for one night, and then remove those.
When the femoral puncture of the vein is advisable for acute fever and severe thirst, and for facial ailments, migraines, and swelling that occurs in the face, especially when it is chronic.
And the quality of the femoral puncture is that the patient clenches his teeth and holds his nose with your left hand, and perform the femoral puncture with a thin long needle in the middle of the nasal cavity according to the correct location, for the vein does not appear here by sensation, and the bleeding starts soon.
Cover your hand with the needle puncture gradually and let the bleeding continue as needed; then remove it after one night, for the wound heals rather quickly.
And the indication for the femoral puncture is to treat arthritis, leprosy, and other chronic ailments and corrosive ulcers similarly to phlebotomy.
And the quality of the femoral incision is that the patient strains to defecate at each hole in his side; and the surgeons are over the patient's head, and the patient lies on a bench.
And gradually perform the femoral incision along the vein with a small, ample cut little by little; and extract blood according to the season's quantity or according to what is needed as is customary; and make a similar incision on the other vein.
And gradually remove the lint and strengthen both veins with a mid-vein ligature so that the patient does not become overly feverish, and leave within the wound until the plague is healed.
And the benefit of the femoral incision on the algirich veins, it helps to discharge small abscesses and pustules from the mouth and corruption of the gums and bad ulcers and fissures, and bad ulcers that are in the nose and around it.
And the quality of the femoral incision is that you make the patient lie down before you, and strengthen his neck with a bandage, and then turn the lips and look at two veins, one from the right side of the lip and the second from the left; the demonstration of each is by the blackness of each of both, and what is more, in the area around those are small black veins; then incise each through an incision.
But if you are uncertain about which one it is, then you understand the incision of the larger one and the most obvious one among them.
And make the appearance of the two veins that are above the lips.
But the treatment for the two veins that are below the tongue is close to the phlebotomy of the cephalic vein, especially those located in the glosse, for the illness of the uvula, and other illnesses of the mouth.
And the quality of phlebotomizing those veins is to follow the illness as it moves in front of your left side before the sun rises, elevate the tongue, and look at the tongue from both sides of its vein, noting that the color of each becomes gradually darker.
And then phlebotomize each one; be sure not to end your hand in phlebotomy of those, for they are arteries.
And your veins which are ligated in the groin are in them customarily found in all men, and the ligation of their veins is done according to two ways, or they put a ligature for ligation mirtilat or olive at subtlety declining; or dry with a surgical ligation, and call it alnessil, and this is its form:
it is like the flax you see, and you apply to open the concave veins filled with prominent large arteries, and at those that contain thick turbid blood.
And this ligation is of lesser width and more subtle extremity, and you apply it to the ligation of thin veins that contain fine citrus blood.
May the youth of the femoral incision of the basilic vein, which is one of three veins: for from it you extract the blood from the patient that you leave to drain the legs and the belly.
And it convenes to the phlebotomizer, when performing that phlebotomy, that he well guard it and be over-cautious in it, for if he leaves the artery there in the puncture of the phlebotomy, he will incise that artery and cause flows of blood, so that one must ensure not to phlebotomize at a phlebotomy puncture before sectioning with a needle.
And if the basilic vein does not appear by obvious manifestation, then it convenes that you leave that and change to the other, or that you search for one of its branches; or that you phlebotomize in a location at the end of the arm, for that is manifest; and section the other vein with a needle as we have said.
May it be that you want the phlebotomy of the femoral vein, then in front of the stricture of the thigh, touch the location between where you know the pulse, and place your hand over it with pressure; then raise the thigh and section the vein with a concave incision as we have said; and guard that the percussion does not reach some space of the area of the artery.
And when you see, as you tighten the ligament, inflation occurs in the place that you have touched with your hand, then that inflation is artery inflation, and therefore avoid it.
And if you see the blood flow during phlebotomy as golden in children, and the blood is thin and clear, then you know it is arterial blood; then close and pause your hand for a long time over that place; and approach your hand there, and if the blood stops flowing, and four or five drops stop flowing, then you tighten your arm and let go of that.
And keep the patient from the moccio of it, and be over-fearful of it and do not wet that for a few days until it is healed.
And if the blood does not stop flowing, and you know that you should not be doing this without proper medical knowledge, then cut the artery if it appears to you; for its extremity will contract and the blood will stop flowing; or take some from a fistula, and do that, and take half of it and apply it strongly over the vein with stricture descent on the ligament and with powder the next day.
And if the wound is cut open, that is good; otherwise, treat that part as described previously in the place of the wounds where the flow of blood was stopped.
And the cutting open of the wound is difficult in many positions due to the small size of the wound and the possibility of limb movement.
More from the dark vein, phlebotomy is beneficial that you extract the blood from the part above the head and from the part below the body; for this, it is composed of a branch of the basilica vein and a branch of the cephalic vein, as we have said.
And when phlebotomizing the vein that is over-taxed in this phlebotomy, note that what you have left is a nerve; then if you adjust the puncture and find the nerve, it will cause stupor, and recovery from it is difficult. It is not easily cured completely. This nerve often appears with sensations; if hidden to some people and thin and not obvious, then pause your phlebotomy at the section of alnessil, and avoid the nerve with your forceps.
And if the vein is between two nerves, then you cut the vein lengthwise.
The purpose of the phlebotomy of the cephalic vein is to draw blood from the head and alleviate the ailments of the feet.
And here specifically, if you want the phlebotomy to be effective, use either an olive branch or a myrtle branch; for these are clean and free from all veins, and do not injure the artery or nerves.
But nevertheless, an abscess is stronger in some people, when it is not phlebotomized in the first percussion; however, do not press on it again to treat the abscess.
The first thing is that you must know that the bloodletting is not administered except for conservation of health and with hope for it and caution about the outcome of illnesses, and that the bloodletting be done in one of the veins that are in the armpit: namely, cephalic, basilic, and femoral; and that the bloodletting be done at the beginning of spring, on fasting in spring and autumn, and in winter around meals, when signs of repletion appear.
And the bloodletting be done on the third day or at the first opportunity after three hours of the day have passed.
More bloodletting that is administered, more when it provokes convenience and necessity at that time, whether night or day, in any hour and at all times.
And know that an infant should not be bloodlet until it has reached four years, and a woman who is pregnant should not be bloodlet except in the fourth month between the seventh and eighth months, and old women should not be bloodlet which have passed fifty years.
And when someone wishes to be lanced in some manner beforehand, make sure to modify his intestines before the lancing with a leon clister, if there is a mota fenixed retained, so that the veins do not eject the superfluous fluids during the lancing of the intestines, which are purged, and do not harm the principal members.
And patients who are lanced do not suffer from nausea, vomiting, or diarrhea, nor evacuation of disease or intoxication until what is in them is evacuated, nor gout, but more importantly, lancing is feared before colic pain, before vomiting, before abdominal condition, before multiplication of coitus and labor and exercise before fasting or watching, and for all causes that dissolve the virtue, either corporeally or animal.
And consider in the subtlety of humors before this if the wound is large, with food and drinks, and with medicines if this is possible at this time.
And consider bathing the wound if any cause does not prohibit it, or exercise due to some exercise so that the wound becomes subtle.
And pause the femoral incision at the foot of the bed, so around three o'clock, as we have said.
And I assure you that the foot of that side should be guarded on the day of all evil accidents, as when it is distressed, anger, fear, and all bodily accidents, as when it is tired and excessive work or intercourse and similar to them.
And at her side, let the causes in the use of which custom has accustomed men with aromatics and perfumes and with balsams and similar according to the quantity and possibility be present.
And follow the femoral incision over a cushion that is higher than the cushion on which the patient lies.
Then withdraw his leg, and rub it with your hand the femoral incision two or three times; then tightly bind it with a strap and wrap it twice.
And let the stricture be tempered, for when the stricture is not equal, or when the stricture is due to excess, then prohibit the flow of blood; or when it is due to relaxation, then similarly control the body's flow of blood.
And near the stricture, ensure that those who are to perform the ligation press their hands together between them where the veins are swollen and made clear by sensation.
And near the ligation, apply a little antiseptic oil to the site properly; then place your left hand index finger on the vein, positioning the location for the ligation so that the vein slightly protrudes and is easily felt. This is where you find the vein resembling a fleeing cord, which is full of venosity. When you press the ligation over this area, it contracts, revealing the location to the ligator; if the ligation does not take on the vein, but instead closes it off, that is good.
And therefore, ensure that the ligator is firm and attentive to all these causes.
And then place the ligature, but if the vein bursts in one go, that is good; otherwise, repeat this or the other loop, slightly securing the area, or apply a compress if the site does not show signs of suppuration.
And if the place is suppurated, or the wound becomes inflamed, then you let it be for one or two days, and do not tighten the bandage, for fear that it will produce a pus abscess or not heal.
And repeat the phlebotomy if necessary.
And if the perception is small and the wound heals subtly, and you fear that it will not heal the amount you want, then repeat the phlebotomy in that vein according to correctness and adjust slightly to the perceived amount. Do this with hastiness before the place suppurates, for when the place suppurates, you should have little perception.
But if you see that it already suppurates, then do not repeat it over it, for there is no cause to do so; instead, place it over a part of the wound where pus does not appear, which alleviates the body from the wound. And it is better in this place than oil and other oils.
And similarly administer the wound of oil in all phlebotomies where you have lanced the veins; they should prohibit the flow of blood from the body, and do this with tyriaca alfadoc and sagzenea when placed over the area, for the blood is thinned and circulated when it is thick.
And if in the place of the incision a large abscess is generated, many motile vesicles occur, especially to him who has not been bled at that time nor during the appearance of the small vein, then apply over the area a soaked sponge in water and salt, slightly warm, and keep it there for one hour, as it dissolves.
And make sure to do this near the end of the bleeding from that vein with the aid of the other vein.
And if any blackness or greenish color remains in the area for several days, do not note this; if you wish, place over it some solution of aloes and myrrh, or some juice of mint or of camphor, or a similar substance.
And many motile vesicles occur and abscesses form from the incision of the basilica.
And place your hand over that area. If then you find it soft, apply your compress to that area, as that eminence is bad and harmful; then be careful to place over it some of what we have said, for strong blood will flow from the artery.
And apply a plaster to this where there is stiffness, so that the area may become hardened, and then treat it with the other treatment until it is healed.
And know that you should draw from the patient all according to the quantity of its virtue and according to the dominant color above the wound as it appears.
And if the blood is black, let it remain until it becomes clear; and similarly, if you see it thick, let it continue to flow until it becomes thin; and similarly, if it is acute, let it continue until its sharpness is reduced.
And know that for one who is full and strong and has the need for a single bloodletting, the incision of the vein should be enlarged and the bleeding should be allowed.
And for one who is weak, do the opposite, and know that you should draw off in smaller quantities over several days, and that you should let it continue.
And the best that is administered in bloodletting from a vein is a transverse section, not a puncture.
This method of phlebotomy avoids the flow of blood and the cutting of nerves, and is more advisable and safer than phlebotomy according to length and width.
And to which it is customary for fainting to occur, before the phlebotomy, take a little of wine of millet grains or of simple chamomile; and extract from the upper part of the blood in three or four draws.
And if there is a sensation of coldness, before the phlebotomy, take a drink of myrrh syrup or of aromatic honey syrup flavored with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and saffron, or an aromatic and fragrant syrup.
And if fainting occurs, avoid the phlebotomy, as it is caused by the passage of thick blood, then it is advisable to drink water from meat and a fragrant subtle syrup; use its aroma, and place his foot in that.
And use the other causes that we have said in the division in the chapter on fainting by evacuation.
And here you want to cool his arm and dissolve his blood for the second time, incise him from which the phlebotomy is by major evacuation, and its virtue is refrigerant, that evacuates the blood little by little, so it depends on the quantity of its virtue in the continuous days.
And if you want to cool his arm and draw his blood for the second time, and his body is strong, then do this about seven or nine hours after the first phlebotomy.
And if you want to draw the blood from his body in the opposite direction of the part where it declines, do so when it is cooled on the second day or the third.
And if that body in which there is hot blood already scalded and heated, causing a fever, draw the blood from it all at once in one time, and let a large quantity be drawn, and intensify the feeling when you are about to cause syncope; for you should have all the conditions of phlebotomy preserved; and place your hand on the pulse, to prevent the body from dying instead of causing syncope, because several times this should be done when the phlebotomist is ignorant and negligent.
And do not withdraw when you want to remove the arm and evacuate the blood for a second time, as the openings of the vein are already closed and it is difficult for the blood to issue forth, that you press upon it with firmness and slightly extend it, for this is too much evil.
Let it remain in the state of being phlebotomized according to the rule; or keep what is left from the sharpness of the phlebotomy that has coagulated the blood in the openings of the vein; or place over it a compress of tyriaca alfalfa, or sagenea, and cover it with a light compression until the blood is settled.
And if the vein is inflamed, let that be and do not touch it until the inflammation is subsided.
And if necessity prompts you to evacuate the blood again, and there is no excuse, then let that (arm) bleed in that same place or in the other arm at another vein.
And the vein called "funis del bras" is phlebotomized in place of the funica or basilica, when they are not found or are hidden, for it is composed of those.
The quality of the phlebotomy for him is that the patient inserts his hand in cold water after the vein has become red and visibly appears.
And then bind tightly over that area with astringent; and then perform phlebotomy according to the transverse small vein, neither longitudinally nor laterally.
And let the incision be wide, and let your phlebotomy be in the area where you performed it over the joint of the hand.
And if the flow of blood is stopped, then repeatedly immerse your hand in cold water and let the blood run into the water until you achieve your necessity.
But if you are in the days of summer, then you are excused from repeatedly immersing your hand in cold water, and it is better to let the body cool the blood in cold water during winter.
And the phlebotomy of this vein is safer than of all other veins, for it has no pulsating vein or nerve.
And the phlebotomy of the vein in the right hand is related to liver diseases.
And the quality of the phlebotomy is that you press the hand with flax or with your hand, having it more in auriga position, while the vein is inflamed and well demonstrated at once; then puncture that one transversely; and if you incise it completely, no harm will ensue.
And make sure that you do not pull your hand out of the phlebotomy, but leave it with the nerves of the fingers naked and without flesh.
And place your hand in the auriga position and let the blood flow through it, for if you do not place it in the auriga position, the blood will coagulate in the orifice of the vein, which is forbidden to occur.
And when the blood is extracted according to the necessary quantity, then pause over the vein with oil and salt, so that it does not become completely consolidated; similarly ensure that you do this in all similar cases.
The benefit of performing the femoral incision on that side of the left arm is that it is closer to the ailments of the thigh.
And perform the femoral incision on the other side in the same manner as you have done on the other.
And the benefit of incising the vein cephena is for ailments in the left side of the body, such as ailments of the liver, and retention of menses, and for ailments of throats and old ulcers of thighs and ancient swellings, and for their similar ailments.
And the quality of the femoral incision on the other side is that the patient inserts his foot in warm water and makes friction thereupon, causing the veins to appear; then place a bandage over the joint of the foot; and at the location of the vein, cut it open clearly, where its branches are located in the surface of the foot.
And therefore, perform the femoral incision wider if there is swelling in the thigh. Cut it open clearly, where the swelling is more pronounced and healthier.
And if you perform a fliaborotomy there on the surface of the foot, then you must guard against the nerves that are left there on the surface of the foot, and place your fliaborotomy slightly to the side where you cut, as if you wanted to incise it.
And let the fliaborotomy be vertical.
But if the discharge of the blood is forbidden; then you moisten the foot in cold water and let the blood flow into it until it is evacuated.
And if the fliaboromator makes an error in the first attempt, then repeat the fliaborotomy slightly, where the area is clean; and do not fear its sharpness, but rather guard against the nerves as we have said.
And do the same for the other foot similarly.
And for the sciatic vein, as we have said before, you should cut the thigh with the claw of the surgical knife.
And the relief from the femoral incision is felt in the hip when it is due to a puncture wound.
And the quality of the femoral incision is that the illness enters the bath, speeds up, and strengthens the thigh with a narrow bandage under the groin over four fingers wide, which only becomes apparent through this.
And when it becomes apparent, then perform the femoral incision according to whatever means are at your disposal and according to the tranversal, which is better; or incise there by incision or make a slit there by section, for the location is clean.
And it is often well enlarged; and if you find it but do not appear by the feeling of the whole, then perform a femoral incision on some branch of it, and that is the one that appears between the two bones behind the ear and the ring finger.
And guard the nerves, and allow the blood to flow in the quantity you desire.
Then release the tension and place your hand over the incision area firmly, for it heals quickly.
Of ventilation and of the qualities of using those.
Ventilations are of the lungs, or of the heart, or of the eyes.
Ventilation is performed according to two methods: one involves scarification and the extraction of blood, and the other is ventilation without scarification.
And this ventilation without scarification is performed according to two methods, either with fire or by fire.
And for ventilations that are administered with scarification and the extraction of blood, there are fourteen locations on the body. The first location, where continuous ventilation is often applied, is at the very back part of the head; the middle location between the two sides of the neck; ventitations below the jaw but above the mouth; ventilations in the cheeks; ventilations near the ear, which is at the end of the cheekbone; ventilations on the collarbones, each being about two inches long; ventilations on the thighs, with each being about two spans wide.
And ventilation you extract the blood only from the small veins scattered in the flesh, and by this do not lose the virtue by those, as is done with flebotomy; nor should you think that ventilation should be made by fire or several fires in any illness caused by repletion within which the body is completely evacuated.
But if necessity provokes ventilation for illness or continuously, administer that at the beginning of the month and at the end, and in the middle of it, and at any other time.
And when times in some cause of those, and properly if it is in the third or half of the month, then command ventilation to be made more than so passed of the day two or three hours.
And the purpose of ventilation of the neck is that when you apply pressure to the head and what is embedded in the heels; more correct is that this be closely followed by evacuation of the whole body.
And this ventilation is in the place for bloodletting of the head.
And it is not recommended to use that which is inflamed or in which there is a cold, as it causes great harm.
And for this reason, it is not advisable to use those that are inflamed, in which there are gouty affections.
More so for that which remains inflamed, it causes oblivion; and for this reason, you should command the ventillator to place his hand slightly on the ventosa at the affected parts, to prevent the generation of oblivion.
More frequent venesection is in the place of femoral and basilic phlebotomy: and thereby you contribute to asthma, and to the constriction of lungs and to the rupture of lung tissue, and to coughing, and to congestion.
And see that the venesection of alkehel is performed a little, for if it is paused, it engenders weakness in the body and stomach.
And the venesection of alhagdahan causes headaches and ophthalmia, and migraines, and epistaxis, and toothaches; it is in place of phlebotomy of the basilica.
And see that you command the venesection to apply his hand at the scarification so that it does not incise the artery and damage the flow of blood.
And if venesection is performed on the mentum, it causes stiffness in the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and a semblance to those ailments that are in the mouth, and are located near the alveolar veins that are in the corners of the lips.
More importantly, the ventilation that is performed on the two spoons you apply should be covered by a cap, which is made through the replenishment of heat.
And the ventilation of the two internal parts of the incisions contributes to the benefit of the phlebotomy of three veins, namely the basilica, fusa, and cephalic, for those veins drain the blood from all those arteries in the flesh, and those small veins between larger veins allow the attraction to reach the three veins.
And command the ventilator not to proceed with scarification, for the area is stripped of flesh, and leave it with its nerves and arteries.
And it is a ventilation where the patient is ventilated on the shins and contributes to the hemorrhoids of the buttocks and the ulcers, and leave them.
And make sure you command the ventilator to use a large ventilation, and one made of wool, for the area needs strong drying; and do not use thin ventilations under scarification.
More cold winds from the legs diminish manifestly, which carry the scald from the whole body, and conduce to ancient pains of the joints and the thigh, and of the bladder; and provoke menstruation, and conduce to bitumen and amylum; and stand in place of a double femoral ligation, and halteren, and of two calves.
But they strengthen the whole body and cause syncope in many men.
And from the cold winds halteren is closely related to the weakness of the winds of two legs.
And the quality of the position of the cold winds is that you place the cautery at the beginning viewable and wet the wound with a cooled extract, and do not prolong the position of the cold winds, but pause them slightly, and remain them completely, so that the humors come to the area by natural means. And do not cease to repeat this until you see the area already turn red and swell, and the scald appear.
And then you incise and gradually increase the suction, while considering the positioning of the body.
If a person has tender flesh due to cold, incise him once and do not continue, lest the wound become ulcerated.
And command the fan to increase the incision and gently apply some suction.
And if the wound becomes enlarged, then you must incise twice; in the first incision, open the way for fluid drainage from the wound and its moisture. But in the second incision, proceed with the examination to drain the large wound fluid.
And if the wound is mixed with feces, then make the third incision to ensure its thorough cleansing.
Finally, when we want to extract the wound fluid little by little or just a small amount sufficient for us, make a single incision.
And if we want an extraction of large blood, we perform a major incision; and if we know that the blood is thick, then we make the incision deeper.
And the term of scarification in which is the depth of the incision solely.
And if the incision is thick, hard, dark, and its pores are narrow, then ensure that the areas for the cups are gently warmed and thoroughly resolved; in summer, use oil of aloes or oil of violet or oil of balsam or oil of mentha; and in winter, use oil of narcissus or oil of iris or oil of chamomile or blood oil, and to those similar.
And if the excess is large, apply, then oil of amber, or balsam oil, or oil of aloes, or olive oil, and to those similar.
Mais if the cupping is on flesh with wide pores, then it should be prohibited from oil, and ensure that the areas for the cups near the cupping are washed with warm water or cold water from Solomon's seal, or water from chamomile, or water from arnica, and similar to those.
And that of which the discharge is due to excess humidity, wash his bowels with vinegar, or with water of myrtle and sumac and similar.
And of that in which the superfluities are large, wash his bowels with old vinegar, or with water of santisc, which is marigold, or of decoction of dill, or of chamomile, and similar to them.
And ensure that the bowel movement is passed before bathing; have it administered shortly after bathing for one or two hours, and ensure that he sleeps near the toilet.
What must be done before causing a bowel movement and phlebotomy.
Ensure that you consider the beginning: if the person who needs to have a bowel movement or is to be phlebotomized is choleric and has acute pain and inflammation, then ensure that they take cooling causes, such as sweet milky whey, endive with vinegar, and syrups of myrrh, julep, and similar remedies.
And feed them thus like pheasant meat, capon meat, and seasoned game birds, and foods flavored with herbs, in similar manner.
And for him of whom the swelling is due to cold, let him take in drink essarop of angelica or essarop of alecost with seeds, sumac, and wine mixed with honey and vinegar; and let him be advised to use moderation in drinking and eating, and to avoid foods like pheasant, rabbit, small capons, and pigeons.
And let him drink more than he eats on the day of ventilation and phlebotomy.
And let him be given to drink in some hours before or after ventilation or phlebotomy, either tyriaca alpharac, or medicines of musk, such as muscat or acelita, before ventilation or phlebotomy, so that the principal members may be comforted and the wound subtliated; and let not those drinks be taken that are scalding.
More the vents that are scarifications should be those that are paused on the liver, and over the gout, and over the umbilicus, in the areas of the joints, and the side, for these members do not suffer scarification upon themselves.
And these are not desired for those, but the drawing of blood from the limb, as when we apply a cupping tool to the breast in disease of flux of blood from the blood of the nose; and we use it so that the local swelling free from viscidity of the limb may be dissolved, as when we apply it to the abdomen and the umbilicus; for then it rarifies the limb and warms it and lessens the pain which resolves the swelling.
And it is applied to the hives when they occur in their eruption or swelling, for by virtue of drawing it strengthens the eruption and expels the swelling from its place.
And it seems to work when applied to the liver and spleen in cases of local swelling.
And these cupping tools are applied with suction only; sometimes they are applied with fire.
And sometimes they are applied full of clear water in diseases of the spleen.
And this is to ensure that the cupping tool is full and larger, so it should be clear water or water in which suitable herbs have been added.
Form a ventosa with fire: let the width of the orifici be two fingers, as we have formed it; and the amount of the preon be half a palm; and place it in its center, in the location that is on the circuit, take it small according to the quantity that enters it one needle.
Let it be made of leather or citrus, of thick edges, lion skin, equal and thin so that it does not lead the member to lose its position over it.
And let it be at the middle of the leather or iron cross, where the candle is placed over the fire.
And let this ventosa be much larger than the one we have described; and the smaller amount of it according to the ailments and the condition of the one who uses it.
And the ventosas for children and those who are weak are different from those for young and strong individuals.
And the quality of placing this ventosa on fire over the member is to extend the heat from the fire of decent wood in front of a small wax candle, and place that one at the middle of the cross transversely in the middle location of the ventosa, so that the fire is ignited around the area left by the ventosa to prevent the patient's body from being burned.
And then place yourself over the limb of the patient, and tell them about what we have said, within which when we have the vents and do not intend for them to hold the said and that vapor rises above that vent, then the vent will soon be dissolved.
And then heat the iron according to its manner, and repeat it if you need to do so.
More specifically for the ventosa (cupping) used in the illness of pleurisy, it should be applied with water, in which there is no transverse scar or vent, and it should not be applied unless it is filled with water, and is placed over the limb only for a short time.
And this is the form of it: And this cupping device should be as large as possible, because it can then receive a greater quantity of water.
Capitol. xcvi.
Sanguissuguas are not administered in large members but in the members in which it is not possible to place cupping devices due to their small size, such as the palate and similar parts; or on a member devoid of flesh, such as the nose and similar areas.
And the quality of using those that you have found leeches in the waters downstream from the bathhouse.
And after letting the day and night pass in water downstream where they are familiar, and ensuring no cause of stagnation in their belly; and then evacuating the body at the beginning with phlebotomy and fomentations; and rubbing the limb of the patient until it becomes reddened; and placing them over it.
And when they are full and swollen.
And if possible, apply fomentation to the area with the ventosa, more so in youth.
And if not, then wash the area with warm water and immediately apply cold water; and rub and express it.
And if the bleeding from the body persists at the site of the leech application, then insert a cloth soaked in cold water, and place it there until the residue is absorbed.
And if the bleeding is increased, then powder vitriol trissat or similar substances to those causing vasoconstriction over it while the bleeding is being reduced; or place hot pea pods on the area and let them remain until the peas adhere to the area, and then let the bleeding cease.
And if necessary, iteration of bloodletting, when possible change those.
And if bloodletting is prohibited by suspension, then wet the area with fresh blood or leave a needle in the areas until it clots with blood; and place them there, so that when any blood flows, it stops quickly.
And when you want them to constrict, powder a little aloes trissat, or salt, or ashes over them, and apply it quickly.
Thus begin the procedures of the first part: restoration. This chapter is necessary knowledge in the art of medicine; and it deals with the restoration of fractures and dislocations in bones.
Oh, son, know that both the learned doctors and the common folk, as well as those who for some time have not studied the works of the Ancients or read them even a letter, boast about this chapter.
And for this reason, this method of the scientists in our land is kept private; and I have not forgotten it even after a long time; and I have not acquired what follows except through much reading of the works of the Ancients and study over their understanding, from which I extracted the science.
And I have directed this experiment and study over the length of my life.
And I have already described in this chapter all that concerns my science and on which my experiment has passed; now I abbreviate this for you others and deliver it from long narration; and abbreviate it at the end of abbreviation; and shown it at the end of declaration; and compiled in this various forms of instruments that are administered there, as is done by addition of declaration, just as I have done in two preceding chapters.
First chapter.
Summarize and collect the details of bone fractures, those for which a preliminary treatment is necessary before we begin recalling the various parts of the fractured members. Therefore, let us begin this chapter with the summary of the discourse; and the chapters for which understanding is necessary at the beginning are those that the artisans must stand upon the truth of. It is you and these who are prompt to know or learn this noble art from others.
And therefore say that when you encounter a fracture or dislocation or twisting or setting, then you must attend to the beginning with venesection or reduce it, or both, if no cause prohibits, such as weakness of virtue, or in that which is affected, or very in decrepitude, or at the time of intense heat or intense inflammation.
And furthermore, let it be in food such as herbs, fresh herbs, and meat of partridges and crabs; and prohibit fatty meats and those full of food, especially avoid foods that fill the veins with sanguine matter, until you are sure of no abscess. And if you fear effusion of matter in the member.
And then return the patient to his first primary position according to the custom of doing so.
And so, when the broken bone begins to be restored, then ensure that the patient is fed nutritious foods rich in both fine and heavy nutrients with viscosity, such as foods made from cooked wheat in water, rice, eggs, fish, cattle stomachs, nuts, fresh meat, and thick substances similar to these. And with this regimen, coagulation of the fracture is induced slightly with honey.
And know that the bones crack in those who are in their prime and in the elderly, it is not possible for them to be cured and consolidated according to their nature due to the drying out of their limbs.
But nature adjusts and ameliorates the broken bone from any part due to a cause similar to glue in which there is thickening that adheres and strengthens it together with conglutination, bringing about the end of strength and firmness, such as fire at the beginning, and for no reason do you prevent it from its works.
And for this reason, it is necessary to place the patient on their side, on foods in which there is density, viscosity, and bulkiness, as we have said.
And know that the types of fracture are diverse according to the diversity of the limbs, for a fracture of the thigh bone is different from a fracture of the skull bone; and a fracture of the foot bone is different from a fracture of the arm bone; and similarly, all other limbs are different among themselves.
And I will recall all types of fractures, each explained in its own distinct chapter.
Various types of fracture within itself. And the types of fracture in bones are diverse; for some fractures occur arcuately or where the stars intersect; and sometimes fractures occur according to the length of the bone: such as the transverse, oblique, and comminuted fractures that occur when preparing to write a pen, fractures by slicing and disruption in the head, and small fissure-type fractures.
And for each case there is a specific engagement or torture in restoration of it according to the distinct recall in their places.
A sign of fracture of the bone. And for this, the fracture of the bone is known: there is a tortuosity in it, and an elevation and prominence of it upon feeling, and the pain felt when you press on that area with your hand.
And when there is neither apparent tortuosity nor pain, you should touch the bone with agitation and if the patient does not experience great pain, then it is not a fracture.
It is possible that it is tortuosity or a small fracture. Therefore, touch the area with your hand and apply compression all around; then place your hand over the medicine of which you recall just at that moment, which suits the location; and it will be straightened by subtle contraction.
And you will know that the area when it is arched and does not split into two or another such thing that does not happen in the interval, as all parts of its composition are inflamed, then you should begin your correction at the beginning and apply a blistering cautery to it.
And if an abscess occurs at that place, then leave it for some days until the abscess subsides; and then treat it in any way you can to promote healing and discharge.
And know that the restoration and ligation of it are lighter than dealing with the place where the accident occurred.
And then strengthen it according to the recall of the remedy that will come.
More so if in the bone there is a fracture, then it is necessary to extend this broken member into two parts, whether it be the hand or the foot; or with your hand if the member is small; or with two cords or one cord and your hand.
And place your hand in such a way that you hold the member firmly according to its natural shape, while the parts are extended from the broken member, then force yourself to return those connections with care and in any way you can at their respective places.
And guard yourself so that your operation does not cause pain or injury to the patient; and force yourself according to your power to apply one bone to its companion bone according to their best forms.
And ensure that at that profitable hour you touch it with your hand, and if you see any other cause different, correct it and equalize it according to the quantity of your virtue.
And avoid excessive extension and compression, as foolish doctors sometimes cause abscesses due to their operations or cause contractions in the limb, as we have seen through their operations.
The quality of the fracture of the injured limb is what I recommend; that you know that the limbs broken vary in their smallness and in their largeness and in the form of those.
And of those that are small like the forearm and the thigh and similar to those, see that the wrapping is of soft fine cloth.
But of those that are large like the thigh or the chest, see that in those there is a wrapping hard and tight, for the firm binding connects the large and strong member from all sides at the fracture equally, try that no spot is left untreated.
And then begin, as you start your dressing, apply three or four wraps conveniently over the place of that fracture; and keep your hand a little tight on the wrapping.
And then place it at the uppermost part of the location of the fracture, and keep it tight so that your binding is firm where you have tightened the location of the fracture. And then slightly extend the covering of the fracture area, gradually soften the tension little by little, while you remove a significant part from the location.
And then take another bandage and wrap the other part over the fractured area covered by the first bandage, and gradually align the bandages to the position of the fracture; and let the operation be on the tension of the bandage and in the softening of that according to what we have said in the first bandage above.
And then place the folds of the bandage or cloth equal to the tortuosity of the fracture, if there is any tortuosity; otherwise, do not fold it for any reason.
And then place it over the other bandage, and gradually equalize over these properly made splints if there is no swelling or abscess in that location. Otherwise, place it over what constitutes the abscess there and which causes the swelling; leave that for a few days, and then strengthen the splints.
And let the stitches of the thigh on the right side be formed sagely; or be of hemp thread; or of palm fiber; and let the width of each stitch follow this form and figure:
However, ensure that the stitch placed over that fracture is thicker and a little longer than the other stitches, and the length of the thread according to what is read about the member in size and minuteness; and then strengthen on top of the threads with another bandage according to your first stricture; and further apply honey decently on top according to how we said about stricture, and it should be your stricture most where the fracture is, and the more it is lengthened from the fracture, the less the stricture.
And ensure that the threads are medium in thickness and fineness, and be of good quality; if the threads are thick, as I have seen in the operation where some used their fingers to place the cords of sinew, it is a great error when applying the stricture at equality.
And equally thin threads are not convenient, for you will not be able to apply the stricture where you want, and it must not be less than a finger's width between stitches.
And if the patient is injured at the extremities of the vessels near the location, then place those of stopa leon or fine wool between them so that this does not harm the area.
Some fractures are caused by a blow, and accidents causing disruption in the chain, and I will recall this in that at the Capitol according to their singularity.
And know that for any broken member, it is not straightened with wires on the first day; this cause is that the member, when large, cannot be held still by wires but should wait a few days or seven or more, according to your safety of the onset of abscess.
And this is the method of plasters that the Ancients used to restore, which are applied over fractures and dislocations.
Method of plastering for the reduction of fractures, convenient for complex cases and especially for women and children, which is applied to that upon which no heat or friction: and it is that you take powder of millstone, which is the marrow of the flour that hangs from the movement of the mill in the walls of the mill.
And you must confect it thusly, but sieve the white of egg, and place the confection not-thin nor subtle; then use that.
Another way to plaster for fractures, dislocations, and sprains: recipe of asafetida, of lapdanum, of acacia, of onion, and myrrh, which is razed from salvages milgrain, all of it in drachms x; of myrrh and aloes in drachms v; alcohol in drachms xx; all are crushed and sieved and mixed with alcohol water or with the white of egg if the wound of the patient is scabby; then use this plaster, which is of good composition, and restores broken bones lightly, and you apply it to men.
Another way to plaster which restores fractures and sprains: recipe myrrh and half of white althaea in drachms x; of myrrh and aloes in drachms v; of acacia in drachms vi; of Armenian bole in drachms .xx.
All are crushed in a mortar with much mixture, and sieved, and compounded with water or with the white of egg and is administered.
Method to apply plaster to joints and bones separated from their places, and for accidental pain in those and for cracks and fractures: take pure wool and immerse it in strong wine and oil infused and place it over the area.
But in this plaster there is not the virtue of restoration, but rather for the removal of abscesses and to relieve pain properly.
Another method of plaster that restores broken bones: take leaves of fig tree and leaves of wild poppy; mix them all together and make a plaster from them.
Method of a brief plaster to be applied when you want restoration of bone fracture and when you desire resolution of abscess: take parts of centaury, chamomile, and violet flowers, part of flour of radish; mix all together and steep them in wine, if the member is not scalded.
But if it is scalded, then soak that in fennel water or in water and use it.
Another method of applying a stronger plaster for resolution when the abscess is hard: take a powder of althea and seed of flax, of balsam, melilot, marjoram, flowers of violet, chamomile, all in equal parts and ground; all be sifted and mixed with water of sage or water must or wine, according to the quality of the limb and the color thereof.
May Ypocras not advise placing a compress over the limb soaked to promote its restoration, but a plaster made of wax and oil; and he recommends that it be mixed between coarseness and subtlety.
May Gualia be seen as having compresses placed over the broken limb to promote its restoration and the causes in which desiccation with little heat, such as myrrh, frankincense, and similar substances, operate similarly to those causes we have recommended.
Method of plaster that comforts injury and pain: take equal parts of myrrh, slices of human skin incised or quince bark, althea, and salt; sift and grind them all equally; mix to make a plaster.
When the quantity according to which it should be cut and then disjointed is determined, you should consider whether there has been no pain neither puncture nor bone broken outside its place, then you do not disjoint for several days. And if pain intense or puncture or inflammation occurs at its place, then you should cut or disjoint it immediately, and apply a plaster to it.
And take a cloth of linen and marine sponge soaked in thick wine, submerge that in strong vinegar, and apply it to the area until the puncture and pain are alleviated; then place the limb at rest for an hour; afterwards, put it on with woolen cloth submerged in olive oil or rubbed oil, and bind it overnight until you are sure of no abscess forming, and reduce the inflammation of the limb, and relieve the pain.
And then repeatedly apply that fine plaster and do not bind it tightly with your first binding, but keep it subtle until it is healed.
And if you see that the abscess, redness, pain, inflammation, and all other accidents have been relieved of everything, and no plaster or binding is needed, then repeat that as you did at the beginning equally.
And if no cause occurs to the member of those we have said, then release it in no more than three or four days or five or seven; sometimes all this is left for twenty days according to how you appear by the release of the member, as we have said, until the fracture adheres and comes to the coagulation of the flesh over that.
And then adjust the larger stricture more than in your first stricture, and adjust to the enlargement of the patient's abdomen, according to whether the memory of it preceded.
And if you see that the place of the fracture is already drying and weakening more than it should, then perceive that the nourishment is prohibited from reaching there; therefore, daub that area with pure water all day long that you cover it; and let this be for three days; and loosen the stricture a little, and by this operation supply the member with nourishment, and it will heal slightly.
And what the surgeons do on another day when the fracture of the member is not restored to its original state, according to how it should be, and is restored according to tortuosity, is an error in their operation, and a great fear; if it were right, they would enlarge the Ancients' works in their books and correct this.
And I have not seen anyone else do this, which makes it more reasonable that this is how it should be done.
Chapter Two: Of Fractures When They Occur in the Head.
The types of fractures are cracks, and their figures are various, and the causes are distinct. For some fractures, they are caused by the impact of a blow, which breaks the bone completely through the cranium, leaving the bone in such a way as it does in the trunk, and for this reason, this type is named *ascial*; or the blow affects a part of the bone, cutting the flesh but not passing through the marrow; and this type of fracture is named *levatio absoluta*.
And the swelling of these two types of fractures can be great or small, and the frictional fracture is caused by a blow with a rod or stone, resembling them in appearance.
And this fracture can be penetrating, nearing the periosteum which is attached to the bone; or it is in the face of the bone, and the swelling of these two types of fractures can be great or small.
And this type of fracture is softened in the bone, in the subtlety of the small hair, and for this it is called this species of capillary fracture.
And this is a fracture caused by compression or percussion of a stone, which causes some lamina of the bone to enter the internal parts, and it occurs in such concave locations as happen to stone quarries when they are struck, with part of their entry into the internal parts.
And this is more commonly caused in the bodies of moist bones, such as those of infants.
And all these species of comminuted fractures are bad like stars separated. And I will return to the recollection of all this in its place.
And we know all these species of fracture through detection by touch and by inquiry about the broken flesh that is upon them.
And the capillary fracture is known because it is discovered on the bone, is extracted, and limits on it by touch, for the fracture appears black.
In the cure of fracture consider at the beginning the accidents of the patient, and when you see by the accidents that signify by manifest signification over fear, such as vomiting of colera, extension, loss of understanding, absence of voice, syncope, acute fever, swelling of the eyes and redness of those, and signs like these in the greater dispositions, suspect that it is not healed.
And if you see uncommon accidents, you hope for health, and then you start the cure of it.
And the cause is that if the injury has come to you in the beginning as injured and this is during the days of winter, then consider that when you study in the bone's membrane before the fourteenth day according to all disposition.
And if it is during the days of summer, then consider that you cut the bone on the seventh day, having that what is left of the bone be corrupted by the fatty tissue, and that the accidents we have recounted occur.
And if the fracture has already reached the fatty tissue covering the marrow, and is finely divided and bruised, then consider that you incise the fragmented part and bruise it, according to what I have recounted to you.
And you should shave the patient's thigh, and uncover the bone according to custom and your possible method according to the shape of the wound, and do so lightly over the patient.
And if it happens to you to detect the bone, fluxes of blood or abscess caut, then you should apply what fits, and that you fill the area with infused cloths in wine and rubbed oil, and make the wound rest until the abscess is subdued, and you are sure of the fluxes of blood; and then proceed with the circuit of the bone and its ablation.
And do so according to one of two surgical methods.
And one method is to incise the bone with an incisor straight such, and this is its form: And then administer another incisor here, a little more lateral than the first; and this is its form.
And then use more the incisor slightly more lateral than the second.
And ensure that you have the right number of different incisors, some of which are more lateral than others; and some of them are shorter and sharper at their extremities, and made of iron or steel.
And use their assistance in percussion over the incisions to prevent shock and lead them.
And if the bone is hard, first make a perforation in its circuit before you administer the incisions along the tendons, which you will call shallow incisions.
And they are not called so, but rather those that do not reach the end of the bone's length, by which the tendon has a round extremity or margin near it, resembling a small edge or circle. You must prevent this from being submerged and passing through the thickness of the bone.
And it is convenient that you use a large number of tendons, each suitable for the thickness of each bone. While the head of the tendon is sharp at its extremity, the length and shortness of the quantity should be according to the thickness of this bone.
And this is the method for three types of tendons: The quality of perforating in the circuit of the broken bone is to place the tendon on the bone and rotate it with the needles until you know that the bone has been penetrated; then, move the tendon to another location, and pause where all of it reaches the quantity of the thickness of the ray or around it.
And then incise with an incisor where it is between each tooth of the bone, and make that small incision delicate which you can do at the end of levity, as we have said, during the removal of the bone, or by your hand, or by some other cause through certain instruments which you will prepare for this, such as fine scissors and forceps.
And see that you take all precautions so that the incisor does not touch any part of the cavity.
And thus, after you have circumvented the bone perforation and separated it from the cavity if it is continuous with it, and you extract that part, see that you scrape and level it at the roughness of that which is in the bone with another instrument resembling an incisor, but however see that it be finer and more delicate than other incisors.
And if you remove any small part of the bones and scrape, then take that with ease using one of the instruments; and then cure the wound with ointment and apply the ones we have said.
And the other method of operation is gentle, far from fear, which he called Gualia and cut with great caution; this is his saying: At the beginning, you must necessarily start uncovering the part of the bone in the area where the fracture is most severe and most obvious. Once you have uncovered that part and placed your hand gently and cheerfully at the end of this long incisor from which this takes its form:
And the lens-shaped part is lion and you must not cut any cause, and the acute part is from it into two cuts forward in length, as you see; that the lens-shaped part be adjusted to the chife against the face of the acute incision on the bone.
And then strike upon the incisor of one part with a small hammer as you cut through the entire bone with ease, and you be sure of the panniculus that it does not occur in the accident that you fear in any way, and if the medicant were the most fool of all men and the most ignorant of them; certainly, and if he were asleep.
When there is any additional cause affecting the bone of the ankle in some parts of the bone, it will incise that one at the extremity of the incised lenticular, and facilitate that one, for it is delivered from its damage and fear.
And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the ankle, and what is excised or remains of the bone is its surface, and it is rough and subtle irregularities in it, then you must razors that roughness and eradicate those subtle irregularities with your prepared sharp razors, in various quantities so that you can administer to all those places the most convenient parts of them and the right part according to where you have directed your operation on that broken bone and its figure.
And you must administer with your judgment using the razors to start shaving the bone with the coarser part of those razors, and then use the finer part of them, and do not cease doing this continuously until you reach administering the coarse and fine parts of all.
In any other small capillary fracture or subtle fracture, you must administer care according to where you have directed for the correction of it.
And it is because they are not accustomed to treating all those who have studied that art. And place this on what we have written about in great fractures.
And if the gauze is torn when you extract the bone, then take a piece of cloth according to the size of the wound, and immerse it in olive oil, placing it over the wound's opening; then take another piece of folded or triple-folded cloth and immerse it in wine and olive oil, placing it over the first piece. Do this gently enough so as not to irritate the tissue; then apply linseed poultice over it, but do not press it more than the size of the wound allows.
And leave it to this treatment for one day or two until you are sure of no abscess; then remove it and administer medicines that require additional dryness, such as linseed and wheat flour, and powder of thyme and arsenic, and similar substances.
And you make these medicines into a powder that is sprinkled on the wound, as it is dry; generally, administer to it any medicine that has the property of cleansing and not irritate.
And guard thou according to thy virtue that the wound in thy cure be clean; and not therein surdician of ointment nor other; nor layest thou to add virulence therein; for when it is adjusted upon the linen of the brain, corrupt that and mar that, and happeneth upon the patient near this malign evil.
And it happens in the scab of the head, as from it is modified the bone and most especially when the cure of it is neglected, and blackness appears on the surface thereof; and therefore consider when it happens to the patient the accidents that we have said, know that it is pernicious indeed.
And if no blackness accideth but from the medicine that is applied thereon, and it is in virtue of that medicine which causeth that blackness, then take that thou mixest a part of honey with three parts of rubbed oil, and line those lintels with a cloth, and place it over the scab; and cure it with the spices of cure that suit until it be healed.
Capitol iii.
For the restoration of the nose when it is broken.
Know that it is not the nose itself that is broken, but two parts joined by an cartilaginous piece, or one of those few blows, because in the nose there are two bones. The part that breaks is cartilaginous and you do not injure it, but rather through friction, tortuosity, and sinuosity.
But if one of the two parts is broken, you must introduce the small bone into the nasal cavity, and equalize the fracture inside according to your indicated index, and externally, between the foot and the nose, so that the nose returns to its natural figure. And do this for you with facilitation, and guard that the pain in the patient does not worsen due to your operation.
And if the fracture is in the cartilaginous part of the nose, and the bone does not reach there, you must equalize it at the extremity of the ray where there is a small swelling.
And if the fracture is in two parts, then you make the appearance of this.
And if the swelling has a restoration on the first day of the fracture, if possible; otherwise, then return the inflammation to its place with a pointed cautery.
And then insert into the extremity of the nose a piece of cloth, if the fracture is in one part, or two walnuts, if the fracture is in two parts, and let the walnut swell to such an extent that it fills the nostril.
And say these ancient restorers that the walnuts should be wrapped in cloth, and changed throughout the day. But this is not seen by me; instead, have a cavity where the piece of cloth is wrapped in ox gall mixed with powdered spice; and leave the walnut until the bone is set and the cartilage is hardened.
And sometimes insert into the nose instead of a walnut, a hot piece wrapped in lion's cloth; and ensure that the fracture of the nose is very severe and that the patient is not prohibited from breathing.
And this cause is not necessary for you; and if you wish, do this, and if you wish, do others.
And if another abscess occurs, cauterize it, plug the nose with wool or a wet and rubbed fat cloth, or with a pledget of oil.
But if no abscess occurs, when you need to plug it externally, use sesame seed powder and powdery coptis root with honey plaster; then place your hand on the nose to hold it in place, and do not plug the nose for any cause.
But if the nose bones are fractured or reduced, when you need to split those areas, extract them using instruments suitable for those areas; then, at the site of the split, treat it with what constricts and consolidates, and use appropriate plasters.
And if a swelling occurs inside the nose, when you need to treat it, do so with poultices and administer lead pipes internally until it is completely healed.
Capitol. iv.
For the restoration of the jaw when it is broken.
When the jaw is fractured and the fracture is not displaced, consider whether the fracture is only on the outside and not broken into two pieces but bent inwardly. In this case, the pain is轻微的。
And thus, if the fracture is on the right side, insert the left thumb into the mouth of the patient; and similarly, if the fracture is on the left jaw, then insert the right thumb; and push the softness of the fractured area inward with your other hand from the outer part of the bone; do this gently so as to facilitate movement to the outside.
And if the fracture of the jaw is already separated into two parts, then you must administer extension to both parts according to the straight line within which it is possible to align them.
And if you encounter movement of teeth with disruption, then strengthen those that you expect to break at the edge of gold or silver or copper; and place a cautery on the broken jaw, and place one on the doubled cloth, and another on the large star-shaped piece made properly, or a single piece equal in length to the jaw; and place this above as appropriate for your ligature and application, so long as it is not destroyed.
And command the patient to rest and be tranquil, and abstain from his usual services for a while.
And if you find that the figure has been altered in any manner, then on the seventh day you cauterize it and apply a plaster of powder of molybdenum, alum of copper, or flour of cypress, after you have shaved the area, and place a lion's skin over the plaster.
And then, when the plaster is properly applied and the position of the bone has not been altered, leave it as it is, without removing it until the fracture is strong and healed. For this fracture to strengthen, it takes about three weeks.
And if another time an abscess occurs, then administer what we have said about it in the treatment, until it is healed and drained.
And if the fracture is open, then consider whether it is a bad separation of the bone or a dislocation, and then carefully treat those dislocations as you would in the removal of those from the muscles.
And if the wounds are wide, then enlarge them by means of incision according to the quantity of your need.
And after you have completed those stages, and from there it will not be necessary to enlarge the wound, then place yourself over the wound if it is large; otherwise, apply one of the plasters that suit and cover that area until it heals.
Chapter V.
On the restoration of the furcula when it is fractured.
When the scapula is fractured, in the anterior part you should break the muscle, and that fracture can be made in one of three ways.
When it is fractured, or separated, or separated into two parts without undergoing stages; and the restoration is easier for such; or if it happens to undergo stages, and the restoration is difficult; or thus that the fracture occurs in the wound.
And the operation in this case, when the fracture is in the wound, is that you have two ministers present, so that one holds the assistant and follows the fractured scapula, and the other extends the neck with that part.
And then equalize the fracture by placing it in the groins as it is made according to its form, and do not place it in a slight prominence or depression.
And if you need more extension, when you place the patient's limb on a pillow or cloth, let its length be according to your necessity; extend and elevate the femur and compress the pillow with your hand as you equalize the fracture according to its form.
And if you cannot extend the end of the femur to the outer parts because it is stuck at the hip, then place the patient supine on their back, and rest a middle-sized cushion on the muscle.
And the minister presses on the muscle at the outer parts until the bone of the femur is elevated to the hip joint, and then you correct the fracture and equalize it in the groins.
But if you feel the bones of the femur and they are fragmented, then cut there and remove those fragments easily.
And if it is retained in the bone, then you skillfully incise it with one of the incisors which you have prepared for this, after placing another servant to hold the instrument that serves the ciphac; and this instrument is of wood or iron, of which this is its form:
And it is similar to a spoon, of which this is its cavity; and its width depends on what you need of it, according to the size of the bone or its smallness.
But the length of it should be according to what is possible in the operation; that it have two extremities thus like spoons, and one extremity broad and the other narrow.
And if the disruption of the wound which you have incised when you have extracted the fragment from the bone is large, and there is a certain abscess cavity, then you adjust the two edges of the wound with sutures.
And if the disruption is small, or you fear an abscess cavity, then you manage the wound with cloths and powders according to the quantity of the incision of the wound.
And if you encounter an abscess, then inject wet cloth or rosin-soaked cloth into it and place something over it.
And always ensure that the stick does not touch the broken bone; therefore, you should check the wound daily, as when the bandage becomes softened or you see the stick already loosened, then you adjust it and strengthen the binding.
And then place the patient's head on its pillow, and let it rest in such a way that a cushion is under its neck; thus, the support of the affected side is raised, and therefore the fracture of the furcula is elevated to the elevation of the muscle; or the arm of the patient is laid along the side of this.
And do not remove the bandage unless something happens at the site or an abscess develops within twelve days.
And then renew the plaster if you see any signs of infection at the site, and adjust it to fit properly and restore the area, allowing the fracture of the furcula to heal and coagulate.
And it is strengthened and made comfortable according to the condition over twenty-eight days, and in some cases, it is done in less time than that.
Chapter VI.
On the restoration of fractures of the shoulder.
The spatula tart is broken at the lateral side of the fracture and not in the middle but along the edges.
And when the place is broken — and it is broken in the middle of the place — and is not known otherwise than by touch, then according to the figure of the fractured bone prepare its reduction and place it according to the natural figure in every manner of skill which is within your power.
And then place on the area powder of ground almonds and honey; and then place powdered double-dried herbs; and then place over the splint on the table a thin layer according to the quantity of the spoon entirely or a little more.
But if you leave the splint concave in some part of the area, then level that concavity with honey; and then place the splint according to equality.
And then strengthen above with adhesive paste a thin strip and firmly place the splint so that it is not displaced from its position.
And consider the bandage on each day; and every time that it becomes moist, reapply another layer and strengthen and level the splint if it is displaced from its position.
And apply the gout over its location so.
The spatula is restored in xx days or in .xxv.
And when this number is completed, then you dissolve the bond, and know assuredly that it is from which bone the beginning did not cause fear nor its dissolution.
And if you proceed from the place of the bone to the ligaments, then cut over it, and hold it, and do as we have said in the fracture of the furcula of sadacio, caut if an abscess occurs here.
Capitol VII.
On the restoration of the fracture of the foot.
The foot sometimes breaks in the middle of its location and remains unhealed for some time; more often, its ends become swollen and necrotic.
And of the accidents when the foot breaks in its middle, it tends to decline towards the internal parts and causes great pain, difficulty in walking, coughing, fever, and vomiting; these are evident in the cavity of the broken bone and are not hidden from sensation.
And the restoration is that he be laid on his back, and a cushion placed between his shoulders; then press on his muscles, adjust his spine against the vertebrae, and carefully perform the operation and adjustment in every way possible until the figure of the bone returns as it should.
And then place it on the plaster and sponge, and lay it over the table with a thin layer of wax or alum and something similar in levitation, so that you wrap that in cloth; then carefully apply it to the broken bone without pressing too much; and cover it with bandages according to its roundness on the back several times, and strengthen it with proper tension; and always consider the bandage at all times, and when it is softened, strengthen it.
And if necessity causes an abscess, inflammation, or pain to occur in that area, when you incise and lance it, remove the plaster and correct what occurs by this method of healing; then reduce the plaster, if you see fit; and adjust its tension as it heals.
Chapter VIII.
For the restoration of the ribs when they are fractured.
Know that a fracture of the ribs occurs only in large areas where the two ends meet; and from the extremities of the front part, such contact does not cause fractures because they are cartilaginous. And the perception of it is not hidden to the sense of touch by placing your hand on it.
And the restoration should be done by equalizing the fracture with your hand as much as possible, ensuring it fits naturally, and then apply a plaster to strengthen the broken bone, if necessary.
And if the fracture of the ribs is near the internal parts, it commonly causes severe pain and puncture, similar to the pain that occurs when there is pleurisy. For this reason, one places a bandage on the bone; and it leads to difficulty in breathing, coughing, and vomiting due to blood. This is a difficult condition to cure.
And already the Ancients were ingenious in such matters.
And from them we say: place the patient in a position where foods that cause inflammation and swelling are avoided, so that the belly may swell and be extended, and the fracture may be brought to the outward parts.
But we advise this so that it may not be a trivial cause for generating a carbuncle accidentally; and if one does occur, then aid is already at hand.
And some of them said that it should be placed above the belly and near where sweat flows strongly; and this seems logical, but it is feared that the belly might drive the superfluities to the area due to its weakness.
And some of them said: place the area covered with wool that has been submerged in oil, and let it be wrapped with powder between the ribs until it is full, ensuring the dressing remains equal as you wrap it according to roundness; and then treat the patient with a regimen of food cure and medicine.
And if the patient is strongly constrained and does not suffer, and the skin is punctured with a needle for drainage, be careful about the patient, then cut open at that place, uncovering from the broken side, and place ourselves over that instrument which we have retained, the memory of which precedes, and incise the skin easily, and extract it.
And when we adjust the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with suturing, and cure that with plasters until it is healed.
And if you happen to find an abscess inside, then incise and insert powder in olive oil and place over the area, and cure the patient with what is appropriate for the abscess inside.
And let it be dressed over the cloth on which he sleeps until it is healed.
Chapter IX.
On the restoration of fractures of the vertebrae in the back and neck.
In some cases, when fractures occur in the bones of the neck, and tendons are also injured, similar to the vertebrae of the back. And when this happens to someone and you want to know if they will be cured or not, then consider whether their pulse is already softened, numbed, and dead and cannot increase or extend or strengthen those pulses and when you constrain them with your fingers or prick them with a needle and do not feel pain in them, then you know that it is not curable, and in such cases, it is fatal.
And if you feel pain in them when you constrain them with your fingers and prick them with a needle, then you know that the nerve of the bone is saved and that gout will heal by cure.
And if you feel along the vertebrae of the neck and want to know if it will be curable or not, then consider the pulse in his feet.
And if you feel that they are already softened, apply yourself to what happens in the pulse, and when he lies on his back, breathe on him and induce vomiting at his will, and sometimes lift him on his back and want to urinate but cannot, then you know it is fatal, and then do not trouble with his cure.
But if no other cause occurs, the cause is better and lighter.
And the cure for this is to perforate with a needle at the site where you place it over the lumbar or slightly scraped spine, or with hot irons; place it there for several minutes each day until the abscess is numbed.
And then place one of the comforting and healing plasters, and apply it firmly over that area; command the patient to take rest and be tranquil, and not to sleep on the part where he feels pain until he is healed.
And if it happens that you need to scrape the bone surface or any cause that is detached from it, then clean the wound and keep the bone in place; then close the two edges of the wound,缝合如果伤口较大；然后用一些膏药治疗该部位，直到痊愈。
But if the lower end of the thigh bone is broken, and it is near the knee, then you should insert your left hand's little finger into the wound, and align the broken bone with your other hand as much as possible through second-order equilibrium; then place a plaster and bandage over it if needed, and apply firm pressure to it.
And if you feel broken phases in it, then operate on that, stop it, and cure the wound with a cure that is to precede until it is healed.
Capitol.
For the restoration of health.
The bones of the fingers are broken, and if they break, then the fracture is simply communication at the extremities of those bones and are split longitudinally; and the swelling and pain occur in that area along with puncture, and the leg becomes numbed when fractured.
And the restoration of that is to place your hand over it while it is aligned with the fracture, which is in the shape of the bone.
And if the fracture is only at the extremity of that bone, then you realign it according to what appears equal by equilibrium, so that it resembles its natural figure.
But if the fracture is in the length or already inclining towards the parts, then you must place the leg on its side and prepare for the restoration of that fracture. And when you have equalized that, place a plaster over it, and then place the wooden or copper rod over it, and apply strong pressure to the area without fearing puncturing or removing the rod.
And equalize the cavity so that it fills the area where the hernia will be reduced according to equality, and command the patient to lie on his back or on his side.
But if an abscess forms, stop the extension of it and its restoration before sedating the abscess with the cautery, then place something over it to sedate it as previously described; then return to restoring it, and apply strong pressure to it as usual.
And if this happens in the bone fractures or are comminuted, then treat them accordingly.
Capitol.xi.
Of the restoration of the fracture of the adjutrix.
Adjutori is that which is between the codium (groin) and the head of the shoulder.
And if it is broken, the restoration of it is in one of two manners, of which one is that you take a rod of good wood according to this form:
And let two threads be at the ends, and then suspend them from the elevated area.
And then place the patient on a bench; and then throw its broken arm onto the rod so that it reaches the middle point where the curvature of the rod is attached.
And then suspend it over something heavy, or the servant extend it to the parts left; and then the doctor place his hands on the fracture at the same time, during which the fracture returns as it should.
And the other method is that the patient be resuspended over its own neck and suspend the hand of its collar with a thread; and then command two servants that one of them hold what is above the fracture with his hands; and the other hold the rest below it; and each of them extend to their part.
And if you want the extension to be stronger, then strengthen over the fracture with one stick and over another place another stick, and each of the two ministers extend to their parts.
And so if the fracture is near the end of the muscle, then place the middle of the stick over the tendon and let the other end rest on the fracture to reduce it.
And similarly if the fracture is near the hip, then place the stick over that location and the hip.
Equalize that with ease and your work, and then strengthen it as soon as it is equalized according to what is needed and applied properly.
But if an abscess occurs, then leave the stricture for 7 days, and place over it a woolen bandage soaked in vinegar and rubbed with oil until the abscess subsides, and then strengthen that.
And the way to strengthen that is to place a plaster over the fracture, and then wrap a linen bandage around the plaster; then adjust the arm on that aid, and place your hand open over its muscle.
And place the cloth firmly over the assistant's arm so that the arm is in the place of support, without prohibiting anything due to the broken bone.
And then use splints.
And you should place that splint over the fracture which is longer and stronger than the other splints; and place the width of each splint according to the break, making the length of the splints according to the break plus the width of three fingers in total.
And then strengthen the splints at the joint which I mentioned at the beginning of this chapter.
And ensure that the joint around the location of the fracture is stronger. And when the fracture is longer, make the joint less tight.
And so, if you adjust the position of the splints and the joint as we have said when restoring the member to its position, then do this.
And if you fear an abscess, wait for seven days with the joint and splints as we have said.
And for three days consider the ligament in all parts to prevent accident or inflammation in the area; or it is forbidden for food to reach the member due to excess of stricture; and therefore correct all this according to what we have said.
If you are confident that no cause of this will occur, then do not loosen the ligature for at least three days or more.
Let the patient lie on their back, and their hands be over their stomach.
Place yourself over a warm pad filled with wool, and at all times during the night or day, consider whether the figure of the broken member remains intact, or if the ligament has become softened; therefore, correct this entirely with your virtue.
Feed the patient according to the order we have mentioned before, ensuring that the food is subtle at first until it begins to strengthen; then gradually increase the quantity of the food.
By custom, the bandage and belt are tightened for ten days; then they should be loosened and a bath should be administered, along with ointments that will correct this.
And if the fracture has been irritated, then do not remove the lint or stitches within one or two months.
Capitol. xii.
On the restoration of fracture of the arm.
The arm is composed of two bones which are called the humerus; of which the one is small and is that which we call the upper arm, and the other is large and is that which is placed above the smaller one.
And if the large bone of the humerus is broken only, or the small one, and if they are both broken together.
And when the small bone is broken above, then the restoration of it is light, and the healing of it is more light.
And when the large bone is broken below, then the fracture of it is bad, and the healing of it is difficult.
And worse than that is when both bones are broken together.
Therefore, if the broken bone is the small thigh bone above, then it is convenient for the doctor to perform the restoration of it, which involves a slight extension facilitated between when that area is stabilized.
But if the large thigh bone is what is broken, then it is necessary to perform a more vigorous extension.
And if both thigh bones are broken together, then you must perform the reduction more forcefully.
And you must place your hand figure to facilitate the restoration and extension of the bone lying on a cushion, with the hand wrist above, more so than the other fingers, and the little finger be below the other fingers, and the thigh be centered on a sloping board.
And place a cushion in front of it at its length or upright position, so that the thigh does not come to bear any weight.
And then the minister extend the arm of the injured part, placing it on his own hand or a cushion, and another minister extend it similarly above.
And then the doctor straightens the bone back into place according to the best form that can be achieved.
And if in the fracture of the bone you have successes, then you reduce all pieces into their proper place with your virtue.
And if there appears a separate piece that cannot be reduced to its proper place as you hope for in the restoration of it, then you set about it and reduce that according to the manner which we have said above.
But if the fracture is open, I have already treated this in a separate chapter, and therefore take up the treatment of it.
And if an abscess occurs at the beginning of your restoration, then you line a cloth made of cotton soaked in olive oil and white wax, making it medium in thickness and fineness, and tightly wrap the cloth around that with a subtle constraint through which the abscess can drain; then remove the wax and apply a prepared plaster of powder of mustard in honey, and place a bandage over it; and let the bandage be placed above that fracture on the side and more firmly.
And you shall know that the number of bones in the arm is seen in the major dispositions, or rather in a fracture in one bone or two bones together.
And then place your grip firmly and strongly over the location of the fracture. When the tension is greatest either at the upper parts of the fracture or at the lower parts of it, place the tension a little more mild according to how the memory of it is recalled at the beginning of the chapter.
And the cloths that you wrap around the fracture should be moistened cloths, neither hard nor rough. The linen which is strengthened should be made of medium-fine material, as we have recommended.
And consider the limb and the ligament for several days. And if any cause arises for which correction is necessary, as is often the case with the limb, then you should immerse the limb in water until that disturbance ceases.
And let the limb not be bound until it has rested, and then return the grip.
And if the constriction has already been softened and the bone has already been restored and appears as those, then correct all of this with your virtue.
And consider more if the nourishment is prohibited from reaching the member due to excessive constriction, so that you soften it a little and leave it for some days until the nourishment flows to that area, and then strengthen it.
And if to the patient none of the causes we have said occurs, then you do not need to let it slip for about 20 days or around those.
And place the patient's hand for its virtue of movement agitation, and have them sleep on their back.
And know that this fracture is restored in 30 days or in 32 days, or more fully restored in 28 days, and all of this depends on the complexity and the workings of virtue.
Chapter XIII.
On the restoration of fractures of the thumb and fingers.
Know that at the wrist of the hand and the knuckles of the fingers touch gently and do not damage them but rub with seen threads.
And when you damage the hand with a fracture or tearing, then make sure the patient remains lying down and in front of the limb for one hundred equal parts of time, and then place the hand over the extended one.
And then the minister extend the broken bones and the doctor joint them well with good joints.
And then place plaster and cotton, if no abscess develops use a cauterization; and then place salt above according to the size of the area, and you have already wrapped that in a cloth.
More so if the rupture is in the inner parts, you should make a pocket of cloth in the palm, and command the patient to hold that tightly with his ruptured palm; and then tighten it with long cloth.
And let the salt be placed on cloth, so that the body is applied to the palm; and hold that tightly as needed.
If the fracture is on the outer parts, then you should place another piece of the bone above the steak and another piece from the part in the palm, so that your hand is open and straight; then place the ligature, as if you were turning your hand at the wrist among the fingers with grains.
If a fracture occurs in one of the finger knuckles, then if it is the base of the finger, equalize it according to what you can see and then strengthen it on the palm. If you wish, place a small piece slightly elevated to ensure the fracture is set correctly and not displaced.
If the fracture is in the other fingers, as in the middle finger, or the index, or the ring, or the little finger, then equalize and bind it to the finger where you see that part; or bind all of them according to their continuity, which is better; or place a small piece over it, as we said for the base of the finger.
And consider, in your restoration, and especially that, the arrangement of cautery and opposition—during your operation—according to what you see when a cause from those occurs, as stated repeatedly in the narrative.
Chapter XIV.
For the restoration of fracture of the hip bone.
The hip bone, when fractured, is felt as pain that extends to the front and back.
And the restoration is done by strengthening the ligament over the fracture and another ligament below the fracture, with the patient lying on their stomach and face.
And then the surgeon extends the ligament to its proper place according to its quality when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
But if it is close to the groove of the hip, then the ligament should be placed near the notch in the ilium, so that the extension fits there, and another ligament below the fracture.
And similarly, if the fracture is close to the notch, then the ligament should be placed near the notch, and the extension to the parts below.
And then the doctor equalizes the bone by bringing his hands close to where you reduced it according to the natural form; the bone is joined by good conjunction; then apply a plaster and bandage, so as not to cause an abscess in the limb. But if an abscess does occur, then you let it alone for a few days until the abscess is ready to be cauterized, and then return to your treatment.
The bandaging should be done as follows: ensure you wrap a hard bandage around the fracture, fold it two or three times, and secure it to prevent any excess; then wrap the bandage until it reaches the ankle and the back of the thigh.
And insert a long needle between the thigh and the upper part of the leg near the wounds, ensuring that the ends of the needle reach beyond the two parts, then wrap the bandage around the leg and thigh, securing any excess of the bandage.
And then place something over the thigh at the location of the fracture, and place a stick over the bone of the leg.
And then fill the void between the waist and the thigh with soft cloths, so that the constriction is constricted.
And then begin with a strong bandage around the middle of the injury over the location of the fracture using three or four wraps. The more you move away from the site of the fracture, the less tight your bandage should be, and it should be lighter and softer.
And then extend the ends of the bandage to the parts you placed between where it will reach the foot cavity, and tightly secure both ends of the crosspieces on the other side so that the cloth does not shift from its place.
And then place the bandage over it so that it does not irritate the limb, abscess, or edema and resembles those conditions; if any of these conditions occur due to some cause, then take care with your treatment, and correct whatever occurs as soon as possible, according to what we have said previously.
More specifically, if the pain in the bone where it is placed is severe, then you must adjust that part as much as possible; otherwise, proceed with it and leave that part alone, and cure what preceded the recall of this memory until it is healed.
And sometimes this fracture of the hip is strengthened by another that is adjusted to it with stays, as we have said in the assistant and·in the arm.
But more importantly in the restoration done in this manner no harm comes to the patient's mobility; and if it is restored alone, or another part is applied to the other side, then it is necessary that the corresponding limb remain immobile.
And know that the hip strengthens in about ten days or a few weeks, and all this is according to the diversity of the complications and other dispositions.
Capitol. XV.
On the restoration of the fracture of the tibia.
Know that the fracture of the tibia occurs less frequently, but often results in considerable pain and inflammation over many days.
But if the fracture does occur, then it is merely a fissure or slight crack in its parts, and this can be either single or multiple, and over all, it is characterized by pain.
And the restoration of it is attempted to be equalized what is broken from the parts of it among the fingers so that it may be added and joined according to what is possible by equilibrium, facilitation, and fabrication.
And then place the plaster and cover over that round stencil, if you need that; strengthen it above at the structure to what is convenient.
And then consider all the dispositions which we have recommended in other fractures, thus as for abscesses and appearance to those that arise when something is applied to every accident as what is convenient until it is healed.
Chapter XVI.
On the restoration of the fracture of the ilium.
Know that in the ilium there are two bones, one of which is large and is named the ilium; the other is thin and is named the pubis.
And accidents of the species of fracture occur in the ilium as they do in the two bones of the arm, and for this reason, the restoration of it is done equally as the restoration of the arm, and the operation of it is one.
And if you need to break two bones together, the joint is dislocated in all directions.
And if you need to break the finer bone, the joint is dislocated in front.
And if you need to break the thicker bone, you find those marks, which are from causes not within your control.
And then administer extension, equilibrium, and ligature of the tendons accordingly.
However, if the joint fracture has dark spots or signs of infection, let the extension be more gentle and milder, and rely on your virtue to alleviate it.
And in the joint, if there is any cause for an operation on the arm, and when you align the tendons and complete your entire surgical procedure, then take pieces of pine wood which are placed under the causes that are suspended on sutures, and make them from palm branches; discard those with small knots, and do not use the thicker ones, but let their length be according to the length of the joint and the distance between them.
And then wrap each one in two layers of cloth according to the length of the foot, and place one layer over the part of the leg from one side and the other layer on the other side, and let them be under the foot's base location.
And then place the two straps in three locations of both extremities and in the middle location, for at this structure the leg is prohibited from leaning to the right or left, and is kept in good position.
And then a brace of wood is administered according to the length of the leg; and the leg is placed in it so that it retains its movement.
And especially make sure you do this in fractures, for when that is inflamed, it is called plague properly.
And then consider the leg on each day and study it carefully, and keep it free from abscesses and inflammation or other similar causes; and whenever any of these causes occur, immediately apply what is suitable until it is healed.
Chapter XVII.
Of the fracture of the tarsus and the bones of the foot and toes.
Fracture does not occur in the tarsus as a whole; more often fractures affect the bones of the foot; and fractures of the toes of the foot are rare, and do not affect them directly but are treated with those in proper position.
And if fractures occur in the bones of the foot and sometimes those bones need to be elevated above each other, then place the patient's foot on a prepared piece of ground as shown.
Then place the other foot on what is elevated under those bones, and compress, press, and align those bones back into their proper places.
Then apply a plaster and bandage over it, and place the patient's foot on a small table with two pillows.
Then strengthen the bandage around the foot with structure and stretch, after you have wrapped that area with cloths and other materials as needed.
And when three or four days have passed, then you untie the bandage, for you will find the bones equalized, or broken, or dislocated, and the operation in those cases is as you know.
And if some bones are broken, then restore those, and equalize them as I and recounted to you in the restoration of the fingers of the hand. And then place the cut finger according to its length, leaving a little side to it; and then lay the skin on this table which you have recounted to me, and stitch that up with a neat seam.
And if what is broken of the bones are two or three or more, then you place each cut bone separately according to its quantity wrapped in a linen cloth, and stitch the table at the bottom of the foot, and standing on one of the edges of the table, make a hole in the sole of the foot so that it has good retention.
And it is convenient for you not to forget that you should not consider all the causes which we have mentioned to you in the other fractures of the accidents we have discussed; and pause at each accident as it comes.
Chapter XVIII.
Of the fracture of the thigh bone and the patella bone and the groin of the man.
When the thigh bone is fractured, make that cast in a lying position, and then incline it slightly towards the injured side, and keep it supported behind.
And then the midwife fills the thigh with cloth, and it is made in the thigh as desired; and then the woman is shaken, and her leg is raised little by little, for all this is done within the range where the thigh is as desired and the fractured bone returns.
And then place powder on the leg, and when she wants to urinate, moisten the cloth to facilitate it; and then let her urinate, return the leg as per the method in which you placed it at the beginning, and then return to its original powder.
And do so for seven days or until it is restored.
And if you wish, take an ileostomy bag and secure it around the patient's waist with a belt; then insert the entire ostomy bag into the patient's abdomen, and proceed to inflate the bag with virtue inside until the bladder returns.
And it should be filled with pus and remain for several days as we have recommended, until it heals.
And when the bone of the pelvis of a man or woman is fractured, then administer in the restoration and needle treatment of it what we have recommended for the bone of the hip.
And what is right is not hidden in these nearby fractures that seldom occur, particularly to those who have some study and understanding of this free work; for that fracture means to you in the major dispositional virtues in the restoration and constriction of it, and therefore understand well.
In the case of the thigh bone of a man when fractured, protect it from infection, and insert the thigh into it; then place your hand over the wrapped area, wrap it up, and leave it for three days or about that time, until it heals.
Chapter XV.
For the restoration of bone fractures when they are displaced.
It is convenient to use someone upon whom you inflict a displaced fracture, especially if the bone is large, such as the thigh bone or the fibula, or similar. You should foment and scarify that person frequently, provided that the conditions for scarification permit it as we have said above.
And if the displacement exudes pus, then foment to retain it and attempt to sprinkle on it zinc oxide, if another cause is not present.
Then proceed to restore the fracture on that first day, and do not delay this, if an abscess does not occur.
More so if an abscess forms, then you leave the restoration until the ninth day, after the abscess has subsided, and do not approach it on the seventh or tenth day, for then you will cause worse accidents.
But if the broken bone is prominent over the uncovered knee, then you must carefully reduce it and align it with your hands with as much ease and little extension as possible.
But if the extension is not to your satisfaction and the alignment with your hands is difficult, then you must reduce it with this instrument; and this instrument is made of iron, its length being about seven or eight inches and its width according to the size of the wound; and for this reason, the doctor must take three or four of them according to the quantity needed in the treatment for all kinds of fracture.
And it should be round, and of small thickness so that it does not bend during the operation.
And it should have sharp ends at its extremities; and the outside should be of greater thickness, while the inside should be thinner.
And this is the form of it:
And it is called in Greek "labre volentz atelarem," so it is a small palette.
In order that the extremity of him be placed at rest above the extremity of the prominent bone.
And you apply it all at once so that the bone returns and is aligned with some equation.
And therefore strive to align the extremities of the fracture with each other, and if the broken extremity is fine and does not take that instrument for a good exception, then you must introduce the extremity of that bone where the instrument has power over it.
But if you cannot reduce the bone completely as we have recommended, then incise that part with those incisors which we have mentioned; it will be that part using one of the blades in any manner that is possible for you.
And then clean the bone of roughness and small scars.
And when the bone is reduced, and after the reduction, if the patient finds great pain in the area, then you know that the bone has not returned to its natural place; then do what you will confer with the patient for great relief.
When your restoration of the mouth is completed, and then submerge a cloth in vinegar steeped black, and precisely during summer, and do not pause over the wound to apply cerot or any other cause which might be oil, so that no accident of burning or corruption occurs.
And then administer steams at the hour of the full moon when the restoration of the bone is completed, and leave the wound uncovered to see if it heals with mere bandages and use wrappings according to the size of the wound.
And guard yourself with all caution that you do not strain the wound near the fracture, for many times doctors have caused harm to their patients, leading to death or a severe and corrosive illness, if it is healthy. And if the moon's phase is slight, moist, different from the phase of other fractures.
And if the wound is large or a bad wound, and you fear certain harmful accidents which we have mentioned, and find pain in the area, then do not pause over applying steams, but use hard cloth wrappings instead of steams and strain it with those.
And when about one or two days have passed since the wound began to fester, where a boil has formed, then you lift the cloth you had placed over that area, and soon administer calxes, ointments which according to our custom we use to treat wounds, thus with tetrafarmcon ointment and similar to it.
And you should remove the bandage and examine the wound at midday and evening on each day until it is consolidated and closed, and ensure that the member is prepared in such a manner that the pus drains from it to the parts where you have placed drainage.
If the wound passes many days and is not consolidated, nor has the boil drained from it, then you should suspect that here you are dealing with a small abscess and should examine the wound by probing. And of those abscesses that are separated and extracted, and those from which the pus is not separated and cause pain in the member, forcefully incise them according to what is possible for you.
And if it happens to the swollen or ulcerated limb, it is stiomenios, or another species of corruption and putrefaction, then you must place each one according to what is suitable for the cure of which there is a previous narrative in its own chapter.
And in the matter where I will speak most clearly and you must present yourself: when the bone is fractured, examine the limb as if it were the thigh and the helper's, seeming like those of large members, and do not presume any dislocation of it, nor its extraction due to visible cracks that would lead to death; have it left in place where it can heal on its own, for it will fall apart within about 20 or 30 days; and then cure the wound if you see fit, otherwise leave it alone.
Chapter .xx.
For the cure of swelling that occurs in the vicinity of any fracture.
Cracks visible on the skin indicate this swelling in the vicinity of the healing fracture, especially close to the joints, and distort the shape of the limb; and strongly prohibit the limb from its natural movement.
Then consider if the knot is recent and administer those medicines that have stanched such as aloes, and enses, and look, and approach it closely, and press it, and compare them to those; try taking some of these or all of them, and confirm those that are stomatic, or white of rue, or red of violet, and place that over the knot in lint, and compress those on it by good compression.
And let the extraction not remain loose for many days; and then loosen it and put another in its place, while the knot is being absorbed; or strengthen over that layer of lead descentment, for lead has the property of absorbing all that is swollen in the limbs.
More if the knot has already been converted into a stone and strengthened is necessary to remove it completely, then split it along its uppermost part, and incise the superfluous and prominent part, or let that drain through several small cuts while it is being absorbed; and cure that while it is healed.
Chapter XXI.
For the restoration of a fracture when it has been restored, then return the delicate and fragile member according to its natural nature.
When a bone fracture is restored, then return the delicate and fragile member, but this is done only for certain causes: among which one is the excessive solution of the membrane and the joining of it is not done according to its proper condition; or due to excess tightness of the membranes within which the nourishment is prohibited from flowing to the member; or due to excess ointment application; or due to unnecessary movement at improper times; or due to lack of strength in the body of the patient and weakness of it.
And the treatment for this is to weaken the patient and make his flesh tender while the strength increases in him; give him baths; and insert hope and joy into him.
Then place a bandage over the member, so that the bandage draws nutrition to it, or continue ointment with white wine, while the nutrition flows and returns to its natural shape.
Capitol. xxii.
For the healing of broken bones when restored tortuously, prohibit any operation on them that corrects this.
When the limb has already been restored near its healing from tortuosity and eminence of the broken bone and knuckle, and this is due to the form of the limb itself, yet nevertheless the limb does not prohibit its natural operation, then you do not need to receive the word of someone who thinks that part of the limb is newly broken.
Yet there are many foolish surgeons and restorers who have done this in our land; this operation is greatly reproachable, leading to great fear from the sign of which is fatal.
Yet if claudication and knuckling are recent, then it should be immersed in water thickened with herbs that soften it, such as althea roots, razizza leaves, melilot, and similar; and let it be wrapped in a soft poultice, well made; or let it be oiled with mucilage of razizza leaves, and covered with gualina ash or aram wood oil, and then applied with that; or let it be greased with figs of pigeon and stitched with goose feathers, similar to the medicines named for consolidation.
And sometimes it is dissolved by frequent gentle friction, especially with the wetter ones, and movement of the limb at all times in all hours.
May it also be that tortuosity has already gone before and is made strong and converted into a stone and provoked to necessity of its cure, then cut out what lies above the cecum and the continuity of the bone should be dissolved and incised, and what is superfluous of the nodation of that vein should be removed from the bone with incisores subtils, and facilitated application should be administered in that which is solicited and studied.
Capitol.xxiii.
On the speech concerning dislocation.
Dislocation is the displacement of one of the joints of that location, such that movement is prohibited, and the figure of the limb is distorted, causing great pain and injuries in the patient.
Therefore, when a dislocation occurs, it is necessary to immediately attempt to reduce it, and not delay the reduction, for if delayed, the area will become inflamed, and the dislocation will be more difficult to reduce.
And therefore it should not be cut nor extended at the time of the apoplexy, for moments ago have caused spasms and severe pains.
When this occurs, it is necessary that you perform a femoral incision on the thigh, and then allow the abscess to rest; and then the limb should be fomented with warm water and oil, and then reduced with ease.
And the entire limb should be treated with water of which the remedy will come to its place.
And you have already ordered the chapters on dislocation according to what is preceded in fracture; from the upper part of the body down to the lower part.
Chapter XXIV.
On the treatment of dislocation of the jaw, proceed.
When both jaws are dislocated without fracture; the dislocation of both occurs in one of two ways: either they are slightly displaced from their places with minimal movement and somewhat softened; or they are completely dislocated, during which they are softened at the point of the joint where saliva from the throat flows and cannot hold that position nor close their mouth, and their tongue is wrapped in a cloth.
When the dislocation is minor, it usually returns by itself in major positions.
But if the dislocation is complete and severe, then it must be reduced lightly, and not delayed entirely.
And the minister should hold the patient's head, and the physician insert his thumb from one hand into the mouth at the site of the dislocation of the jaw, if the dislocation is on one side; or he should insert both thumbs together if the dislocation is on both sides, while the other fingers remain outside and balance them. And he commands the patient to cease moving his jaws and allow those that are out of place to return to their proper positions; and the physician then aligns the jaw and thrusts it back into its proper location.
And if the reduction is difficult, especially if both jaws are completely dislocated, then administer evaporation with hot water and oil, while performing a light reduction of both and not delaying the reduction of both entirely, as we have said before.
And then when returned and equalized, and the mouth of the patient is closed and not softened, place over those lint pads of cloth soaked in cerate, made of wax and rubbed oil; and soon apply them with several bandages.
And let the patient sleep on his back, with his head standing between two pillows, so that it does not sweat on either the right or left side; and do not force him to gargle for any cause; having his food being light, within which when the pains are relieved and the jaws are loosened, then sweat what he wants.
And this should be administered easily, and you should not trouble with the opening of the mouth for eating, drinking, and spitting, within which time the jaw is loosened and healed.
And if the reduction of two jaws when dislocated at any hour and are not returned to their proper places, then pain and continuous fever occur. And greatly swollen is the abdomen of the patient, and greatly and purely vomitings arise.
And when you see this, take it as a warning; many have died for whom this happens in a few days.
Chapter 25.
On the reduction of the dislocation of the furcula and the extremity of the muscle.
The furcula is not dislocated within the sternum by its continuation to the feet; sometimes it is dislocated at the outer part, and this is declared by the sensation.
And the restoration of it is that the patient lies on his back and extends his wings. And place your palm firmly over the area to compress it, so that it returns.
And place your hand over the area, apply the plaster and powders, and strengthen it.
Moreover, the extremity of that which is connected to the thigh is not dislocated in any day; therefore, it should be reduced and aligned as we have said and according to what you are capable.
And then place yourself over the plaster, powder, and extract, and command the patient to adhere to tranquility and rest until they are healed.
And this method of cure reduces the extremity of the muscle when it is separated from its place.
Capitol.xxvi.
On the reduction of the dislocation of the muscle.
Know that the muscle is not dislocated in any of three ways, one of which is when it is dislocated from the tendon to the bone.
And the second is when it is dislocated above the muscle, which is done with a knife; and it is not dislocated at the back parts through the shoulder; and it is not dislocated at the front parts through the nerves.
And it is more dislocated and protrudes outward at the back parts of the tendon near the bone, especially in those where the muscles are few, it is slightly dislocated; more so in those with many muscles, it protrudes outward with difficulty.
And often it happens to some men through a blow or fall, and the muscle of his is abscessed by a carbuncle, and is cut by what has already been dislocated.
Then cover what you have done over his part, and then proceed with his cure.
And the dislocation is known when you must palpate the injured part; so that you can distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the normal muscle, which shows a clear difference; and you find in the head of the muscle a concavity, and by palpating the head of the muscle it feels like a hollow, and the patient cannot return his hand to his ear, nor raise it with any movement.
If it is dislocated, you should palpate the foot or upper part, and then you will find a clear sensation upon touch, and it is not hidden.
And for this dislocation, a gentle reduction is made when it is fresh and the patient is still in pain.
And the reduction is that the minister raises his hand to parts above; then places the tied feet with a tremor, and elevates the joint with strength at its place, and the minister raises his hand and extends it there; then places it there so that it returns lightly.
And if by what we have said it does not return, and only from the beginning that caused the dislocation, for several days, then immerse the gout in warm water and apply a moistening poultice thus as if it were roots of colocynth, fenugreek, and melilot in water, and apply it.
And place the gout on its back and hold it with a tremor of wool that is equal in lightness and tension, then the doctor places his hand on the spine, elevates the head of the muscle with virtue, and pulls the hand of the gout so that it is not twisted at the parts below, and another minister holds the head of the gout, so that it is not twisted at the parts below, for it returns to its place quickly.
And if you wish, return the second in this manner: and it is that you cause to be present a man who be longer than the patient, and stand on the side of that leg, and insert his muscle under the titillac of the patient and raise the titillac of the patient above the parts upwards between which the patient is suspended in air, and another minister pull the hand of the patient from the sides under his belly. But if the patient is light, then it is that another cause be suspended, for fear that the grave injury return quickly.
And it is returned by another method: and it is that a long pole be placed on the ground with its head round in shape, like the handle of a mortar, neither thick nor thin, and placed under the patient; then you lay lion skins over the head of the pole, and the patient stands according to the length of the pole, and extend your hand to the parts on the other side; and stretch the body from the other side with strength, for the joint returns to its place quickly.
And if the reduction is difficult due to all the causes we have said, then use this cure: you should take a rod of which the length be that of two cubits, and the width of that be four fingers, and the thickness thereof be enlarged in the part of the tip according to this form:
And then place a round leather pad on the head to prevent the rod from injuring the patient.
And then place the tip of the rod on the patient, and extend your hand or arm under the rod between the parts, and fasten the rod to the support and the arm and the extremity of the hand.
And place your arm on a step of the ladder according to its width, and extend your hand between the parts, and the other limb be suspended from the other side, for the joint will soon come together.
And when the instrument is completed in any manner that is possible for you, then place at the tip a sponge of equal quantity; and then apply a plaster prepared from powder of madder and honey over all the muscle, so it is thoroughly mixed on top, and tightly secure the tip with a bandage; the plaster should be applied over the bandage, and your hand should be attached to its neck, and let it be, without moving your hand for seven days.
And ensure that food for the patient is paused until the member is comfortable, because it is better for the recovery of the patient.
And properly give food more than seven or five days and exercise some movement; and therefore if it is closed and not softened, then it is already healed.
If the joint is dislocated due to frequent humidity or for another cause, then it is necessary to apply a cautery in three passes, as previously mentioned in the chapter on cautery.
And if all this is done and after seven days the ligament and joint are not dislocated, and the plaster and stricture are reduced over it several times, and still not closed with catgut and cannot raise that arm above the parts above, then you should know that the nerves of the muscle, which are at the head of the muscle, are either incised or extended or softened, and you should know that the joint will never be fixed in its proper place.
For the dislocation of what is done, you should raise the foot and calf or the parts behind, and the reduction is done by impulse and extension by the hands, while it returns.
And let it be applied in the other stricture, and care for that until it is healed.
And if there is a delay in the healing and a loss of movement in the limb, then use hot bath motas until the delay in the healing is alleviated and it returns to its original nature.
Chapter XXVII.
On the treatment of dislocation of the shoulder.
Know that the shoulder joint is dislocated with difficulty and seems to return with difficulty; and it can be dislocated in all directions, but especially forward and backward. The dislocation of the shoulder is not hidden from you—whether you see it quickly or feel it upon touching, depending on the shape in which it is dislocated. When you set the dislocated shoulder into place, this is clearly manifest to you, for the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm or reach its own muscle.
And note the collarbone and reduce the dislocation as soon as possible before it comes to an abscess. For if it reaches an abscess, reduction becomes difficult, and even with force, it may not be completely cured; especially when it is in the back parts, for it is worse than all other types of dislocation, causing more pain, and hot motas can bring death to it.
And the restoration of the patient, when that is possible to reduce, is that the hand of the patient be extended between two others, and the arm of the patient be stretched out, and the hands of the doctor be on the knees and leave the patient, and he push the joint with the heels of his hands or with the edge of his palm as it returns to its place.
And if the dislocation is in the front parts, then return it thus by bending the hand against its own palm, between which strike the knee with the edge of your palm.
And if the dislocation does not obey reduction, then administer violent extension and strong force.
And let two ministers stretch the arm, and hold that position with two ministers so that the extension is not resisted.
And then let the arm be rotated completely, since it is wrapped in a long folded cloth around the patient's hand, or linen.
And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, anoint that area with some oil so that it helps in the lubrication of the joint and facilitates its return; then push the joint with strong pressure as it returns.
And after the reduction of the cavity let it be placed upon that cushion in which there is a pad and evacuation of white mucus from the liver, and let it be extended with a gentle descent, and the arm be suspended from the neck, and let it be left for some days.
And then let it be released; and therefore if the joint is formed in that location, then you release the ligament of the foot and leave it.
And if you see the joint not well strengthened, then reapply the plaster and the ligament, and leave it for some days until it is extended; and then release it.
Moreover, if it happens to it gravitates after the reduction of the joint, and its disposition is in movement, then administer moistening in bath and subtle friction, and compress, until it is alleviated; or pause over the joint for a while, as a matter of much movement; and then bind it, and leave it over the bone day and night. And then apply that to it, and put it in bath; when it is soaked, then friction the joint with tempered friction, and then repeat over it for a while, as a matter of much movement, one time, and the second, and the third. am intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.
And if you wish, place your hand over that moist and weathered slit at the edge and strongly press there; do this several times, for that is moist and return it to its position.
Capitol. xxviii.
For the treatment of dislocation of the shoulder, it is the joint where the arm meets the hand.
Shoulder of the arm is sometimes dislocated, and the reduction of this dislocation is slight. The opposite is true for other joints; however, more importantly, it is necessary to act with speed in the reduction of it at the hour when it is dislocated, before the area becomes inflamed or an abscess forms.
And the reduction of the dislocation is that you place the patient's arm joint on a table and make them extend their arm. The doctor then places their hand or palm over the vicinity of the joint and gently push it back into its proper place.
But moreover, consider whether the palm is already placed on the belly of the hand, then the patient places the back of his hand on a table while extending and reducing; and if dislocation has preceded, place both hands, then the position of the hand of the patient intrinsically on the table, so that the doctor's hand falls over that imminent joint.
And so if it returns quickly, that is good; and otherwise, then strengthen that by applying ointment yielding to the abscess and leave it; and do not repeat this, for if you do, you cannot endure nor perform the reduction of it any longer than a day passes.
But moreover, the joint must be considered according to its tortuosity; and do not note any cause to the patient, but rather that the hand is softened and cannot strengthen any cause; then you know that the nerves are crushed or stretched, and then there is no remedy in it except to apply a cautery near the site and strengthen it with this, giving some relief.
And since the gout has returned, then place it over the ointment which we have recommended, and let it be applied and strengthened for five days; and then dislocate it and leave it, and exercise the hand of the patient.
But if the movement in it has been obstructed and occurs with some gravity, then ease that by applying water compresses and some friction, until it is alleviated.
Chapter XXIX.
On the cure of dislocation of fingers.
In some cases, the fingers are completely dislocated at once.
And when one of the fingers is dislocated at the base of the palm or in the flesh of the finger, then hold the finger and push the dislocation back with your thumbs until it returns to place.
Then hold the tip of the finger, and suspend that part which is dislocated, leaving it for two days.
Then suspend that part and extend it until the finger is properly aligned on that same day.
And when it is night, hold it according to that narration, and do not cease to straighten and exercise it with movement during the day and at night; and do this for several days until it is properly set.
And make it seem as if you are doing so, even if dislocated in the hand, hold that part and do your first operation, until it is healed.
And make it seem as if you are doing so when it is dislocated in other parts.
Capitol.
For the treatment of dislocation of the cervical spine.
When dislocation occurs in any of the vertebrae of the back or the neck, and many vertebrae around that area are displaced, then there is no cure for that part, and death may occur to the patient.
The sign of this is that the patient's excretion is forced out against their will, and they cannot retain it; often, several members of the patient or parts of their legs or arms, or one of those, are softened. Or a vertebra in its place is displaced, as many vertebrae are displaced and many vertebrae are removed to four parts.
Then it is already mended at the rear parts and is named gelbozitation.
May the cure of it be that when you consider whether the gelbozitation arises from purisssia, for in that case there is neither cure nor does one become whole.
May it be that in those arising from coagulation or percussion or similar to those, the Ancients have already spoken of the methods of cure at length, of which the most returns to prophecy; but I will now abbreviate what is necessary from that, for which I have exposed and formed my exposition close to the understanding, with which I have here expanded and clarified it.
And of those, only the one that arises in the two specifically where I advise is cured.
And the patient should be extended on his back close to the wall, and laid out so that he does not touch the feet of others.
And place a straight stick, placed in the ground at the end of the hand near its head, and another stick vertically under his feet at the other end of the stick.
The minister should hold the stick, and it should not be fixed in the ground; another minister should hold the other end according to that form.
And wrap around the head of the patient and tie the lion's hide tightly. Extend the end of the ligament to the stick which should be at the head of the patient, and fasten that in place. And firmly tie the other ligaments under the patient's hips and thighs, extending those to the other stick which should be at the feet of the patient. Adjust all the ligaments and fasten those to the other stick at the feet of the patient.
And the minister should firmly extend the ligament to the part of the stick, and do not loosen the two sticks and the ligaments in which they are placed, but do not fix them as we have said.
And the doctor places his palms on the spine with strength so that it returns, or he places one hand on a table and adjusts his feet on the table as it returns.
And if it does not return in this way, then take a table of which the width or length is about three bracci, and cut into the wall that we said was near the hernia a place at the edge of the table. And place the majority of the table on the spine, and the doctor places his feet on the other edge, and presses well so that the spine is compressed and returns to its place.
And if you wish, turn the part that is twisted with your hand; and when you are on the ground, place the patient's head at the heel of two sticks, the length of which is one braccio, and place his head at the heel of two sticks in the same manner; and make sure the distance between each stick is a palm. Then draw the torn part through the hole in one stick, and secure each stick firmly to the ground so they do not move.
And there should be a round staff on which the cord is wound, and it should be turned in the two grooves of the two staffs.
And at the end of it is a groove in which the staff is wound, the length of which is one palm's breadth where it is wound; and in the other two staffs it is similar to that.
And then strengthen the ligaments you have stretched on the foot in the groove of the staff, and the ligaments you have stretched on the thighs in the cord where you place its ends.
And then place each cord and have a minister hold the cord with his hand, and the doctor tighten the spine as we have said.
And when the spine is returned and the area is tightened, then cover with a paste of honey, and some wool; then place a piece of cloth from a table, whose width be about three fingers or slightly more, and its length enough to cover the part of the spine, and over the portion of the spine.
And then apply the incense which we have mentioned, and use the patient of subtle nourishment under which it is healed.
And if there is any danger at the place at the end of the healing, then ensure that medicines that mollify and soothe are administered through long-term use, which we have recommended; and already a sheet of lead is being administered in that place.
And sometimes dangers occur at the end of the vertebrae of the spine, and are caused by that dislocation; and it is that bone for which you already fear that no suspicion should arise about it with this medicine, as it will greatly harm you.
Chapter XXXI.
On the treatment of dislocated hip.
Know that the hip joint and the joint of the muscle should only be dislocated to such an extent, and not occur in those cases where small movement and depression happen to other joints.
The joint of the ankle is dislocated according to four manners; it can be dislocated inward, outward, forward, or backward.
It is mostly dislocated inward, and little forward or backward.
The sign of dislocation inward is that when you adjust the leg of the healthy side against the affected side, the unhealthy one becomes longer and the heel more prominent than the healthy one. The affected foot cannot bend its toe; this is the place where you should cauterize the apostema, so that the head of the swelling is already reached here.
The sign of the one on which dislocation occurs outward is that the symptoms of it are contrary to this accident.
The sign of dislocation forward is that the leg expands symmetrically, but it cannot bend at all where the pain is in the heel. If forced to move forward, it cannot do so; his urine is retained and swelling occurs, and you should treat him by cauterization on the sole.
And the sign of those to whom dislocation occurs at the back parts is that they do not expand the flank, nor can they bend what is in front so that it bends backwards, and their waist is shorter than the other side, and the flanks are softened, and the apex of the thigh is deviated from that place.
The main reduction of the species of this dislocation is that you consider, at that time, if the dislocation is old and already accustomed, you have almost administered the reduction of it according to its disposition; then there is no need for total treatment in that case; hence, one should not guess at that.
For the one where the dislocation is recent and belongs to one of the four species of dislocation, you should turn the joint and extend it both inward and outward, and manipulate it on the right and left sides, as it will return with force and does not require any other treatment.
Moreover, if it does not return in this manner, you should prepare a strong counterforce and extend the waist on the side that is more injured, or on their hands, or with linseed which is soaked over the flank below the flank; another counterforce should extend the hand from above so that it touches the base of their hands. Then place another person to hold tightly the end of the linseed.
And it is an extension from his arm or from the inner part to the shoulder blade, or from the back to the buttock.
And it is the extension of all these in one go, lifting the patient's limb from his body and letting it dangle.
And this type of extension is common for all four.
And so, if the dislocation returns as we have said, it will be good; otherwise, for each type, what I say about its own treatment is necessary.
In the reduction of its own, when dislocated, and the dislocation is in the inner parts, ensure that the patient's limb is repositioned over his side; then place the bandages around the hip at that location where between the head of the hip bone and where the loin is attached; further extend the bandage from above the shoulder blade to the next part of the scapula.
And further, another minister firmly take hold of the thighs, and compress the thick part of the affected hip, extending it outward by strong extension, so that it returns to its proper place.
And this species is of a milder cure for which that member is reduced compared to other species.
And if it is excused for you and you do not follow the training on this species of cure, then make sure that both feet of the patient are tied together firmly but gently, over both the ankles and both the toes.
And let the length of each be by the quantity of four fingers, and let the patient's leg be extended more than the other by a quantity of two fingers.
And then place the patient's foot on the stake's head, and let it be in the hand; and let the length of the foot from the ground be the quantity of two braces.
And command a strong youth to hold down the thigh, and place the patient's foot on another strong youth, and the other youth holding down the thigh with force, for the joint returns to its place quickly.
And in the reduction itself, when dislocation is at the outer part, make sure that the patient's foot is placed on a pillow according to what we have recommended for having the thigh strong. And strengthen the bandage over the patient's leg and its ankle.
And then two sticks are placed aside, one on the foot and the other on the head; and then sticks adjusted in the middle of the stake fixed under which wet sheets be wrapped, so that the patient is not harmed because the stick is between the thighs of him, for you must allow the extension to the parts left undone.
And then each minister extends to his part, and the doctor with his hand equalizes the reduction according to the art.
And when the dislocation is in the anterior parts, then make sure that the leg is extended slightly, and this is according to this method as narrated for the stake; and the doctor places the palm of his right hand on the affected knee, and then tightens it with the other hand, and by this tightening, he extends the previously bent part to the posterior part.
If the dislocation is at the rear parts, then do not allow the patient to lie on these parts, and elevate them above the ground; it should be laid on a hard surface, just as if the width of him were dislocated to the front parts, according to what we have said about his lying on two widths; and it should be placed with its face and limbs extended, as we have said, not otherwise.
A compression should be applied on the area where the joint is dislocated.
So, when the reduction is completed as it should — and you notice the sign of the reduction, which is that you can extend both limbs of the patient, and when you feel them equal and the limb returns to its normal position; then adjust the thighs and wrap tightly with a bandage so that the width is not altered in any part; and adhere the limb to rest for three or four days.
Then remove the bandage, and compare one limb with the other.
When you see the equal marks in the wound, then know that the dislocation is already healed, and then let the patient go.
And if you see any cause of swelling, then return and apply a poultice to that area, and extend it according to your first structure, and let it remain for three days.
Then loosen that, and allow it to remain in motion over each part for some days, until it is comforted.
Capitol.xxxii.
On the treatment of dislocation of the shoulder.
The shoulder is dislocated in three ways: it can be dislocated to the outer parts, to the inner parts, and to the back parts more than to the front parts; and it is not dislocated to the front parts.
And the sign of shoulder dislocation is that when you command the patient to apply their hand to their hip; then you know that the shoulder is dislocated.
And the restoration of all manners of it is that you make a straight cut in the side, attempt to extend its cavity as much as possible; attach your two fingers to the face of it, and place his foot between your feet; then make sure to adhere the back to your palms, hold those between your thumbs over the back of it with strength, and another minister extend his foot so that the back returns to its place.
And the sign of its submission is that its cavity adheres to the flank easily without effort.
And then apply that and make the cavity adhere to the flank, and place those constantly with a bandage for three or four days, and then remove those.
And do not use the side for ambulation for some days until it is healed and comforted.
But if the reduction of it is excused to you, then administer strong extension to the ligaments of which in the cure of the hip the preceding narrative was told.
Chapter XXXIII.
Of the treatment of dislocation of the ankle.
The ankle is sometimes reduced by slight movement, and sometimes dislocated by force, and the dislocation of the ankle is caused either on the inner side or on the outer side.
And the sign of the ankle dislocation is that you see the ankle swollen from the side where it is dislocated.
More so, the treatment of the reduction of the ankle is by gentle manipulation, and it should be extended with ease and returned to its normal position.
More so, in the treatment of the ankle when dislocated by force, make sure to straighten the limb, and have a strong and brave assistant behind the foot at the midpoint.
And then place your right hand on the upper part of the foot, and with your left hand, hold the lower part of the foot at the location of the heel.
And then pull the foot to your right hand, and then to your left hand twice, and then extend your left hand; and push the foot to the right you straighten the leg.
And do this twice as we have counted.
And then push the foot to the third time towards the leg, and you are at the ankle.
So if it returns in one or two pushes using this method, and if you close the foot properly, that is good; otherwise, then repeat the operation, for it may not return.
But if reducing the foot as we have advised is prohibited to you, then place the leg on a board on the ground, and insert a piece of wood in the ground firmly, so that it fits between the patient's thighs, and you have wrapped a cloth around it to prevent the foot from slipping.
And then the minister should hold their thighs, and another minister extend the foot with their hands or a cloth tied around the leg of the foot; and then each minister extend themselves against the extension of their part, so that the piece of wood remains between the patient's thighs holding it, to prevent the body from being pulled towards the sides as you straighten its extension.
And then the doctor equalizes the dislocation with his hands, while another assistant holds the healthy thigh at the place left vacant, so that the dislocation returns easily.
And then since the dislocation returns and the health of the reduction is declared to you, then apply a strong paste externally there, and bind the foot with lint to the leg.
And beware of the nerves behind the ankle, lest the lint be too strong and severely irritate them.
And leave it there for two or three days; and if the lint is moistened, change it.
And remove it on the third day or fourth, and prohibit the patient from walking for forty days. But if it is necessary for the patient to walk before this time, then there is no guarantee that the dislocation has not become dissolved and corrupted, and that it does not receive healing.
And if an abscess occurs at the wound, then beware that you administer in the treatment of it what we have described in our narrative, in another place for healing and application, until it is fully healed.
Chapter XXXIV.
For the treatment of dislocation of the toes of the feet.
First, ensure that what is dislocated can be reduced with slight extension; and what is not difficult, should be done gently.
But if the dislocation is in some toe joints of the foot, then you should place the patient's foot on a level part of the ground or on a table, and let it be thus as if walking.
Then stand on the patient's foot, and place your own foot over the area near the joints, and press that part with your foot to help it return to its proper position, and observe that it is reduced and does not appear as a prominence in the area.
Then place the patient's foot on a table that can hold the entire foot, which has two supports, and strengthen it with a sturdy structure for three days; then remove it and allow the foot to rest by walking for several days, until it is strengthened and its recovery is assured.
Chapter 35.
Of the species of dislocation that are caused by trauma or fracture or any other means.
When any of these causes occur, and you are involved in the treatment and restoration of it, mistakes can lead to death.
And for this reason, one must not presume in the treatment of it, but rather someone who is skilled in the art, long accustomed to its use, merciful and pious; who waits, not impatient, nor fiery, nor presumptuous; and who uses at the beginning of medicines that cauterize abscesses only, leaving the illness to divine judgment, but to one to whom you hope for salvation from perdition, from the illness alleviation, and in which you appear to have some hope. And then strive to perform the reduction at the beginning of the cause, before it develops into an abscess.
And then, if the limb returns as we want, proceed to administer treatment that cauterizes the abscess and treats the trauma with what is suitable for it from the drying ointments.
And if dislocation or fracture of separated bones occurs, then you must realign their joint, and do so as we have said in the simple ailments that precede these in the places mentioned.
And guard and avoid according to your virtue that of the instrument in the ways of fear according to which my preaching precedes you; for this is better to you from your Creator, and more permanent to your glory, and more greetings to your true essence those in your time. Thus you finish the words of Albucasim perfectly, for which may God be blessed. Amen.
