O, children, now that I have completed this book, which is the last of the science of medicine, by its completion bringing about its end, and through its explanations and declarations, it is clear to me that I complete for you here this treatise, which is part of my surgical operations.
Since the operation of the hand is professed in our region and in our time as almost entirely private, despite the great importance of the science of it, and its practice has been obscured; and only some minor descriptions have remained in the books of the Ancients, which corrected many errors and hesitations, yet the understanding of it has been limited and its force and art have been diminished.
And it is evident to me that I should revitalize that part of this treatise in the manner of explanation and declaration and abbreviation; and for it to come into the forms of the instruments of cautery and other tools of the work through the addition of declaration and preparation, which is necessary for this cause.
More the cause why a good craftsman does not use his hand well in this our time is that the art of medicine is long and that its actor before this had to be exercised in the science of anatomy which Gualia knew entering into which he learned the youth of the members and their forms, and the conjunction and separation of them; and had knowledge of the bones, the nerves, and the arteries, their number, and their disease; and of the pulsating veins and the quiet ones, and of the places of the movement of them.
And for this you say Hippocrates that in his name is mouth, more in the little work, and mainly in the art of the hand.
More we have already spoken of that in the introduction to this book; for who does not know what we said about anatomy, will not be free from error by which men will die, as I have seen too many of those, for some are formed in this science and fall into the errors of that other science and its experiments.
For I have seen a doctor who, through ignorance, incurred an apostematisc in the neck of a woman, and injured some arteries so that great blood flowed until the woman died amidst her pains.
And there was another doctor who nearly extracted a stone from a man who had suffered in his state, and the stone was large, and came to him, and he removed that stone with a piece of the bladder, so that that man died on the third day.
And I have already called for the stone to be removed, and I saw that because of the size of the stone and the position of the patient over which it lay, he would die.
And there was another doctor who took payment from a duke of our land for surgery, and he came upon a black slave who had a fracture in the thigh; and because of the doctor's ignorance, he removed the fracture, over the wound, with pillows and splints of strong structure, and did not allow the wound to breathe.
And then the dislocation according to his desires, and then the relevation, and then the release for a few days, and commanding that we release the ligament; and thus remain until the thigh and foot are firmly set, and proceed to our detriment.
And I was called to him, and prepared to dislodge the lithiasis, and peace and attempts to alleviate his pains were achieved.
But indeed, when corruption was confirmed in the member, because I could not restrain it, and did not cease to walk the corruption through the member while the patient suffered.
And there was another doctor who incised an oncotic abscess, and it became ulcerated over several days, during which the evil increased greatly in him and affected his lord.
The cause is that the wound is purely of melancholic humor, and does not affect the whole body, but rather affects a member that suffers from being attacked by it in its entirety.
And for this reason, my sons, it is necessary for you that the operation be devised in two ways: one where the operation is associated with health, and another where the work is dangerous in its major dispositions.
And I have already existed in this entire text where the operation is full of errors and fears; therefore, it is necessary for you to keep this and leave that, so that the leaves do not find a way to speak against you and dishonor you.
And therefore take your arms with diligence and protection of God, and your patients with happiness and firmness.
And use the best way by the grace of God seeking salvation and laudable success, and lay aside the terrible illnesses difficult to cure, and place your arms around that which makes you fear, so that sitting in your faith and in your name you are not deceived: for more remains to your glory, and much more in this world and beyond in your sanctity.
Gout has already been dissected in some monastic texts: Do not treat illness with bad medicine, so that bad doctors are not called cured.
And I have already devoted this treatise according to three chapters.
Begin the division of the treatise, and first of the first part. The first chapter ordered of the foot, regarding the forms of the instruments and the tools of the cautery, and what is necessary in the operation.
The division of the second part. The second chapter, on drying and perforation, and on suction cups, and on blisters, and on extraction of arrows and similar, all categorized and ordered by the forms of the instruments.
The third chapter, on restoration and dislocation, and on the cure of sprains and similar; chapter ordered by the head between the feet, and by the forms of the instruments.
I will now describe the quality of the coals for the cautery and the substances used, as well as in what condition the cautery is prohibited.
Therefore, I say that the discourse on the quality of the cautery coal and its substance is long and lengthy, subtle by science, and a hidden secret; much has already been said about it by wise men, and they are in disagreement. For my part, I suffice with a little of their sermons, fearing lengthiness.
And therefore say that cautery is applied to all composition universally which is of flesh or sinew, except two compositions, which are compositions of sinew.
In the composition of sinew and flesh, it will dry out; for some said that cautery is beneficial for that, while others said the opposite, that cautery is not suitable in illness which is due to quality and dryness, for the nature of fire is quality and dryness, and it is inappropriate that such an illness, being sinew and dry, be cured by that which is cautery and dry.
And argue against those who say the opposite, that by cautery one is cured in all sinew and flesh diseases that come in men's bodies, for when you compare man's body to its humors in relation to the composition of fire, you find man's body dry.
And I say according to the speech of that, for I have already experienced this several times.
But I do not claim to know everything about this, having already been trained extensively in the Capitol of Cautery through recent exercises, and having come to understand the diversity of human composition and the disposition of diseases in their various forms, as well as the causes of these diseases and the accidents related to them, and the duration of these illnesses.
In other complications, there is no need for fear, and particularly in the wet and painful conditions, for all doctors are agreed upon those, and do not disagree in using cautery in them.
Know, my sons, that the secret of curing by cautery with fire and its goodness lie in the burning medical instrument, for the fire is simple, and its action reaches only the member being cauterized and causes no great harm to other members.
But the action of the burning medical instrument reaches those members that it touches, and strongly brings to the member suffering from a difficult to heal illness and quickly cures it.
But the fire, by its subtlety and the goodness of its substance, does not cause anything other than to superfluously burn. We are already known for this through experience and long service in studying the art regarding the true causes; and for this reason, I excuse myself for the length of my speech. If it were not that this is not suitable for public discourse and that you do not know the secret about the fire, its quality in operations on bodies and its expulsion by which you expel illnesses, a philosophical demonstration would be appropriate, which would be beneficial to your ears.
And be wise, sons, that they do not disagree about the time at which it is convenient to make a cautery and when they pause the best time of spring.
And I say that a cautery is convenient at all times, because the damage from the accident of time is submerged in the youth of what is cauterized, and especially if the cautery is for pains or necessary pains, strong and fistulas, which do not suffer delay because it is feared that those that come from evil intent are greater than little damage entering through time.
And this is not done on your feet, sons, for they do not consider anything but the common people and the foolish physicians, for at that illness which is cured by cautery it is not convenient all the time, and they pause that consequence.
And the reason is not thus because they consider it so, for a cautery is not but in place of a medicine which alters the composition and dries the humors which are the cause of the venous pains.
Yet, however, excessive cautery over medicine for the swiftness of its validity and virtue of its operation and greatness of its lord.
It is possible that the patient's illness may return at some point in time, depending on the complexity of the illness, its location, the virtue of the person, and what is prepared in the body due to the accumulation of superfluities within it, as well as what is received by acquisition through food and similar causes; but if the illness in which cautery is applied is a subtle illness in a member with few superfluities and humidities, such as a dental cautery for pain and similar conditions, it is possible that that pain will not return, more so when this is done in small amounts.
It is more common to say that cautery is the last remedy of medicine, and this is the view of surgeons. But as we understand it, I believe it is not a cure that benefits either medicine or any other cause except for cautery.
And the cause is contrary to this; and I understand that cautery is the last remedy of medicine only when one has administered the methods of cure for some illnesses, and those medicines have not proven effective, and then at the end of the course of treatment, one administers cautery, which benefits it. And at this point, the last remedy of medicine is the cautery, not according to the understanding which I understand the vulgar and most of the foolish doctors.
And the ancients said that a cautery made of gold is better than one made of iron, and they did not say this only because of the equality of gold and the sublimity of its substance.
And they said that the place for a cautery does not burn, since it is not absolutely heated; for I have already examined this and tested that it does not do so in all bodies as others do. A cautery made of iron is good and better than one made of iron as they say; but when you make a cautery with fire from gold, it is not to you declared, since it ignites according to the quantity you want due to the reactivity of the gold, and prepares to receive heat; and if you adjust over the flame, the gold melts by the fire, and cases in the fire several sheets so that the craftsman can cut through its occupation.
And for this, you should make the cautery of iron lighter and more precisely according to the correct operation.
And I have already arranged this chapter on the cautery according to chapters, and have arranged those of the hip between the feet, so that I delay the asking of him what he wants.
The first chapter.
This cautery treats cold and humidity over the painful condition of which there are two causes, these being the cause of soda and much traumatic flux, called coryza, from the head to the regions of the nostrils and ears flowing, and much sleepiness, and toothache, and colic, and generally all illness that comes through coldness, thus as paralytically, sodden, and apoplexy, and symptoms in those illnesses.
The form of this cautery is as follows: first, you command the patient to be evacuated with a mild medicine for three or four nights, according to the nature of the illness, the age of the patient, and their habit.
And then command that his head be shaved, and place that shaven area on a slanted bench and place his hands on his feet.
And then place the shaved part of your palm on the sole of the foot between his heel and toes. More over, since the middle part is reached, mark that place with a probe, and then ignite the olive cautery, which has this form:
And then place that cautery on the marked place with a probe, in such a way that it descends gradually, with your hand being gradually constrained, and you rotate it.
And then lift your hand slightly and examine the area, and if you see any part of the bone being revealed through a crack, as much as an err (a small piece), then lift your hand. If not, return your hand to that iron, or another one, if it is cooled, so that what I have said can be seen on the bone.
And then take a little of salt, dissolve it in that place, and leave it for three days.
And then place over the inguinal hernia, and leave it there until the scar of the burn is destroyed. And then cure the place with an ointment of tetrapharmcum until it is healed.
And we have already said that when the wound is opened, it heals better with bread, because it is better and more nourishing.
And some of them say that the condyle should be cauterized within the bone, and that the cautery should be left in until a part of the bone's surface is burned.
And then scrape what is burned of the bone, and then cure it.
And others say that the cautery should reach the marrow, pressing forcefully into the bone until it cools, and this is the method of Alphécat. And they estimate from that place exhale the vapors of the head.
And let the wound remain open for a long time, and then treat it so that it heals properly.
But I have not seen these two kinds of cautery for all, only in some men according to a fear-based method; and leave that one, I advise you, it is better for health when it is; for the head is heated by solution of continuity of the sun as we have testified in other members, especially when the head of the patient is of cold nature.
And the first kind of cautery is safer and better, I advise you; use that one and do that for health.
Capitulate second.
Of the cautery for the head.
When the head experiences chronic and long-lasting pain that is prolonged in the patient, and uses cloths, seeds, fumigations, plasters, poultices, dogs' bile, oils, and balms, and especially if the head has already been cauterized with a cautery that does not improve it due to any of these causes, then consider whether the head of the patient is of strong constitution in its nature; and if there is no great cold or heat, then this cautery is ineffective. In such cases, leave the previous cautery and use another one slightly different. And then cauterize that area on the corner of his head with a cautery between where the vein is divided. Incise the vein and the quantity of the opening in the mouth as we have counted, and cauterize that area with a cautery at the back part of the head in the place which is called vas, — and this is the place where the suction cup is placed. And lift your hand here, but do not uncover the mouth, for the patient finds great pain from this different from the pain of all other head cautery treatments.
And I will describe this cautery in its place, for I know that the cautery with which you cauterize the corners of the head and the occiput is finer than that with which the middle part of the head is cauterized; and this is the form of it.
Head, top.
On the cautery treatment for new migraine.
When there is a sharp pain in the back of the head or a dull pain between the eyes, the head should be treated with medicines that penetrate it, and the other treatment should be administered, which I have described in the sections on diseases; and if this is not effective, then cautery can be performed in two ways: with a cauterizing acute medicinal substance, or with iron.
More cautery in medicine burns when you take a piece of aloes, incinerate it, and cut the extremities of both its ends. Then locate the place of the pain in the temple with a lancet laid gently there, and let the needle be hidden within.
Then strengthen the place stopped by descending compression, and let it be for the space of three hours; then remove and cut the aloes, and leave the wound for two or three days, and place your hand over it submerge in water until the place dries.
Then cure that wound while it is still warm.
And if you wish, do what with some burning medicines which I have written in the second treatise of burning medicines.
More on the cautery method: Heat it with fire, and this is its form:
and it is called a keyhole cautery, for the head of it has the form of a keyhole, in which there is some curvature, and in the middle part there is a small projection.
And then place your hand over the location of the pain, so that the artery which is left is not adhered, and turn the small iron bit gradually and quickly.
And if the quantity that is adhered by the cut of the tendon is as great as its size, and raise your hand so that the artery which is left is not adhered, so that there be no flow of blood.
And then immerse it in salt water and place it over the area, leaving it for three days. Then place it over a warm cloth, and cure it with ointment until it is healed.
And if you do, cauterize at the tip of the scalpel according to the cautery, and guard against incision of the artery in this new migrainelike condition.
Capitol quarter.
On the cautery for ancient migrainelike condition.
When you cure migrainelike condition as we have said in the previous cure, and as we have said in the divisions of diseases, and if the cure does not improve, and times come when the disease is beyond what we have said about the first cautery with medicine or the cautery with fire, then you should ignite the surgical cautery while it is white-hot. Place the tip over the location of the pain for the length of the diameter of the said area, or mark that spot; then remove your hand after a moment and strongly apply heat to avoid incision and penetrate into the bone.
But you must guard against the continuity of the jawbone, which is used for chewing, and ensure that the cartilage is not adhered and the nerves, which supply it, are not affected, and that no spasm occurs.
And if it is concerning the care and caution of the flow of blood in the artery that is amputated, for in its amputation there is fear, especially to those who ignore what they do and are not diligent; and leaves the operation at its beginning.
And I will return to the regulation of blood flow in the arterial accident according to its manner, in this place of this treatise.
And if you see in this illness that this cautery does not suffice and you find the patient's condition tolerable, cauterize it in the middle of the foot as we have recounted, and cure the wound while it is healing.
And if you see, administer the cautery which we have said in the chapter on strengthening the artery with a cautery, using two knives. This cautery is better and more effective.
Chapter V.
Of the application of cautery for ear pains.
When there is pain in the ear due to inflammation and has been treated with other curative methods as described in the division, and the pain does not subside, apply the cautery, which is called puncta. This is its form:
Then apply the puncta near the beginning, and it should be placed around the entire ear as if it were rotated, or in the circumference of any part where the pain is located. Slowly extend the cautery along the edge of the ear gradually after you have confirmed the location.
And if the cautery of these points on the entire ear is applied and then removed, and subsequently treat the areas between until they are healed.
Chapter VI.
Of the cautery for tetanus.
Turtura the quality of which is cured and seared through no other means than the species of phlegm that the vein carries, as we have said in the divisions of diseases.
Avoid cauterization of the species that flows due to drying or spasms of the nerve.
When you cure that species of turtura by bleeding, capi-purgation, and guaragism, and if you do not agree with your cure, then you must cauterize the disease with three cauteries: the first at the root of the ear, the second a small distance from its temple, and the third at the junction of two lips.
And place your cautery opposite the site of the disease, for softening occurs only at the site that appears healthy.
And the method of cauterization is to apply the cautery along the outer part of the ear just above a small point on the top of the head, and another on the temple, the length of which should be according to the length of the thumb. Then place your hand over the cautery until the quantity of the species of the conda is burned.
And this is the form of the cautery, and it is special to the barber-surgeon, the form of which is shown in front of us. But more subtle is that one sees it only slightly; and one cuts with a knife to remove a slight excess.
And then cure the place where it is shown after it has been treated until it is healed.
Capitol. vii.
On the cautery treatment for old apoplexy.
When apoplexy is old and you have treated it as we said, and the patient does not have fever, then cautery treat the area with four cauteries: especially on all the corners of his head; and with one cautery in the middle of the head, as we said; and with a cautery in the groin. And the method of the cautery is made according to what was said above.
And the cautery has already been applied to the mouth of the stomach; it is more posterior; and then it is treated as you proceed.
Chapter VIII.
Cauterization of oblivion performed by flame.
Cover that they be given to the patient at the beginning large jars and pills of the powdery substance.
Then place your hand on the head of the patient and position it over the heart as described in the treatise on plasters.
Then hold it there for several minutes, as this is the method of cautery. Do so according to that method and order as I have already said.
And so if by those good remedies it does not improve; otherwise, then make three cautery marks on the rear part of his head, which should be descending from the upper part of the head to the lower part of the neck. Hold your hand for the thickness of a finger between each cautery, and then proceed to treat the cautery mark.
And if you add more to the patient and it is tolerable, then do a cautery in the middle location; and if you add a greater amount, then cauterize that area above the two horns.
Then cure that which is inside until it is healed; and let the cautery be olive-shaped as given in the form above.
Chapter 9.
On the cautery for parazilium and the mollification of the entire body.
Cover that you proceed in mollification of the head with jellies and as we have said; then place your hand near the patient's head, and then cauterize that with a cautery in the middle of the head, and with a cautery on all its horns, and with a cautery on the back part of it, and with three cauteries on the vertebrae of the neck.
And if it is necessary in the disease of mollification of the body to apply more cauteries and the diseases are tolerable and the disease is strong, then cauterize that with four cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, and behind that with a cautery where the backbone ends, and raise your hand. And then cure that which is inside so that it is healed, and this be done with an olive cautery.
Capitol.
Of the cautery treatment for epilepsy.
The epileptic is not cauterized, but only if the epilepsy is caused by phlegm.
And therefore make sure to modify the brain at its beginning, on both sides, and the other treatment which we have described in the division when the patient is large and tolerates the exclusion of medicines.
And if it is a child who does not tolerate the medicines, then administer garglers and chewable remedies to the servant, before this for several days, with improvement of the food.
And then place the head of the patient in a convenient position, and cauterize that area with a cautery in the middle of the head according to the previous method, and another cautery at the back of the head, and over each corner of the head, cauterize accordingly. And if the pain is strong and tolerable, then cauterize those points as mentioned, while keeping paralysis and softening of the body over the vertebrae of the neck and the vertebrae of the back.
And use an olive cautery as described.
And if the pain is in a child, then use a fine cautery according to this method.
Capitol. xi.
On the cauterization for melancholy.
When the causes of melancholy are damp and gross flame, then cauterize those points using the cauteries we have mentioned while keeping paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is excess moisture declining into melancholy, and the body of the patient is humid, then give him to drink what purifies his brain according to what was mentioned in the division.
And place your hand on the head of the patient, and properly make a ring from it over the circle, and then place that in the middle of the head.
And if the patient is senseless and held from all sides.
And then apply a liniment; it is more worthy to be used as a salve for sheep. And heat it over the fire for moderate warming, which the patient suffers when more is applied. And then place it in the middle of the head in the circle, and let him remain until it is rubbed.
And do this for the patient once a week. Use the other regimen until it is healed; or if you wish, cauterize it by making small points according to its size. Otherwise, keep your hand on a similarly ordered cautery: this is a type of cautery which moistens the brain in equal measure.
And then place that cloth soaked in salve or in oil of linen.
Capitol.xii.
On the cauterization with water flowing down the heel.
When it has been declared to you the beginning of water in the belly by the signs which I have said in the division, then begin and give to drink to the patient what modifies his head, and keep the other free from all moisture.
And make that decoction in water for some days.
And then command him to rub his head, and cautery that place with a cautery in the middle of the head; and then cautery that place with two cauteries on the temples if it is the beginning of ysement of water in two bellies, or on one temple if it is the beginning of water in one belly.
Cauterize all the veins and arteries which you leave uncauterized; and let the cautery be in that far place in the width of the temples.
And keep away from fluxes of blood when it is cauterized; and if you see fluxes of blood, stop with some medicine, which is in your power.
And I will come with wisdom which is in the extraction of arteries and in the cutting of those and caution about flows of blood.
And sometimes it is cautery applied to the neck with two bones heatedly produced.
Capitol. XIII.
Of the cautery for ancient tears.
When tears from the feet are ancient and frequently occur through the veins and arteries which are in the obvious place on the head, it is verified that these are superfluous phlegmatic fluids. Then cautery the area with a cautery as we have recounted in the Capitol of the beginning of running water in the feet, and with a cautery in the middle of the head, and with two cauteries on the neck placing two temples, and with two cauteries on the neck placing two bones. And if there is an addition of inflammation, then cautery the area entirely along the length of the foot on the outer edge of the eyebrow with a small cautery.
Chapter XIV.
Of the cautery for the foulness of the nose.
When your treatment for the foulness of the nose does not improve, and you prepare and give the patient to drink castor oil for three nights; then rub his head, and cautery him with a cautery made from half olive wood and half iron. Then cautery that area with a cautery made from carnation wood, using two cauteries on both supraorbital regions, leaving the hair slightly.
And beware that you do not burn too much of it.
And the form of the carnation wood cautery is this.
Chapter XV.
Of the cautery for the softening of the eyelids in infants.
When the eyelid of the infant is softened due to illness or humidity, then cautery that eyelid with a cautery made from this lunar cautery; and this is its form:
And if you, cauterize that over the two temples a little with two cauteries in all parts, and let them be long from the temples. And let the length of each cautery be according to the size of the temple.
And do not press too much with your hand on the cautery, but according to the amount that the outer part of the eyelid is touched.
Capitol. XVI.
Of the cautery of the eyelid when the skin is converted to parts inside and around the eye.
When the skin of the eyelid is converted to parts inside, I must prick the eyelid, cauterize it in those areas according to two methods: either by cauterizing or by applying a burning medicine.
If you cauterize with fire, command the patient before doing it to expose their skin as they do when they bathe, keeping them long and equal; and if you prick there, you should strengthen the eyelids with a bandage so that they are not damaged until the skin is grown back.
When they are born and equalized, then place the head of the patient on your thigh, and over the eyelids of the patient gently spread, in the form of an olive leaf, a mark which is the beginning of the sign of the skin.
And then place a clot in the bile or mucus of the eye.
And then heat the cautery, which is in the form of this.
And then cauterize over the figure which is marked, little by little with small rotations, until the surface of the wound is burned, which appears like a leaf of laurel entirely.
And the sign of the healing from your work is that you see the eyelid of the eye already contracted and the skin around it elevated after the puncture of the eye.
And then lift your hand and leave it there for three days, and place the clot between the eyelids until the scar is healed. And after cure that ointment inside which is healed.
And if it returns through the skin for some cause near their origin and the eyelid is softened, then make another time the cautery over that area as you have done first.
And if the skin is on the eyelid, then cauterize it inside until it is elevated to its natural place and equalized, so that the skin does not heal unevenly.
And the cautery with medicinal burning substance that you command the patient to apply on the skin until it is prolonged and equalized, then make of paper cloth the shape of a hawthorn leaf.
And after, take a known soap and fresh fat. Mix these fats well, then apply this mixture gradually without rubbing it; spread this mixture over the paper cloth which is made thus in the shape of a hawthorn leaf, and place that on one side or both; let the patient hold that with a clean hand or hands, and their head be in a raised position.
And place it on the medicine and press it slightly but do not wet it in such a way that the patient feels the bite of the medicine, for the bite is like that of fire.
And so, to perceive how the atrophy bites, when you leave the medicine and wet that as you said; therefore, when the biting ceases, place the medicine and wash it well with water; then consider if the eyelid has already been raised; if it is washed like this, you should apply heat or incision, for then it is good; and if not, return to the place of the medicine where it did not press and do not deface your operation by making it equal.
And then place it on the edge of the cut so that the bond of adhesion is eradicated, and then cure that with an ointment or something else so that it heals.
And you must ensure that your operation is conducted with diligent vigilance so that the wound does not become infected by the medicine. If the eyelid becomes slightly softened or some of the hair falls out in the wound after a few days, then reapply your medicine to that area where the eyelid has softened, and do so in the same manner as at the beginning, and keep it under observation until it heals.
And this is the form of the leaf of hawthorn.
And you should know that the humours of men are diverse according to their size and smallness, and therefore according to this your contraction is made.
And the way of straightening should not be hidden from those who study in this art.
Capitol. xvii.
On the cautery treatment for a fistula in the humerus.
When you treat a fistula as we have said in the divisions of the maladies and do not refer to our treatment, then when you cauterize it according to this manner: command the patient to place his head in the boiling water, and hold his head with some minister between the hot vessels in such a way that it is neither burned nor agitated on his head.
And then place something warm in the albuminous fluid or in the mucus of the eyelid over the head.
And then heat the cautery of which this is the form:
which is convex, as in the shape of a cane or a turning pen, from one end of which the cautery is made.
And if it goes, penetrate into the other end. And if you want it to come out as it tries.
But however, that which is concave is better for your work.
And then press the fistula if it is open, and clean and dry it out. And if it is not open, then open it and extract the pus from it.
And then place the hot cautery on it, and with your hand hold the cautery at the base of the nose a little, so that your hand does not err or the patient move, and then place the cautery in the nostrils and destroy that.
And therefore if at the beginning of your cautery it enters into the wound, that is good; but otherwise, then iterate the cautery one or two times, as needed; and leave it thus for three days, and afterwards place your hand over that spot and apply an ointment to dry it until it heals.
And if it has passed eleven days and it is not healed, then place the sharp corrosive medicine over it until the bone is uncovered and is scraped as you see fit in your chapter.
And another way of cauterizing a fistula that some first may say: Identify the location of the fistula and do this there; then place your hand there with good retention, so that the bad humor does not enter as the melted lead does not penetrate to that part; and cover it over the opening of the bad humor until it is covered in honey or water, for the lead adheres to the location of the fistula and heals it through marvelous healing.
And if the fistula is healed as we have said of the cautery and healing, that is good; but otherwise, it is necessary to administer drops into the nose and reduce the fistula to the nasal cavity according to its proper place.
Chapter XVIII.
Of the cautery for the fistula of the toe.
Small wounds often cause fissures in the lips, and especially in the lips of children.
Therefore, when you treat those fissures as we have said in the divisions and do not prolong your treatment, then heat the small surgical cautery according to this form that is taught:
And let its cavity be according to the subtlety of the blade.
Then place that heated cautery at the fissures for as long as the cautery reaches the bottom of the fissures.
Then treat it with cerate until it is healed.
Chapter XIX.
Of the cautery for fistula in the mouth.
When an abscess forms in the root of the uvula or on the palate or in the roots of the teeth, and then breaks, becomes old, and forms a fistula, and you treat it without prolonging your treatment, then heat the cautery according to the amount received in the fistula, and place that heated cautery into the tract of the fistula. Keep your hand there until the hot iron reaches the bottom of the fistula, and do this one or two times. Then treat it with what we have said for the treatment until it is healed.
And so, if the abscess is incised and healed, that is good; otherwise, it is necessary to expose the location and fix the corrupt bone as will be covered in its chapter.
Capitol. xx.
Of the cautery treatment of teeth and the softening of warts.
When the warts are softened by moisture and the teeth are numbed, and you have treated those with medicines without success, then place the patient's foot in warm water, and soon after, heat the cautery to the form which will be given shortly. Test that you pause the heated cautery over the tooth and insert it into the area, rapidly applying the heat so that the patient feels the warmth of the fire at the root of the tooth.
Then lift your hand, and repeatedly apply the cautery several times according to your desire.
Then the patient should rinse their mouth with salt water and keep it for an hour, then spit it out, as the numbed tooth is sealed, the softened gum is tightened, and the moistened corruption is dried up.
Chapter XXI.
Of the application of cautery for tooth pain.
When tooth pain is due to inflammation or there is a boil or abscess, and you cannot achieve relief with medicine, the application of cautery in that area can be done in two ways: either with a calf's bladder cautery, or with a fire cautery.
The calf's bladder cautery is when you take a bladder from a calf and fill it with fluid, then wrap it around the tip of the instrument, and immerse that part in the filled bladder. You place it over the painful tooth, pressing firmly to ensure it becomes inflamed before the pain subsides.
And then repeatedly apply that several times until the heat of the fire permeates to the root of the teeth.
And if so, soak a piece of wool or cloth in the fluid from above mentioned, and place that over the painful tooth. Hold the burning iron over it until the heat reaches the root of the tooth's cavity.
Moreover, however, the cautery with fire you must attend to the wound of skin or of iron, and in its core there is some coals and the acuity of fire must not reach the mouth of the patient.
And place the cautery in the form it will take, and hold that over the dent and put your hand inside so that the cautery is well lubricated; and do this a few times to prevent the pain from worsening on that day or the next.
And ensure that through the action of that cautery, the patient opens their mouth wide and holds it for about an hour; this is the form of the cautery.
And cautery it as much as you can determine or desire.
And this is the form of the catheter:
Chapter 22.
On the cautery treatment for extrophy.
When extrophies are due to phlegm and humors that do not respond to digestion with medicines, if you perform a mild digestion of those, then ignite the cautery in the form that follows: having two open ends, so that smoke exits from one end. Hold the ignited cautery over the affected area for one time, and another if you find it necessary, without allowing the flame to reach the base of the abscess.
And if the abscess is small, then apply the cautery according to the size of the abscess, and leave it for three days, placing a stopper inside between where the fire has burned.
And then cure that with ointment and bandages until it is healed.
Capitol.xxiii.
On the cautery for sore throat and the constriction of hemorrhoids.
When humidity enters the channel of the lung, and especially when it is due to a cold complex, then you must evacuate the patient with medicines that are laxatives, and then cautery the vein near the groin in the affected area.
And be sure that you do not apply the cautery to the groin nor burn the vein but only slightly.
And cauterize that area with another cautery at the joint of the neck at the rear spine of the patient. And cauterize the clavicle with the cautery according to the previous manner.
And then cure that which was treated until it is healed.
Chapter 24.
On the cauterization for lung disease and cough.
When cough and lung disease are caused by humidity, and the patient has no fever or consumption, and it is an old illness, then cauterize two cauteries on the furcula at the lower parts of the lion bones and tarsals; and another cautery in the middle part of the foot between the two mammary glands; and use the clavicle cautery according to the previous form.
And if you wish, make pointed cauteries with the cautery called puncta, the form of which you show in the puncturation for ear pain.
And make points between them; then carefully cure that which is inserted before it heals.
And having the cautery with three points, the cauterization is made on that: with one time you can make three cauterizations according to this form:
Capitol.xxv.
Of the cauterization of titillic which is the head of the helper.
When the head of the helper is dislocated due to lubricating humidity and does not return within the hour of its expected return, you must reduce the dislocation while it is in that position which customarily returns, and then by a small movement, it will be relocated as it strives to return. As we have testified, this happens when first you reduce the dislocation, and then place the patient on their back or on their side; and elevate the codena which is in the inner part of the titillic at the upper parts above your left hand, if the joint is dislocated inwardly.
And then heat the cautery having two heads; this is its form.
And then cauterize the chain where that enters the other limb; and the figure of the cautery will come when of two heads the cautery has.
And sometimes it is adjusted according to this count and because these cauteries are VIII.
And then place salt on the cautery for a moment, and then make the patient lie down with the limb at rest, so that it is not dislocated until it is comforted.
And if the dislocation is above and the treatment is done this way, then cauterize over the muscle with a cautery on the collarbone or with pointed cauteries, so that the joint is confirmed and the humidity is alleviated and the patient heals.
Chapter XXVI.
Of cautery of the stomach.
When pain in the stomach is due to damp humors that extract themselves from its composition and multiply within it, if you continue the curative methods without success, then expect the illness to spread to his back and extend its hands and limbs. Then cauterize that area with three cauteries: place one on the foot at the width of a finger with aawl-cautery, and two on the sides of the cautery, forming the shape of a triangular cautery; leave space between those that are not tightly placed to prevent sores.
And if the depth of the cautery is the width of two-thirds of the thickness of the cord.
And let the shape of the cautery be as follows: If you wish, cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form; this should be a circular cautery according to this form.
And cauterize the stomach by puncturing where the large cautery scares: and you should prick the stomach according to the quantity you desire with a tentative needle, then cauterize that area with a small cautery; then cure that with the curative method until it is healed.
Capitol xxvii.
Of cautery of the foot sore.
When there is pain in the foot due to coldness or humidity or excessive windiness that has altered its natural structure through excess, and if the malady is not relieved by what we have said, then you should ensure that the malady is pressed against its neck, and proceed to apply three cauteries according to this form and quantity over the foot below the hypochondriac region, letting the decubitus of a man determine it.
And let the space be the one between each cautery according to the thickness of the finger, and let the cautery be according to the length of a straight man's arm.
And do not mistake the place for the cautery spot.
And if the quantity of what is applied equals the size of the thickness of the cord, and is not adjusted further; and if the malady stands on the sides of the feet; and if it does not stand, then lie down, which has already extended its parts, and raise its arms.
And it is possible that you will use this cautery with a surgical cautery, when using your subtlety and prudence in the art.
And guard that too much heat does not blister the skin, and let the subtlety of the whole cord be burned so that the entire body is affected and penetrate into the intestines; for here the cord is subtle; and know this.
Chapter XXVIII.
On the perforation of an abscess on the sole with a cautery.
When an eruption or abscess is on the sole and you want to know if the abscess is in the flesh of the sole or in its membrane, then if it is in the flesh of the sole, the patient will experience a significant increase in swelling and pain.
And if it is in the membrane of the sole, then the pain will be severe, and often it will exhaust the doctors with its treatment.
Then make sure the patient is lying on their side; then place the location of the abscess under tension; then heat the cautery which resembles a reed, the shape of which was shown on the previous page. And cauterize there and in between until the entire chain is carbonized, until it reaches the core, until it burns cleanly.
And then cure that by curing the other abscesses until they are healed.
And do not use this method of cauterization except with that one which the study in the art of medicine has prolonged, and for most of which they have known ailments; but this one has been experimented with several times on this operation, yet I leave the other to you, and it is better.
Chapter XXIX.
On the cauterization of piles.
They say that the ancient cauterization for hemorrhoids was done by taking a long stick from the root of Aristolochia and making it long and thin, with a diameter similar to that of a finger.
And then immerse it in oil and place it on the fire, and then cauterize with a cautery in that spot which is between the continuation of the furcula to the neck; with two small cauteries guide them, one slightly inclined towards the part behind the beard, and with two cauteries in what is inclining between the fifth rib and the pelvis, inclining slightly to the rear parts; with another cautery in the middle of the foot; and another on the stomach, and three cauteries at the rear parts; and with one cautery in that spot which is between the two blades, and with two cauteries at the sides of the foot, place the cautery which is between the two blades.
And do not place your hand on the cautery, but hold it at the end of the rod in operation.
And some ancients have said that some men use a cautery like a branding iron and burn with it in that spot which is between the ribs, until we bring about from there to there an abscess and it becomes healthy, as we have said for the abscess of the flank.
More in this puncture use cautery is not feared, for he dies soon if it happens in the place where the fistula is formed and does not heal.
Capitol.
Of the cautery of the wound.
When you treat the illness of the wound, as we said in the division of the cure, and do not apply your treatment to it, the cautery on the wound is according to three ways, all of which are rightful. Of these, one way is to make three or four lines according to the length of the wound, following the shape of the cautery irons, the shapes of which have been previously described.
And let the thickness between each cautery be that of a finger or a bit more, and the method of the cautery be the method we said for the cautery iron in equal measure.
And do not hold your hand on the cautery; let the patient be above its shoulders.
And another way to cauterize is that you heat the cautery with two embers, which we have said in the chapter on dislocation of the muscle, and raise the chain which is in the middle of the seam letting the juice of the left thigh pass through.
And your elevation is such that you raise the chain according to the length of the body, so as to make cautery marks according to the breadth of the body.
And then insert the two embers, burning hot, into that space through which you penetrate the chain from the other side.
And then remove the cautery; and so he makes four cautery marks.
And if you do, cauterize with the cautery heated by three embers.
And then you treat the cautery more when it has been allowed to burn for too many days; this is more conducive to recovery than other preceding causes in the treatment.
Capitol.xxxxi.
Of the cautery for dropsy.
Cauterize not for dropsy but for gout properly.
When you treat the dropsy, follow the methods of treatment we have said in the division and do not deviate from your treatment. When it comes that you must cauterize, use four cauteries in the circuit of the belly and one on the stomach, and another on the flank, and another on the loin, and two between the vertebrae of the back, and one on the right side of the foot, and another on the stomach. And the depth of the cautery be approximately equal to the thickness of the skin.
And allow the cautery to remain open so that it heals for a long time.
And do not evacuate the gout from the treatment near the cautery where it should be added two incisions, and it will be aided by a healing process.
The shape of the cautery with which the belly is seared should follow the shape of that described above, and it is with this that the two olive-shaped areas are seared according to what was said previously regarding their form.
Chapter XXXII.
On the cautery treatment of feet and thighs.
When the feet are swollen and filled with yellow water, cut off the circulation by searing the feet over the side of the foot between the ankle and the thumb, and raise your hand with the cautery without twisting that area; then raise your hand, and do not return to touch everything, for the yellow water will drain.
The cautery is to be used in this manner: And then apply two cauteries to the thighs, and on each thigh make a cautery at the extremity of the surgical knife. And the cautery is to be applied according to the length of the thigh: and leave one end up high on the upper part of the thigh, and the other down low on the lower part; and on each thigh, apply two cauteries.
And leave the wound open for a long time so that no water leaks from it.
And then cure the ailments which we have said.
Chapter XXXIII.
On the cautery of the abdomen.
When the abdomen is inflamed due to cold and humidity within the intestinal walls, it is the digestive and retentive virtues, which are in the stomach and intestines. This condition is treated according to the methods of cure, and sometimes the patient suffers from a cautery of virtue exposure. Therefore, cauterize that with a large cautery over its own stomach according to what was previously described in the cauterization of the stomach, using the ring cautery and four cauteries in the circuit of the fine cords, using a subtle needle cautery; or use a large aloes cautery, or two cauteries.
And if sometimes the excessive humidity and the patient tolerates it, then cauterize that over the pentelagh and over the intestines, and strengthen it by applying two cauteries to the stomach near the inguinal region, which is a perfect cure for the youth of the condition, in which you do not err.
Chapter XXXIV.
Of the cautery treatment for ancient hemorrhoids.
When they are in nature derived ancient hemorrhoids or one of thick humors or corrupted humidity, and they are cured as we have said in the division and do not apply the heat cure, then cauterize three times on the base of the pus leaving a small triangular mark, and with a cautery above the navel down two fingers.
And if you suspect that the stomach is inflamed and the food is not digested, and the face is flushed, then cauterize that area on the stomach with a large cautery as previously described; and with one cautery on the thigh, and another on the armpit with a round cautery, and let the cautery remain open for some time, and cure him until he is healed.
Chapter XXXV.
Of the cautery treatment near the site of the abscess.
When you incise the thigh, then ignite the cautery that resembles a reed. Then insert that ignited cautery into the incised thigh, and keep your hand there until the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which the pus flows.
And do this one or two times; if there are too many, then cauterize each of them according to how we have counted, and place ointments between the cauterizations until they are healed.
And if you cauterize with a large cautery on some areas, it will heal more quickly.
Capitol.xxxvi.
Of the cauterization of fistulas that occur in the parts around it.
When nature does not obey the work we have recommended in its place, and the patient is scared by this, heal it with a cautery.
Then when an ancient fistula in the nature rear appears, and is corrupted by foul humors, therefore what is most worthy that covers it is to attempt with a subtle probe, and then know the quantity of the depth of it by the front said probe.
Then heat the cautery that resembles a ray. Then place the heated cautery in this fistula, and according to the quantity in which you insert the probe.
And iterate over that with the cautery until those corrupted vessels are burned up completely in one or two or three times, according to the quantity of your necessity.
And guard yourself from burning nerves and veins; or if the fistula goes to the body of the bladder or the body of the intestine, then guard yourself from all those areas; and do not do this unless the fistula is in a fleshly location and you perceive that it is not penetrating.
And then cure the area once it is healed.
And if the area is sealed, and the materials are cut from it, and the flow continues for a long time, then you can see that it is completely cured.
And if the materials do not stay on the wound, then you can see that it is penetrating or in the depth of the wound and corrupting it, or it comes from those causes which will be recalled in its place.
Capitol. xxxvii.
On the cautery of warts.
When warts pain due to cold or excessive dryness, and for this reason the patient's discomfort is alleviated, then you should cauterize that area with a cautery, cauterizing each wart with a cautery tip. You will find more details about this in the following text.
And cauterize lightly the first one with a small touch, for three linear cauterizations will follow, and thus they will be more effective in healing.
Capitol. xxxviii.
Of the cautery of the bladder.
When there is a debility and softening of the bladder due to inflammation and humidity, so that the patient cannot retain urine, then cautery the bladder in its part, starting from where the skin of the penis begins, with one cautery on the right side and another on the left.
And the length of each cautery should be according to the size of the patient's foot; and cautery that area with a cautery on the lower part of the foot, or with two cauteries if necessary.
And the shoulder cautery should be according to how it is processed.
Capitol.xxxix.
Of the cautery of the womb.
When there is venous inflammation and humidity in the womb, and therefore conception is prohibited, and the menstrual flow is corrupted, and the induction is delayed, and joint pain occurs due to its condition, then the area should be cauteryed with three cauteries around the umbilical circuit, as we have said in the cautery of the bladder; and a cautery on the lower part of the foot, or with two cauteries, and the shoulder cautery should be used.
Capitol of the chapter.
Of the cautery treatment for dislocation of the ankle.
When moist phlegm infiltrates the area of the ankle, and causes displacement of its location, a sign of this is that the swelling extends over the other foot when compared between them. And the location of the dislocation is treated with a hot poultice.
Then, make a circular cautery mark on the foot of the ankle with a hot cautery, as you will have marked it around the circumference of the area as if it were turned, so that the area falls in the middle of the circle.
And the form of the cautery mentioned above is used in the treatment of the stomach.
And if this cautery is not present, then use three small olive branch cauteries instead.
And make the cautery according to the intensity of the pain in the entire limb; and then cure that which remains after it is healed.
Chapter XL.
Of cautery for the sciatic vein.
When pain comes in the part of the groin, and its cause is cold and humidity, the patient is cured with what we have said and you do not add anything, as this is ancient practice. When you treat the patient for large humid humors, use stinky pills or artificial ones or similar; and then cauterize that area.
The method of cauterization in this case is according to two methods: either with burning medicines, or with fire.
Sir according to two known methods, of which one is to cauterize that area over the part of the flank with three triangular cauterizations according to this form; and do so with good depth. And let the space between each cauterization be the width of one finger, whether the cauterization is small or large.
More often, let the cauterization be in the middle of the location, on the head of the spine, because there are four cauterizations.
And if you wish, cauterize around the circle where the form precedes in the cauterization of the dislocation of the ankle, which should be a circle that burns the sensitivity of the entire tendons.
And this is the way to cauterize for the ankle when pain is localized to the ankle and not extended to the thigh.
But if it is extended to the thigh, then cauterize there with two cauteries on the thigh over the area around which you will encircle the ankle that causes the pain; and with one cautery on the heel, a little should be applied to the tendinous part.
And for the surgical cautery, the depth of the cautery should be according to the sensitivity of the tendon.
And if the ankle pain is extended to the area near the toes of the foot, then cauterize there where you will apply the cautery with three or four points or more if needed.
And if the ankle pain is extended and the swelling appears on the thigh, then cauterize there with a surgical cautery.
Guard yourself in all cautery that you do not end with the cautery to such an extent that it burns nerves or great artery, and that by this you are above the patient harmfully or contraction.
And I have seen one or another of those whom the cautery was applied to the scrotum and ended in the cautery, and the fire inflated between where the tumor touched the skin, and fire perforated and corrupted all the skin. And then follows a severe attack of belly pain, and then death.
And if the pain is in two parts, cauteryize each separately according to this manner.
And the wise will say regarding the cautery in water: this is the manner: make a circle of iron, with its circumference being the width of one palm; and let its openings be according to the size of an finger bone or at most a little more.
And inside that circle, place another third; and let the space between them be the quantity of a foot's breadth; and let those circles be opened in two parts; and let the length of those gaps be one foot or two feet, and make on those iron edges decently enclosed in the circles; this is the form of it:
Approximately it should be ignited in the fire until it becomes red and produces sparks, and then placed on the part of the ankle, the gout columned over the leg. And therefore cauterize it with three round cauteries in one go.
And then leave it for three days; afterwards apply a plaster with borax and leave the wound open for many days; and cure it by ointment while it is healing.
Albucasis says: Oh, son, of this kind of cautery we have used it little because of the fear of its appearance, and because of those few things we have found that concern it.
But for those who have suffered from good cautery, find the place for it.
But for medicines that adhere, make two circles using a perforated wheel on which the smoke from the iron door is drawn; let the length of the walls where they are placed be such that two nuts or twice as much fit.
And if the space which is between each of the quantity of the enlargement of the digit; and be opened below and above, and contain themselves among them according to this form:
And then place your hand on the part of the foot where the patient feels pain, and hold your hand on the part of the water; and then take some hot water, pour it between two circles, and let the quality of that water be with a small fire gradually, and keep that for the quantity of one hour, and allow the patient to feel the bite and adjustment of the heat — for that absence bite is like fire — until the bite ceases.
And then raise your hand with the instrument and remove the hot water from all the water with cold water.
And then let it be for three days and place your hand on that border until the blackness of the adjusted bruise subsides, and let this be done for some days, after which the swelling will go down; this is called blanchiment.
And then cure it by applying ointment until it is healed.
And if the pain is extended to the thigh or hip, apply a statue in it that contains water according to how it is done in the water.
And this is the manner of water cauda, and I have already written that in the treatise on the rectification of medicines. Recipe for alkali and for a fire not extinct from both parts one, three times let it boil in a new cauldron where the part left has a small hole pierced through it, according to the quantity that enters into it.
And place the bottom of the cauldron in another boiling cauldron, and get over that alkali and live fire from water with a spoon so it captures them for one digit, and after you understand them with your hand by good compression, let the cauldron that descends from the sharp water into the part left in the boiling cauldron.
Then adjust all that water, and get it over another live fire and new alkali, for which the water will be of strong acidity, which is administered in most operations of medicine and in cautery of other members, for which operation makes use of fire.
And some of the medicines which are cauterized wide, such as terebinth and myrrh, and we assay that they be mixed.
And Gualia relates of an ancient man the operation and cure for water pain and sciatic vein pain, magnificently describing it well, and says that no other cure is necessary, and he was cured in one session as recommended, for he immersed himself in hot and cold baths.
And it is that if there is no vervain, then take a recent fig; and it should be bruised a little with some gray and placed on the water in which is the pain, or on the thigh, or on the chest, and it should be tied.
And let it be left for the quantity of three hours or for the amount that the patient endures the application.
And then place it in hot water; and when the patient's body is well rinsed, insert it into the soil, for the pain ceases and he is cured.
And be aware that no one uses a cautery with these medicines except near the body's evacuation.
Moreover, I Escorides say that when making a cut in the sinew vein, it will heal better if cauterized; and the cautery should be used according to this method: take wool and soak it in old oil, then place it between the layers of the foot and over the bone.
And then take a dry cut piece and flame it in fire to make it char; and place it over the wool until it is fully burned. And repeat this, and continue doing so until the glow of the flame reaches the water and relieves the pain.
And this method of cautery is called the cow's cauterization.
Capitol. XLII.
Of the cautery for pain in two places.
Sometimes pain in the two [areas] is due to multiple causes, such as compression or percussion or excessive evacuation, and by causes similar to those, through the infiltration of watery matter.
And the cautery is not used for cutting, but only in this single species where it is applied through the infiltration of watery matter.
Then incise, and place pillulas fitted in size to the affected area on both sides where the pain is, three lines wide according to the width of the area. Then test with cautery or more if needed, according to the quantity that the patient can tolerate and the virtue of the cautery.
And perform the cautery with a pointed cautery.
And if you wish, perform the cautery with three or four cauteries using a medial pronged cautery in this manner:
Capitol. xliii.
On the cautery at the beginning of gilbositat.
When this disease affects small children; and the sign of the beginning of it in children is that they experience discomfort in the legs, elevation, and movement.
You find in the lower vertebra of the back and of its notes that it is beginning to overmount on the other vertebra.
And when you see this and want to prohibit it, then cauterize that with a cautery in the form of a circle according to this shape: let the cautery cover all parts of the vertebra equally.
And if you wish, cauterize around the vertebra with a pointed cautery two or three lines wide. And let the points be close to each other.
Then place something warm in the area until it is healed as we have said.
But beware that the cautery not be applied in inflammation caused by nerve spasm.
Chapter XLIV.
On the cautery treatment for gout and joint pain.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and when venous pains in the feet occur, doctors customarily call this gout.
And since gout caused by cold is treated with a method of treatment and not alleviated by remedies, it is usually treated with cautery.
And you cauterize the area near the foot's joint with cautery to facilitate the evacuation in the circuit of the joint.
And the olive cautery, which is this its form:
And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. And if the pains rise into the toes or other joints, and this method does not relieve them, then cauterize each toe with three or four cautery marks using this olive cautery.
And if you need to use cautery irons for these cauteries, then cauterize that part and do not press your hand too much against the cautery before, just around the size of a cone.
And if the pains penetrate to the groin and testicles, then apply the cautery which we have said in our chapter.
And if the pains are only in the thighs and it is called sciatica, then puncture along the course of the nerves as they run, puncturing in those two lines.
And if the pains remain in the fingers, then puncture along the course of the nerves over each finger and over the base of the hand.
And if the pains remain for several days in the elbows or muscles, then cauterize the areas around all parts of the elbows.
And if you do not evacuate the illness according to good regimen and reception of medicines, for if it is done well and the inflammation is eliminated, this cautery will be healthy, God help us.
Capitol. XLV.
Of cautery for ruptures.
When there is a rupture in the groin and the intestines are protruding through the opening in front of the skin, and this condition begins to worsen as you approach, then you should instruct the patient to fast on that day and use mild remedies so that the abdominal wound does not become worse.
And then place the patient's hand over their abdomen, and command them to keep it there until the skin is stretched or the skin and intestines appear.
And then return those to the thighs and test the rupture over the bone of the shin, marking the extremity of which should resemble the size of a circle in the upper parts of the body.
And then heat the cautery, the form of which is as follows:
until it is heated red hot and begins to spark. Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
Then place the cautery over that mark with your hand holding the cautery straight, and keep it there until you can get to the bone of the ankle in the middle of the shin; and repeat with another pass if you have not reached the bone in the first pass.
Observe wisely the condition of the hernia during your cautery, that you do not burn the hernia too much, lest it lead to death or other great harm.
Be aware that when you use the cautery, you should not touch the bone, as this does not complete your operation.
Ensure that the cautery for children is fine according to their size and measurement.
And then care for the area of the cautery for three days among other things until the wound from the fire is healed.
And then care for that as with other ointments until it is healed.
And the patient lies on their back for 10 days until the area and wound are healed.
And ensure that the nourishment is withheld according to the length of time for the healing of the wound which closes the abdomen, and that the intestine does not come out with great effort to heal.
And when it is time to lift after 10 days, then administer the poultice properly made, and keep it for another 10 days.
And let it rest from work and replenishment of food and drink, and of strong voices, for when it uses this regimen of healing entirely, it will be cured.
And I will say the healing of ruptures in other parts of the abdomen, and at the beginning, if they are not to tear, then cauterize the rupture with a round cautery according to its quantity. And what is drawn from the vein should be treated like the tender part of it; then care for that as we have said, and it is not stitched.
And some have said that a rupture should be seared with a triangular cautery according to this form, rather than sewn with needle.
And a line is placed there for the length in the slashes but above the rupture, and another line on top; then place your hand with a cruciform cautery, but the first cautery is lighter and better.
Capitol. XLVI.
Of the cautery treatment for a wound.
When pain in some members persists due to embedding or percussion and does not respond to medicine or treatment, then you should cauterize with a pointed cautery.
And the cautery should be of the size and proportion of the member, with its virtue and depth, and the location of the wound and its pain.
Then if the wound is healed by the first cautery, that is good; otherwise, repeat the cautery on it. For customarily, such pains are punctured in a neighboring member to the affected one, so that you may achieve healing through the cautery before the illness is cured.
Chapter XLVII.
Of the cautery treatment for leprosy.
Lepers are sometimes treated with a large cautery, and moderately so if the type of leprosy is caused by the putrefaction of flame and melancholy.
And so, if you want to cauterize that area, consider whether the leprosy is common and as cured as we said in the division, neither here nor there, and fear that the corruption may encompass his entire body and all its composition. Then cauterize that area on the head with five cauteries: one in the middle of the head, leave one space from it, shave the forehead to the end of the hair; two on the horns; and one behind, on the neck or servant.
And finish your hand with a cautery a little inside where it makes a small impression in the mouth, so that the exhalation of thick vapors is alleviated; and cauterize on the tongue according to necessity.
If leprosy is already spread over the patient and clearly manifest, then you must cauterize that area as well as those cauterizations which we have said in the head; on the tip of the nose, and two cauterizations on both shoulders, and two on two vertebrae of the neck, and six on the vertebrae of the back, and one large one near the shoulder blade, and one on the spine, and two on the armpits, and one on each armpit, and two on the hips and one on each hip, and two on the knees, and two on the muscles, and two on his foot tendons; cauterize that on all joints of his fingers and feet, and on every heel of his feet, and on his nails.
And guard the nerves which are over the heel that you do not burn those.
And sometimes cauterization is done with one cauterization on the bone of the pelvis and another on the entrance of the stomach, and another on the liver.
And know that the more tightly you apply the cauterizations, the more beneficial and effective they are; and know that the patient does not feel pain from the cauterization as they do from others, because the body of the patient is already numbed.
And ensure that the cautery marks are large or small according to the parts and joints as specified by the type of instruments used.
And then cure the cautery with a mixture of errct powder and honey until it is healed.
Capitol. liv.
On the cautery for stupor.
When any limb is numbed or paralyzed and is treated with medicines, ointments, and plasters, and does not heal, then you cautery that numb limb with cauteries according to the size of the limb or its smallness.
And let your cautery penetrate the depth of the wound a little. And then treat that with ointment until it is healed.
And sometimes certain applications are cauterized for stupor which affects the head and the feet, and the spaces of the nerves through which those limbs pass, and thus the stupor is relieved.
But do not presume on this except he be wise in the anatomy of the members and of the exit of the nerves moving the whole body.
Capitol XLIX.
Of the cautery for albargues that are morphew.
When albargues are old and do not respond to any of the ointments of medicine, then cauterize over that with a cautery previously heating a small amount according to the quantity of the coeden (a type of cautery) until the white color and the color of it change.
And then cure that by applying a paste of err (possibly a type of seed) and lentils in well-pressed oil and leaves of arnica, and either dove dung or swan dung, with one part of each, all mixed together. Then apply a cloth and place it over the area until it heals.
Capitol L.
Of the cautery for cranc.
When cancer begins and you want to stop it, then cauterize it with a circular cautery along the circuit of the lesion as it is revolving.
And the wise will say that it should be cauterized with the last cautery in the best place; but to me this is not visible, for I fear it is ulcerated, and I have seen this several times.
And it is more proper to cauterize it along the circuit of the lesion in a circular manner as we have said, or with several cauteries.
Capitol.
Of the cauterization of tumors.
When some tumor is delayed in maturation, this happens either due to excess fluid causing it, or due to the state of the patient, who is old and decrepit, with little strength, or due to time, and you want to hasten its maturation; then cauterize along the circuit of the tumor with several small puncturing cauteries; and leave the one that will mature on its own.
If you want to make the puncture with a cautery, then heat the cautery of which this is the form: and place that in the middle of the affected area so that the hot iron penetrates.
And if you place the cautery in that location, let it be, so that the wound on the arm is alleviated; and then cure that which has become healed.
Capitol. lii.
Of the cautery for corroding.
Corroding is a wandering corruption in the member, which you corrosive as if fire consuming dry wood.
Then if you find the corroding in a location where the cautery of fire is applied, then heat the cautery with many small and large coals as appropriate for that location where there is corroding.
And then cauterize that completely as you remove all the corrosion and do not leave any cause of it.
And for three days let it be, and place over the cauterized areas three times a day oil mixed until all the scars are completely eradicated and all the corruption is gone.
And for it cure that with ointment generating flesh.
But if for three days the flesh grows healthy in what is not corrupted, that is good; but if not, then iterate the cautery over what is rotten in the corrupt areas.
And if the wound is treated several times with acute medicine, which is half the use of cautery. But nevertheless, a cautery with fire is good for slightly pus-filled wounds.
And I have already described the treatment with acute medicine in the division, so use that when you need it.
Chapter XXXIII.
On the Cauterization of Wounds and Other Similar Conditions.
Small stones placed at the outer part of the foot that is affected by gout; and this is a major cause, entered, which affects the foot; in these cases, cauterization is performed according to two methods, one with fire and one with water-based cauterization.
The cauterization with fire is done by heating the concave cautery resembling a half-round, which is made of iron according to the quantity it should contain the stone from the entire affected part, and it should have thin edges.
Then place the heated cautery over the stone, and quickly move your hand around the cautery in the circle of the stone while the cautery reaches the depth of the stone. Let it remain for three days until it begins to bleed. Then apply a poultice with wild thyme boiled in salt water, and let the poultice remain on it for one night, so that the stone is thoroughly expelled from its place.
Then treat the area with a cream of generative flesh until it heals.
If so non-convertible, and many blisters occur on the surface of the body, mainly on the thighs and feet, then when you administer in those cautery with water, take a quanna of elm or iron or pen of wood, place that over the nail; then put in the quanna of water a small quantity, raise your hand, and you revolve that with compression of your hand from all sides, and press the margin of the canula on the side of the nail, and you will find the water flow through the hole of the nail; wait for the patient an hour at the bite of the flowing water, then remove it, as the nail has its sides bored.
And do the same to them and then the other entering which you come over all of whom they are in the body.
And then cure those boils where the nail's sides have been bored by applying ointments which cause the flesh to regenerate.
Capitol. liiii.
Of the cautery for trembling.
When an excessive tremor occurs due to irritation of the nerves or fever of a similar cause, or another similar cause, then you should apply four or five cautery marks on the spine, placing one cautery between each vertebra; and one on the foot, and one over his stomach.
And the tremor subsides, and the health improves with the cure of the illness.
Capitol.lv.
Of the cautery for accidents in the body.
When in the body there are swollen abscesses with openings which are made of coarse corrupted materials; then at the beginning as they appear, they should be cauterized over the entire length of the fistula with a thin cautery stick made of myrtle, the end of which is extended over the fire; or with a reed from erestologia longua; or with a flat round cautery.
And sometimes a cautery is applied additionally at the beginning of its expulsion according to this manner; and when the superfluity is broken, they heal from those.
Moreover, I must ensure that this is done promptly with venesection.
Capitol lvi.
Of the cautery treatment for flux due to an accident from an arrow wound.
Often times, flux from an arrow wound that is incised drains through the wound which has been made, or through the incision for apothecary or cautery of the limb, and then the swelling appears, and it is difficult to stop this.
Then, when any of this occurs, you should hold your hand over the orifices of the arrow wound, and place it there to strengthen that part with your hand until the flux of the blood has stopped, then remove your hand so it does not swell.
And then place the olive cautery sticks over the fire for a few moments, and blow on them until they are hot.
And then take a small or large one according to the place and wound where the artery is ruptured, over that vein press forcefully as you have already touched as I said, and keep the cautery so that it is cut and narrowed that blood remains.
And if the blood is expelled from the opening of the artery when you touch as I said and narrow the cautery, then take another cautery prepared among the cauteries that are in the fire, and therefore do not cease to do this one after another so that the blood is narrowed.
And make sure you do not burn the nerves here, and that no other evil comes to the patient.
And know that when blood flows from the artery, it is not possible to narrow the blood flow in those places, especially when the artery is large, if not by one of four methods: either with a cautery as we have said, or by extraction when it is not extracted, or when it is extracted, its ends are burned and the blood flow is narrowed, or by tying with pitch or with resin for strong constriction, or by compressing with woolen cloth in a proper bandage.
May those who administer proper restriction to the patient with liniment and by stricture of cloths or by position due to burning causes and similar ones, not confide only on time.
May it happen to someone and there be no doctor present or medicine, then open the finger gently over the orifices of that vein as we have said, and understand the great compression within which the abscess has remained from the upper part of the wound, and over the archery the finger should not be pressed; and over the archery let water fregated with a great deal of coldness be applied before the abscess is congealed and enlarged; and may it be burned with cauterization or necessity of medicine.
Of incision and perforation and venesection and of bloodletting and of wounds and of their similarities.
We have already said in the first chapter all illness in which cauterization with fire is convenient and medicine burning, and the occasions and causes of it, and the instruments necessary for those cauterizations; and I have ordered the chapters of the subirenity of the head between the feet.
And we proceed in this chapter by that method, so that what is desired may be alleviated for him who has requested it.
And before we begin this, learn, sons, that in this chapter what is treated comes from the first chapter on cautery.
And because this, be careful, for in the operation which is in this chapter, multiple evacuations are made necessary. You must either apply the aspersion of the vein or incise over the abscess or puncture it, or perform an excision or purgation of the wound or extract an arrow or make an incision for pus, and do so with caution. And all of these operations are accompanied by fear and trembling, and in the most severe cases, death.
And I warn you that this applies to you in the position where it is situated, for at times you may find yourself handling matters related to patients' ailments. And some of these operations require you to be close to the patient's ailment. If it is a mild case, you may find yourself dealing with their death, this due to the intensity of what you encounter in their illness, and from the prolonged nature of their illness, where fear of the illness signifies death.
And of those which give you their affection and say, you expect from that health, and their illness is dangerous.
And so you must consent to only those who come to you, of whom this is the manner; and your caution should be greater than greed and your rapacity; and do not presume any cause over this but rather certain science which verifies what you must do, and by which success is praiseworthy.
And use in the cure of all your patients according to their prognosis and indication of them, for in that is assistance given to you for the acquisition of fame and memory, praise and glory.
O, children, God infuses His understanding into you and does not deprive you of direction and protection, for this is in His hand.
And I have arranged this chapter separately into chapters as preceded in the chapter of cautery, concerning the cure from the head to the feet, that what you seek and need may be eased for you.
First chapter.
Of the cure of water that is contained in the head of the child.
Know that this illness often appears in children during childbirth and when the mother strengthens the child's head.
And sometimes appears for hidden causes which are not known.
But I have only seen this illness in children; and for all of them whom I have seen, it leads to death, and thus I have been left with no other choice but to work on those.
And I have seen that a child's head was full of water, and its head remained constantly swollen until it could no longer bear the weight due to the size of its head, and more so because the humidity increased until death.
And this humidity is either added between the membrane and the bone, or added by placing something on top of the head.
When the operation in that place where the humidity is between the tendon and the bone and the abscess is small, then cut in the middle of the location making a fissure in the lateral direction, with the length of the fissure being two finger widths so that the humidity flows, and this is the form of the spatium:
And so, if the humidity is much increased and the abscess is larger, then make two fissures in this manner:
And if the humidity leaves the bone, the sign is that you feel the edges of the tendon open from all sides and the water oozes out when you press on it with your hand inside, and this is not what you expected. Cut in the middle of the location making three fissures in this manner:
and drain all the humidity; and strengthen the fissures with bandages and feathers; and on the fifth day, pour oil over it, and remove the stitches and heal the wound with ointments, strengthening the tendon with equal parts; and let the patient eat dry food with little humidity until the limb is comfortable and healed.
And there is another method of incision, which consideras regarding the size of the abscess and the collection of water; for in some cases it may be more in the occiput, or in the front part, or on the right side, or on the left; and therefore attend to the incision where the abscess and the filling with water appear, and do so as is most convenient for you.
And observe that you do not incise the artery and attempt to flow blood from the patient by that flow of blood for evacuation of moisture.
Chapter II.
When you encounter a clot or wound in the heel or foot, this is an ancient practice, and you should not rely on medical treatments for its cure; rather, the proper treatment involves incising those two arteries.
And therefore cover when you want to incise those that the malady root is its head, and then rub the place with rough cloth so that the arteries appear, and then strengthen the neck of the malady with some cloth; and then consider where to palpate the vein; and the places of each over the places which are near the ears pressed, and they are hidden in almost all men.
And then press over the artery with your hand, and then incise each with a sharp knife along the path of the vein leading into the mouth, and do this for the width of the head.
And if you want, insert the knife leaving the artery and cut it at the points where the incisions are made above.
And let the length of the incision be two digits wide, for when any vein is incised, the bleeding occurs at the pulsating exit, which jumps frequently through that opening.
And if the artery does not appear at the incision, then measure from the ear the quantity of space for three digits, and then press with your hand, and make the incision into the mouth.
And that which flows from the wound is a quantity of blood one pound, and more or less it flows more or less, and all this is according to the quantity which appears from the virtue of the malady and the filling of the artery of the leg.
And then consider the wound, and therefore if any cause of infection remains on the bone, cut this away so that no abscess forms.
And then strengthen the wound with down feathers and pieces of cloth, and then cure that with ointments until it heals.
Chapter III.
On the extraction of the arteries which are in the temples.
When an old or acute migraine occurs due to harmful humidity and the quality of the vessels in the temples, or if it is a strong old one resembling those, and is treated according to the methods of medical cure, and since this does not work for you, then we have resorted to the extraction of the arteries in the temples, or cauterization of those as we have shown.
And the manner of the operation and extraction is that you raise the skins which are on the temples; and understand the apparent artery in the temple where it is shown to you by your own pulse, and is hidden in few men through the violence of cold.
And if it is hidden to you, then lift the neck of the patient with some cloth; and then rub the area with a rough cloth or evaporate the place with water until the artery becomes clearly visible. And then you take the spatium of which this is the form: And then you inject the needle there with facilitation until you reach the artery; and then cut into it and extract that part above until you remove that from the needle and discover that of the tunics which you leave there, from all parts.
But if the artery is fine, then wrap it at the extremity of the onion; and then divide a part of it according to the quantity for which the extremities of it are long and contracted, and will not allow the flux of blood, for if they are not divided, the blood will not rise up.
And then evacuate from the vein one. in three.
And if the artery is large, then you should divide it into two locations with a silver needle doubled very strong or with long cords, and do not allow it to putrefy before the consolidation of the wound and ensure a flow of blood.
And then incise the superfluity which is between two threads; and do this at that time or nearby another time.
And if you wish, cauterize it with a cautery inside the bone and with a surgical cautery where the threads are incised, and it will take the place of that metal work.
And it is better to do so unless the patient has fever or is of hot complexity; for the cautery is one of those causes that help in resolving humidity, and therefore it is better in convalescence.
And you should incise the extraction of the arteries that you have placed in the proper location, and they should be packed over with decently made powder, and it should be treated with dry medicines until it is healed.
And if while working another time you encounter flow of blood from the artery, then you should constrict that blood, or with a cautery, or what you fill the place with cloth, and strengthen your hand so that the blood is restrained. And if for any reason it is not at your disposal, then place your finger on the spot between where the blood is constricted, and immerse the area in water of strong cooling until the inflammation subsides, and let it be strengthened accordingly.
And what is lighter in arterial extraction is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery having two knives, after you have marked the two places with pins, and place hot irons over them until they reach the bone and cut the vein into two parts, so that what is between the extremities of the vein is elongated, which are not fully sealed by this cautery.
And this is the form of the cautery:
And let the sharpness of the two knives be supreme. But however, if the pain is sharp as two knives, it is better, for if acute like two knives near each part of the flesh, and not lessen so quickly.
Therefore, when there is any swelling, hold the heat from the fire on those areas and the flesh is incised slightly.
And this work is better in all works and more slight.
And let the space which is between two knives be the quantity of the swelling of the digit.
Capitol quart.
Of the cure for bodies affected by sharp and acidic tears of the eyes.
When the tears are acidic, and the body is affected by those veins which lie over the temple of the head and do not respond to any cause of cure in medicine, and the face of the patient often turns red and feels a walking sensation on their forehead as if it were ants crawling, and the eyes become weak and moisten, as if the skins are known, and the eyelids are scalded by the sharpness of the tears, the ancients mixed in the cure for those from this operation, and they numbered that cure among the passing things.
And you command the patient to stretch the skin on his forehead, and then incise the forehead with three equal distances according to the length of the forehead. And if the length of the incision is two fingers: the first incision should be equally distant from the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second according to the length of a small movement of the tears which are in the lacrimal, and the third on the other part.
And beware of the beginning of the arteries which are in two branches, and keep your hand away from the continuation of both jaws. And if the space of each incision the quantity of three fingers adjusted.
And if you have a piece of sponge prepared or dry cloth, place them where the bleeding stops.
And then insert the point of two sharp extremities, the form of which is the incision: that is from the part between the temples into the second incision. Excise all the tissue that is between two incisions near the cheek which is over the bone, and then do this of the middle incision into the second incision. And then stab this flap and insert it into the first incision. Alternatively, use another instrument called a cuttle, sharp on one side and blunt on the other.
And place the sharp edge to separate the adjacent flesh, and the blunt edge into the bone, and push it into the middle crack until it reaches there, and cut all the vessels that descend from the head to the heels.
More than that, continue the incision to where the tissue appears, and then do this in the middle crack between the other crack.
And after the bleeding has equalized, squeeze the areas of the swollen feet with your hand.
And then place your hand over any gouty crack in the old skin, and place over those powders mixed in wine and oil and vinegar, and ensure that no abscess forms.
On the seventh day remove the bandage and administer a large fomentation of water cauda or thuja, and then cure this with an ointment of basilicon in olive oil and others until the sores are healed.
Chapter V.
For the cure of tears due to catarrh and those drops descending from the inner parts of the head.
When there is an acute catarrh with continuous discharge, and the drops from the foot are small and exhausted, and their appearance shows debilitation, and the eyelids are ulcerated, and the skin of their head, in the preauricular region, has acute pain and subsequent extension, then you should know that these symptoms arise from the venous humors from the inner parts.
And the best cure for these is this: command the patient to raise his forehead, and then incise a small crack in the middle of the forehead, about the width (starting from the left temple between the right temple; and within the bone; extend your hand towards the temples which are swollen you should grind them), until the bone is exposed.
Dry all the blood with sponge or dry cloth and then place something like a pledget of wool or a piece of cloth between the two lips of the crack. Then strengthen above with powders mixed in wine and oil so that it does not develop into an abscess.
And when you uncover this and see that the abscess has already diminished, then wash the bone where it begins to grow flesh, and then cure it with a drying regimen which makes the flesh shrivel, as if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony and mix them, and from them make a paste and administer it to these wounds of the flesh's nativity.
Chapter VI.
Of the cure for that which catches in the ears.
All cause that catches in the ears is of four species: either it is mineral stone or a cause similar to stone, such as iron or flint, or it is from a plant such as cypress or bean, or it is a fluxible cause such as water or vinegar and things like them, or some beast.
And when pyre burns in the ear or another cause resembling those causes that do not adjust or creeps into the ear, place the ear in the sun, and if you touch the pyre, then distills in that some cause of violet oil or sesame, then return the extraction of it, and make him sneeze under conditions, and plug the nostrils to prevent sneezing. And place some pieces of cloth or wool in the circuit of the ear, and extend the ear to the parts above, where motas (small particles) are often found due to these causes.
And if it is not found, then perform the extraction of it with the instrument called gesti epicicarios subtil, the form of which is as follows:
And if it is found with the gesti, well; otherwise, then perform the extraction of it with a fine, slightly duplicated hook.
And if it is not found by this, then make a catheter of wire and insert the end of the catheter into the meatus of the ear and close around the catheter with wax and with oil softened so that it does not open except the catheter. And then extract the thigh muscle with strong traction, for too tightly bound as we have recounted.
If it is not loosened in this manner, then take a hot flax or a waxed thread on which the gashes are placed a quantity of lint, and place that at the extremity of the tear, and then wrap over that妥善包裹。 And then insert that into the tract of the ear with facility, and then dry the ear of its humidity.
And if it is not loosened by all the causes we have recounted, then you sew to cut that which will likely develop into an abscess or spasm.
And the manner of cutting that is that at the beginning you mark the patient's thigh where the sciatic vein is located and extract it according to the virtue of the leg, and then make a cut between your fingers and turn the ear upwards, and make a small fissure in the rear part of the ear and place its cartilage in the well-packed location. And let the crack be of lunar shape through which it reaches the heel, and, if the heel is damaged, block it if possible with appropriate instruments; then, near that crack at that time apply velocity, and cure it within the time that it heals.
And if the cause lies in the ear, being one of the waxes that accumulate and are inflamed, then administer the cure and extraction of it; but if it does not yield to your attempts, then you take thin subtle spathae according to this form: And administer to him the extraction of that wax which is lodged in the ear.
And do not do this when you think that it is already moistened by the vapor of the ear, and place it on fine wicks, and prop the extraction in those with oil or with subtle gestures, or by incision as we have said, for this alleviates the extraction.
But in the water which has entered into the ear canal where the patient uses sternutation to facilitate the removal, and fills his ear with some old cloth, place that ear over the water in which it is, and if by this it is perforated, good; but if not, then take rough pieces of papyrus or leonine skin according to the length of your finger, heat those in the fire for a little, and have the patient insert one of those into the passage of his ear and jump over a piece of that material and strike it with another stone above the stone which is inside the ear. Do not stop applying heat until all the water has been expelled.
Do not stop applying heat until all the water has been expelled. And once the water has been thoroughly expelled, take a paper or a wick, and place one end in the ear and extend the other end into the fire until the material is burning.
And put another wick and do this as many times as necessary until all the water has been thoroughly expelled, and extract the canal with a canula as previously described.
In the extraction of small objects entering that ear, proceed carefully and as seems fit. Care for it as we have said in the division. But if it is a large object causing immediate pain, then perform the extraction with speed and precision, as the cause is less severe than other causes found in the ear.
In the extraction of worms generated in the ear, when you treat it as we have said in the division and in the treatise on distillations, and if your treatment does not seem effective, then you should look into the ear with the sun shining on it.
And so if there appears any cause of worms, then extract that with forceps or fine tweezers, but if no cause appears, then take a cannula and stretch it open, this is its form: I insert the fine end into the ear according to the amount that the patient can bear; and then suck it with strong suction, performing this several times until all the worms are extracted.
But if your attempt does not succeed, then you insert and close the circuit of the cannula with wax as we have said; then administer distillations which have already proven effective in the treatment of worms, and you will find this in the treatise on distillations.
And let your application be with that which you pour medicinal oils into the ear with this instrument, whose form is as follows: And make it of silver or copper, stretch it out, in which there is a small hole, and with a flat surface above.
And therefore they should push so that it is in the cavity of the cannula here where it will be necessary. And if you want, take the wick and wrap it properly around its end, then place oil in the cavity of the ear, or the juice of some herb, or any of these medicines into the cannula — that is in the ear —, and then insert the wick carefully above and squeeze your hand with a gentle compression so that the oil is expelled into the cavity of the ear and the disease feels the oil inside.
And what is infused in the ear should already be heated over a fire for a little while. And make sure that the medicine you will distill in the ear is not too hot, for ear medicines cannot tolerate that.
Chapter VII.
On the Treatment of Ear Abscesses.
Sometimes children get abscesses in the flesh of their ears from their parents' unperforated ears, and this happens occasionally in some men as well, with an abscess forming in the ear flesh due to a wound or no obvious cause; in some cases, the abscess forms in the preauricular region which does not become visible immediately, and in other cases, it appears in the outer parts.
And that which occurs in the region of the belly, which does not respond to external treatment, is in the major dispositions for difficult recovery.
And in that where you can apply treatment, make sure that you place the patient in the sun and look at it. And if you see an apparent swelling, open the small incision beneath which this swelling is located:
If the extremity of the incision is narrow in width, with one part sharp and the other not; and the incision is two inches long to prevent it from irritating the ear.
And if the obstruction is due to hidden flesh in the ear or in the meat of the ear, then make small incisions and cut deeply enough to remove all the flesh.
And if the obstruction is in the region of the ear, then take a thin needle and heat that incision slightly with fire, and then place it in the flesh of the ear.
And therefore if you sense an abundance of that which the patient finds with ease due to the weight of urination, relieve the oppression by facilitating it; and be sure not to damage the nerves of the ear.
And then place the cloth in the ear according to the size of the wound which you have covered with Egyptian ointment; and do this for several days until you are sure of the healing of the wound; or take some and apply it to water and powder it over the dry trisssat, using it; and if you see the ear already protruding, then clean that which you damaged and change it for another which you wrap in a cloth made of olive oil, until the abscess is discharged; and cure that once it is healed.
But if a flow of blood occurs, then submerge a sponge or cloth in cold water and place it over the ear, and use the other treatment which constricts the flow of blood, which is said in the treatise on distillation.
Capitol. viii.
For the care of an eyelid that has become inflamed.
Eyelids that occasionally become moist, at other times dry.
Then take those flax or linen cloths, soak them in the foam of their juice, and place them over the areas after allowing them to dry.
But if there is pain with a flow of venous fluid, then cauterize those areas with a thin pointed cautery.
And the best cautery is near the incisions, and the wounds return when there remains any cause of their juice; and when they are cauterized with fire, those juices are burned and do not return.
Capitulum ix.
Care for an inflammation of the eyelids due to venous fluid.
Spots occasionally appear on the eyelids due to some cause which resembles inflammation in its strength and hardness, and for this reason it is called inflammation.
And it is an addition of thick humidity in the eyelid above and below.
And the operation in them is that you consider whether the enlargement is present in them at what appears from the eyelid and is swollen in all parts; and the cause of it is slight.
And make a slit there for the width, and then probe that part with ease so that it drains, and suspend that part and cut it off.
And if the figure is large, then you adjust it with sutures; and care for that until it is healed.
And if it is small, you will not suffer ill from it because the salve restores and heals that area.
And if the enlargement is decreasing in parts inside the eyelid, you adjust the internal surface, then drain the eyelid and suspend the enlargement with a clamp, another that you choose for incision, and press it from all sides. If the eyelid by incision is lengthened, this is noted for no apparent reason.
And at the beginning, wash the area with salt water; and cover the place with water until it is healed.
Capitol.
For the cure of excision in the upper eyelid.
Excision is when foreign bodies are generated in the tunic of the upper eyelid, and especially in children, it aggravates their ailments and causes death through their catarrh; they cannot look at the clarity of the sun due to this, and tears flow abundantly.
And for this, you often see them weep on their cheeks all the time, and they sleep with tears on their cheeks. The upper eyelids of their eyes are wet, which are already covered by inflammation, and the imminent appearance of excision is in the eye; and when you press the area with hot objects, you feel the excision within them.
And one method of operation is when the patient rests his head on a hot object, then places a cloth around him and her, and makes a cut according to the quantity that contains all parts, then places this over it and presses with hot objects so that excision is added in the middle of the circle. Then in the middle of that wetness, makes an incision through the width, and the incision should not be larger than the incision made in a flaubotomy.
More in the preceding condition that you cut the cord entirely until you reach the arceran, for in the more severe cases you proceed with a fissure according to the form of whiteness.
Therefore, remove those from the cloths which you have wrapped around your thighs and revolve between your right and left hand until they are dispersed.
And be sure that you do not press too hard on the fissure, lest the pus not drain and you seal it up.
More if no alternative appears at the beginning of the fissure, rather than pressing on the fissure, use a small piece of flannel between your fingers; then remove those as we have said; and place cloths in water and vinegar over the area and strengthen them with powders.
And use salt to dress the area in the cavity of the fissure so that what remains of that humidity is absorbed.
And cure it until it is healed.
And if an abscess occurs in that place, then cure it by applying flaxen plasters until it is healed.
Capitol.
Methods of palpation of the whole body.
When in the eyelids of the eye, small sores adjust themselves and heal naturally, then those who experience such symptoms may develop illnesses such as constant tears and softening of the eyelids and tissue. This can be a cause of destruction of the eye, which is called tactinir del huel. It is cured in four ways: by cautery with fire; by acute medicine as previously described in the Capitol on cautery; by surgical excision and suturing; or by cauterization with needles as I will explain later.
And thus make sure that you hold the patient's head steady with your right hand; then place the eyelid under your left hand. If it can be easily moved, it is good. Otherwise, insert a needle into the spot where the eyelid tissue was cut out, and push the needle with thread upward, positioning it near the margin of the eyelid where the skin meets. Pull the thread through the upper parts of the eyelid tissue and move the lid back into place.
And then in the inner part of the eyelid, place the skins tightly against the tear fluid from the major lacrimal gland into the minor lacrimal gland; and extract the bile and place dust of wool or cloth over the eyelid with a probe, and thus as the figure of a leaf of myrtle.
But I must observe that the figure should be according to the degree of swelling of the eyelid, for this already varies in women, for those in whom a large quantity of fluid is excreted from the eyelid should have it incised to a greater extent according to the degree by which the eyelid becomes softened.
And then place the tear fluid along the two lines you have marked, and start from the major lacrimal gland into the minor lacrimal gland. And if your incision near the natural skin is as thick as the king's thumb.
And then place the needle in one of the angles of the wound, and incise it completely, and then suture the two edges with a needle or piece of fine wool thread, and clean the exudate, and apply what is superfluous from the threads on two forehead wrinkles for some viscous causes, if you want to do this, and otherwise, you do not treat.
And after that, let the suture of the veins between three and four days, and then cure this.
And if you wish, let the wound heal without suturing, and cure it by what dries and constricts, for when the eyelid is swollen you should apply the poultice to the wound and its addition; more suturing is better. Therefore, so say the ancient taxanir.
But more importantly in it be vigilant about the patient, and it is of good operation, and not in its fear.
And another method of applying it, and that is to figure the poultice like a leaf of myrtle, and then elevate the eyelid by three inches, securing and gathering it according to this form:
But if this is not possible, hold the pins, and this is not exact. Then take a needle with thread and put that in the middle of the figure, and insert the other thread near the major lacrimal gland, and the other thread near the minor lacrimal gland, and adjust the threads between the ties equally, and then raise your hand for elevation equally, raising the entire codena over which it is placed as we have advised.
And then adjust the two edges of the wound with stitches, and cure that within which is healed.
And if you make an incision or a slit, treat that abscess with a plaster and in appearance, apply ointment.
And in some cases on the eyelid, if its edges need to be converted, then use what we have said about making an incision; but stitch only where it is more artificial.
To treat cankers according to this form: And you convert the eyelid and split the figure that is inside according to what I have recounted; and then, by art, make two cankers or two thin astelas whose length shall be according to the length of the eyelid and the width of theirs shall be a third of the width of the space. And you have incised at the extremities of each part where you have the threads.
And place a thin layer over what you have excised from the eyelid, and tighten the cankers of each part with strong tension, and leave it for some days; as the knot will die due to the tension and become rejected, and will fall off when it falls by itself.
And if it is delayed, then cut the thread of the cord, and soon cure the wound while it is healing.
Therefore, when it is reduced, the eyelid is elevated and the skin does not pinch.
And this is the way of two canes which you will make according to this form: and has the quantity of length and width neither more nor less.
Capitol.xii.
For the elevation of painful skin, prick the area with an awl when the skin is taut.
When they are unnatural, hard, rough, and painful skins, the operation in this case is that you should use a thin awl and pierce at the fine thread of each skin, and soon adjust the ends of the thread very subtly with tiny clamps. And let the length of the threads be the width of one palm.
And then you prepare another fine substance and place it briefly, using the ends of that.
And then place the patient's head in a tub of water, and expose it to the sun so that your work is effective, for it is a subtle and delicate operation.
And then insert the needle into the groove of the tightly adjusted skin, which has been prepared with a tool, and make that penetrate deeply into the eyelid, while pulling it out above the natural skin.
And then pull the skin upwards and insert the needle into the incision, with one or two or three skins and not more.
And then pull your hand there so that the skin is thoroughly soaked with the ointment in the eyelid with the natural skin.
More if the ointment is applied and the skin is not soaked, pull the ointment to the edges by placing it on the needle which you have prepared there, so that after being applied the ointment from the wound remains.
And with that, at the sight of the wound, you will stitch it up, and tie each thread tightly, and close the wound, and leave it open for two or three days until the hair adheres to its place and grows over that good flesh.
And if the hair is shorter, you will adjust a longer piece of natural hair, and elevate it at that place, or you may leave it to grow until it lengthens somewhat in that space, and then you elevate it.
Chapter XIII.
For the cure of eyelid swelling that occurs above.
When there is eyelid swelling, and it is due to a contraction of the eyelid that contracts towards the inside, outside, or on one side, due to poor healing of a wound or a burn, it is called leporine. This kind of swelling can be natural or accidental, caused by the healing of a wound or burns, or by something similar to them.
May the manner of the operation on him be that you make that consolidation and separate the labia from him, and place in him at what is between those a mechanical piece of cloth, and tie those together until they are healed.
And you must use the cure for those causes which dry up, constrain; for if you do this it will return to worsen more than at any time not being there.
Use for those causes that mollify thus as fenugreek, and apply it wet in the water in which it is cooked with its seed, or ointment of lard, which be liquefied by one of the oils, submerge the cloth in that, and apply it there.
And the treasure of your cure is that you perforate with anything that is not consolidated according to the form that it was at the beginning.
And this operation which we have said is nothing but some correction of hernias that do not return the form of the area as it was before.
Chapter XIV.
For the treatment of ahcration which is done on the eyelid, proceed as follows.
This ahcration which is done on the eyelid, which is called ahcration properly; and it can be either from some natural cause or an accidental one.
More accidental ahcration is caused by a wound, or a cut, or a cautery, or other similar causes.
For the operation of this, you should take a needle on which you make a double thread, and place that needle in the flesh, making it pass from the left lacrimal into the right lacrimal so that the thread reaches the two ends of the flesh.
Then extend the flesh at the upper parts above the needle and stitch that above the needle, and incise with a wide blade. And so, if you return the figure of the eyelid as it should be, that is good; otherwise, take the ray and place it in the split figure, and with that, convert the eyelid, and make the two fissures in the side of the eyelid.
And if the ends of the two cracks at the angles of the incision, which you have made where they converge, and from them an angle is made such that when they come together it forms a figure of them.
And this figure is the Greek letter: lambda.
And then place the flesh there for the quantity that is the length of the sharp end left from it, what remains of the flap.
And then adjust the separated parts with the linen thread; and dress those areas with the medicines we have mentioned for softening and with plasters until it is healed.
And if you incise further for a crack or suture or cautery, then make the incision a flat one on the skin of the eyelid as described previously. And then separate with the plaster between two lips as we have said.
In the sum of the discourse on the incision when above or left behind, let it run in the operation according to how it is prepared in the form of the incision, and that is in the form of various spots.
And the wise artisans at all times prepare means in every manner which is possible for him to return the figure to its natural form or near it, and that malady according to what suits him from the operation and the instruments in major dispositions.
Chapter XV.
On the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
When this consolidation occurs in men, one tries to solidify the eyelid above on the white of the eye, and to prohibit its ease of movement and its natural actions. Therefore, you should insert a probe between the eyelid and the eyeball, lift it up, or extend it towards the outside.
And then you incise the adhesion with a fine blade, which should not be of great sharpness, having an obtuse small edge so that the malady is not disturbed. You should leave the fluid to prevent it from becoming acrid and affecting the eye's sharpness.
And let your incision be such that it facilitates the separation of the adherence so that the eyelid returns according to its natural form and all the adherence is healed.
And then put in the wound enough salt water to wash with; or use distilled water dissolved in salt.
And then separate between the eyelid and the wound with salt water, and place over the wound infused wool in honey album, and for several days use conservative remedies until it is healed.
Chapter XVI.
On the incision of the eyelid and the prominence of the orbital flesh.
Know that the eyelid is divided into two ways: one is nervosa, resembling a thin hard chord; the other is non-nervosa, resembling a white congealed moisture. When you touch it, if it must be cut, it is easily divided and no ointment should be applied in it.
And both species do not begin until the major lacrimal gland, which gradually covers the eye and prohibits light and the movement of water.
The manner of acting in the incision is that the patient places his head in your lap, then opens his eyes, and raises his eyelid with your hand, then you collect the thumb with one finger and extend it to the upper parts. And then take a needle and insert into it a hair from a horse or a bull or a cow, or from something similar, or a strong thread, or gradually double the tip of the needle little by little and place it in the middle of the thumb, and penetrate it with the needle, and bind the thumb with thread; and extend it to the upper parts, and scrape the skin away from the thumb which seals the pupil. And thus you follow it under the skin to the back of his hand.
And then you make an incision in the fornix of the eyelid with a fine spatum or small forceps, and leave the natural flesh of the eyelid so that by this incision it does not become a continuous flow of tears.
And sometimes the thumb is placed on the sole of the stretched foot or on vinegar, as we have said, and then it is extracted with lion's dung from which this is its form:
And beware that with the lion's dung you do not touch the cornual membrane and even if there is a rupture in it, and that the pupil is perforated.
Then apply a little salted honey or of vinegar made from wine to the wound, and leave it in for another day; and take care that what comes between it heals.
And if the thumb is not nerve-racking and you cannot put the needle in it, then treat this kind of thumb with medicines, and it is healed as I and recommended in the division.
And if you want to incise it, then open the space in the thigh and take lion's dung of ripe fruit according to this form: of fine consistency. And if you find that it is rarified and contracted into the narrow space, then spit in the hollow of your hand made of your little finger or thumb or salt moistened, and pour this liquid into the other nostril.
And then repeat the operation inside until all of it is removed, but if a counterabscess forms in the hollow, then leave that and cure the beginning of the abscess until it is healed.
And then repeat your operation on that until it is healed.
The eminence of the tear gland, if noted in the hollow causing great discomfort, should be suspended with a needle; and incise part of that, but do not complete the incision so as not to cut off the flow of tears.
And then spit in the tear gland with a thumb or finger moistened, and do this until it is healed.
Capitol xvii.
Of the incision of algazardenic and what is born of flesh pressed in the whole.
In the heels of some feet, flesh has grown raw and is pressed over the pupil, or it approaches or strengthens on the eyelids and lightly compresses the eyelids at the outer parts and is joined to the edge of the balcony.
The operation in such cases is to place the patient's head on a pillow; then open the feet and collect all that flesh with convenient incisions using forceps or tongs; next, cut the flesh from its beginning until everything is finished with the scalpel, and keep watch over the wound so as not to let any part of it slip during your operation.
And let your incision be either along the line where you incised previously on the ankle, or with small pincers with which you collect the ascitic fluid according to the form it takes in this chapter.
Then, when your incision is completed and the entire flesh is remoistened, fill the wound with salted water, or sprinkle it with raw flesh powder similar to that of corrosive medicines, and place something over the wound externally like a piece of cloth until the abscess is secured.
And if any cause requires guarding and is seared by fire, fear an abscess from the fire, then let the whole and cure that abscess with what yields that abscess, and place it over that again in operation until it is healed, and similarly do in the flesh adjusted which you happen upon in the healing of this kind.
Moreover, you must know that all healing of the wound from cold should be through natural means or accidental means, use iron, and do not place your hand in any of these operations until you see that that member is suffering from that operation.
Chapter XVIII.
On the collection of knowledge in the wound.
Knowledge of veins is needed, which are rough on the wound and you prohibit their operation, and they expand the wound over a long period of days.
Therefore, at the beginning, you must consider whether the wound in which knowledge is needed is strong and contains only another vein-related issue. Then, you collect that knowledge.
And you command the patient to place their head in your lap, and then suspend those veins at one or two inches according to your prudence; and that inch should be of subtle doubling according to this form:
or two inches gradually in one space according to this form:
And then gather those veins with fine threads, in subtlety, and cleanse the wound bit by bit, meanwhile encouraging those veins to swell and be rotated.
And make sure you do not cauterize at the extremities of the wound; and if your operation is in the middle of the day before the sun, remain firm in your operation so as to not enter anything but those veins.
And when you have completed, then distill into the wound green vitriol or quicksilver so that by its acuity it may corrode what is swollen in the joint.
But if this is not possible at that time, then plaster the entire area with what relieves its pain, and leave it for a few days until its pain subsides and an abscess is secured by cauterization.
And then iterate over it according to how the patient handles it as it is being healed.
This is the form of the forceps:
Capitol XIX.
For the reduction of dislocated bones in the nose.
When you treat dislocated bones with a cautery or with sharp burning medicine, according to whether the narration of the case precedes and it is not healed, then do not engage in it but instead cut into the abscess to bring about its maturity, and extract all the moisture which is within it until the bone is revealed.
And then, when the bone is revealed and corruption or blackness is found within it, you must treat it with an instrument of which this is the form:
And it is named the sharp point, and it is made of iron, and its head is round like holding such a thing, which is made punctured by hammering or refined by subtle puncturing (as in the following form).
And place him over the corrupt part of the bone, and then carefully rotate it between your fingers, and gently press your hand little by little so that you know that this corruption is superficial.
And do this several times, and then restore the area caused by drying and constricting agents.
So if the area is consolidated and there is good hidden flesh and the healthy tissue is separated from the diseased and lasts for 40 days without being renewed or becoming gangrenous and no accident occurs, then you know that it is healed.
And if not, then reduce the fracture to the form of the nose, and according to this manner: first uncover the bone with forceps or a sharp instrument, once the bone is uncovered, then take hold of it according to this form:
Let the tip of the forceps be triangular, and the shaft be slightly flattened at the tip as you can see.
And place it over the bone, which is near the lacrimal bone; then extend your hand a little and carefully rotate your hand with the forceps so that it penetrates the entire bone, and the pain felt by the forceps indicates that air is escaping, when you feel this with your hand.
Then restore the area with medicinal powders drying as they are accustomed.
Then when the flesh and area are hardened, the matter which it exuded to the surroundings returns to its place, so this is easier over the patient.
Capitol.xx.
For the reduction of the prominence of the heel.
When the heel protrudes completely and there is no damage or diminution of the clothing, then loosen the patient, subsequently follow, and place fomentations on the neck for scarification and suck out the blood with good suction; afterwards place liniment on the heel made of acacia, aloe, enses, and sarcolle, and strongly apply the plaster to the heel with motz powder.
The method of the powders is that you take cloths soaked in motz (a type of ointment or powder), and each cloth should be folded into four parts; then use those powders.
And then place those one over the other according to the quantity that it has of them. And then strengthen those with a hard cloth bandage; and repeat the cups with suction six times; and leave the cups there for the day and the night.
But if in the meantime the ligament becomes softened, then leave it strongly tied.
And leave the ligament for the day and the night as we have said.
And if the swelling has already been reduced, that is good. Otherwise, then repeat the plaster with the powders and the bandage and the cups until it is healed.
Chapter XXI.
On the incision of the elevation of the uveal tunic.
When there is disruption in the uveal tunic, and it forms an elevation, proceed to incise the eyelid as if for a third degree burn. This forms the shape of a man through this. If you wish to incise here, then perform the operation as we have recommended. You insert the needle into the edge of the uveal tunic from one side and above, and then insert another needle on the other side which is double the size of the lacrimal duct. Make the latter needle penetrate and leave the first needle in its place. Then incise the area where the double thread is located and lift the part of the uveal tunic in the circuit of the needle, and strengthen it.
And then extract the needle and place yourself over the wool infused with honey and let there be the thread in the needle.
And then care for the wool that comforts him while the wound is healing.
And sometimes gather all the parts in a circle of cloth over the wool, then adjust the prominence greatly, and then perforate with a fine needle that comes to the core of the wool, allowing the humidity albuminous to drain, and lower the wool quickly.
And then strengthen him while he is healing.
Capitol.xxii.
On the cure of ulcers.
This illness called alconati is nothing but carbuncle, which is located in the wound resembling water dripping and is not that one.
The method of treating it is to place the patient on a prepared and straight bench, then take the head in your hands at two parts and bring it so that you can see the carbuncle clearly, ensuring that it dries up without descending further, and keep the light nearby, allowing the patient to see the causes as if they were visible.
And if it does not come down below, know that it is water.
And if the descent to the wound is not prepared as we have said, then make the surgeon sit between your hands and approach taking a thin spatula and apply it over the gauze, carefully covering a little of the continuation of the conjunctiva with the cornea in the corona (into the place voided), so that the wound is forgotten.
And since it is forgotten, then you drip in the urine that you have mixed with honey or urine in which you have already boiled fenugreek and honey.
And then treat the other causes once it is healed.
Capitol.xxii.
Of the cure for water descending in urine.
We have already mentioned the species of water in the division and which one is appropriate to puncture when speaking, according to its condition.
When you must separate the patient's thighs on your knees over a basin and keep his/her heat intact, use a strong cloth.
Then place your left hand near the upper eyelid of his/her affected side; or with your right hand if the affected side is the right.
Then with your right hand take the pincers, if the affected side is left; or with your left hand, if the affected side is right.
Then place the extremity of the pincers near the cornea for the thickness of the vein in the white of the affected eye from the inner lacrimal corner, and then pull the pincers with force and rotate your hand around it.
Then penetrate into the white of the eye and feel that the pincers have already reached the vein due to their thickness.
You must ensure that the size of the pincers is appropriate when opening the space, which is the distance between the pupil and the edge of the dark part, i.e., the cornea; for you will see the pupil clearly through this with the help of the clarity of the corneal layer.
And then place your hand in the location where the water is, and then you lower it down one time or another, and therefore when the water descends quickly, then see the patient here where his vision falls quickly, and your hand in his hue.
And then rest for a moment; therefore if the water has descended, then you lower it another time in front that your hand not be gotten.
And when it is drawn out and does not descend, then you withdraw your hand with ease, and rotate your hand little by little, and then dissolve a bit of clear gemstone salt in the water and use that to wash the wound inside; then place a cloth, stop, or infused wool in olive oil and album of eggs over it, and tie it with that.
More now and those of our times cover that with egg white.
And if your hand does not fit into the wound due to its hardness — which is sometimes the case with men whose skin is very hard — then you should take the spume which is called alberid, and this is its form:
And therefore perforate there that joint, and do not withdraw your hand from the tract, but rather make a small opening in a suitable location below.
And then introduce the needle as we have said.
And you should complete your work by preparing the patient to sleep in a properly made bed in a dark room, and prohibiting all movements.
And pause at the nature of the patient to let his nature settle, and do not shift his head to the right or left side.
And apply the bandage according to the patient's disposition on the third day.
And then leave that patient in the dark room and expose him to fresh air, and perform some incisions, and then return the bandage on the seventh day.
And do not perform this during the hour of the cure or shortly after the infusion. Having a cavity that you open through which water may pass more readily by great and violent effort.
But if it happens that an abscess forms, then having a cavity that you open on the seventh day, and correct that which yields to become the abscess.
When you close the wound and place your hand over the face of the patient's mouth so that it may heal properly, let the patient remain in the darkest room for a few days.
And gradually let it heal and talk to the patient about its causes.
And know that in alcohol one may excuse the apprentice from vision for some days, and then you must be attentive to the operation.
And we have learned from some of those who are skilled in the Artach, and some say to make fire under the Ayrac magdaam perforated, through which water is drawn.
But, however, we have not seen anyone in our land who is perfect at this, nor is it mentioned in any of the books of the ancients; and it is possible that this is new.
And these are the forms of the species of magdaan that should be known among them those who ignore them:
And they are made of iron or copper precisely, and their ends are to this subtlety triangular, the acute end thus being the form.
Chapter XXIV.
For the treatment of flesh wounds in the nose.
When in the nose there arise different flesh masses closely set together of which some cause is gathered to scorpion of metal (or) to polypus of fire; and this illness is called polypus, which is like that fire represented. And of it is cancerous flesh, dark in color; and from it is flesh like a lion not of dark color.
Therefore, in that which is in these lion-like flesh not fraudulent nor cancerous, make the patient lie between your legs and expose them to the sun, and rub their nostrils, and prick the thigh in those flesh. And then extract it from the perforated parts, and subsequently divide what you have grasped with a sharp thin blade between which you know all the flesh has been cut away; if any remains due to some reason for which the cutting is possible, then quickly use one of the fine instruments to facilitate its breaking open for any cause. And if the wound suppurates or an abscess forms, then pause at it with what fits; if it is a malignant abscess, then incise and cauterize it thoroughly, ensuring that the pus is drained completely.
And then insert something in the nose after the incision, either a cloth or a piece of wood. And if the nose is already opened and from it proceeds moisture to the palate, then you know that it is already healed.
And if the moisture does not penetrate as expected, then you know that inside it is flesh rather than pus, and there will be bones of the nose to which no incision has been made.
When you find that there is a lump in the place where there is any swelling, use fingers for probing, and between each finger place the quantity of a digit or less, and ascertain the defect and insert an extremity of the probe into the nostril along the vein or by some other cause which is possible to him.
And when this has been done, let it exhale its odor into that which reaches the canals of the nostrils, and sit above his pillow, for too many gestures during this action make children at school laugh, and it is a light cause for those who want to do so.
Then return the two extremities of the probe, one that closes over the nose and the other that enters into the nose, and then administer a ligature of flesh around the fingers that are in the probe, and do this before you can sense that the flesh is against the bones of the nose.
Then remove the probe, and place a catgut in the nose near the exit of the blood for three days or more until the ointment dissolves all that is retracted from the flesh.
And at the end of the cause, place in the nose a lead cannula for several days until it is healed.
If you need a cure that requires drinking, use that one.
And this is the form of the instrument for making nose drops, in which oils and medicines are distilled in the nose:
And make it of silver or gold, which should resemble a small open lamp, like a small basin, and the spout resembling a pipe.
And if you want, make a closed cannula like a reed, and the spout of the instrument for making nose drops should be flat and open; place a tube at the rear end of it, with which you can put oils or whatever liquid you want from the secretions and causifiable substances into it when you heat them up.
Chapter XXV.
From the teeth to the extremities of the nose.
Small spots appear on the teeth at the extremities of the nose, and are enlarged and swollen over several days as the spot becomes more noticeable upon examination.
And because of this, you should examine that person at the beginning of the appearance of the spot, and isolate them completely. Then place yourself over the area with the cautery or burning medicine which was on that spot.
But if the isolation is delayed until after it has enlarged, consider whether it is hard, dark in color, and with little sensation; then do not touch that with iron as it is a dangerous abscess. For small spots should be treated by the one who isolates this abscess to avoid great harm to that person.
And if the abscess is due to a blow and not dark in color, and isolation can be performed throughout that area, then drain the poison, isolate it without fear, and treat the area with what dries and constricts until it is healed.
Chapter 26.
For the suturing of the nose and lips when the continuity is dissolved by wound or similar injury.
Know that when there is a dissolution of continuity in one of these cartilages, you should not much concern yourself with that operation but rather with several men.
Then probe, when it happens that any of these causes are present, whether it is a fresh wound with its exudate, and then you adjust the two edges of the wound with sutures, and proceed to cure that which is within until it is healed.
And if the edges of the dissolution of continuity are already separated, and any one is made to be healthy, then you must excise each part of its base apparent until it exudes pus. Then adjust the two edges with sutures and strengthen them, and over them sprinkle wound exudate of dragon's blood and three times distilled, and place on the powder a piece of dressed linen diafinicon, or some other of the consolidating plasters, and leave that paste for two or three days, then remove it and replace it with another plaster, and proceed to cure until the fibers dissolve.
The method of suturing is that you add the solution of continuity or use needles as we have recommended in the belly suture, or add the solution of continuity with thread as you are made to know.
Chapter XXVII.
Of the extraction of those causes that blood in the two lips in the parts inside.
Spots seen in the parts inside the lips that turn into hard abscesses resembling lard; some are small and others are larger.
Then incise the lips and the edges of each of those hard areas from all sides, and after the incision, fill the place with three layers of cloth to strengthen the wound, and then wash it with vinegar and treat the area with water that is astringent until it heals.
Chapter XXVIII.
Of the incision of the flesh pressed into the gums.
Great care should be taken over the gum close to the flesh which the ancients called albulus; then you must suspend that part by a string or hold it with forceps and incise it slightly, and let the healthy blood flow or the pus.
Then place something warm on the area for three days or another styptic or stimulating powder.
And if that flesh returns, then incise it again, and cauterize it, for after the cauterization, it will not return.
Capitol.xxix.
On the reason for teeth pain.
When on the surface of the upper and lower teeth, as well as between the gums, there are sharp, rough edges, some times they are black and caused by yellow or green substances that affect the gums through corruption, causing the teeth to become loose.
And so you must cut the patient's thigh between your thighs and place the patient's head in a basin of water, brush the teeth where these edges and similar causes appear to prevent any loosening from happening, and do this to remove the blackness and the yellowing as well as other changes that have occurred.
So if what remains of the matter at hand is in those at the beginning of the reasoning, that is good; and otherwise, then you iterate the reasoning on those another day and the second and the third until it comes to the final statement in what you want.
And know that the teeth have required various forms of extraction and different shapes according to how your operation is prepared. And so, some razors for extracting teeth are such that the tooth is extracted from the inside, while others are such that it is extracted between the teeth according to other forms. These forms of razors you should prepare, and you will see them often.
Capitol.xxx.
For the extraction of teeth.
Cure the tooth thoroughly with skill and take your time in its extraction, for no cause can make up for the loss of a tooth when it is extracted, as its substance is refined during the process of extraction.
When the patient is forced to open that tooth, you must be certain which tooth is painful, for many times the pain descends from above and is in a healthy tooth, and you extract that one and soon the pain ceases once the diseased and painful tooth is removed, for we have seen this through the operations of barbers.
Therefore, you must be certain which is the painful tooth, and knowing this well, when you incise along the circuit of the tooth from which any virtue arises, until it dissolves from the tooth in the gum of all parts, then apply those ties, or fine scissors gradually at the beginning, as the swelling subsides.
Therefore, apply water to the mouth for good speech or strong fracture, and place the head of the patient between the ties below that you must hold well, and then extract the tooth according to the right manner so as not to break it, nor give greater pain to the patient.
Therefore, if it is not forced open, then take one of those instruments, and place it on the patient from all parts with ease and effort in removing it as is done at the beginning.
If the tooth is broken or decayed, then you should cover it with cloth and tie it at the end of a fine thread to prevent it from breaking during your operation on that part.
And you should incise meticulously in the circuit of all parts of the gum and preserve its strength so that you do not break that part of it, and return to the illness because its malignity is greater than the first pain.
And beware that you do not do what some ignorant barbers do in their incisions and audacity regarding the removal of boils; for they do not administer what we have advised; which causes great illnesses to come upon men, which are more difficult to break than boils, and the reasons for their failures all, or some of those, or that you extract from certain bones of the jaw as we have testified with many ailments.
And after the removal of the boil, wash the mouth with vinegar or water mixed with salt.
And if there are discharge of pus, as often happens, then take some vinegar and sprinkle it on the wound. If this does not work, cauterize.
The form of the forceps and thin tongs with which the tooth is extracted should be long at the beginning, short and thick, so that they do not bend when those you must work on them.
And they should be thus: when thick and long at the beginning, then when narrowed, they should not bend, being short and extended.
And they should be made of Indian iron, straight at the beginning and long at the end. At the ends of these, there should be teeth such that one enters the other and tighten strongly by their descending construction. Sometimes, the ends of these should be in the shape of a cuckoo's bill, which is called a ciconia, and they are of strong construction.
Chapter XXXI.
On the extraction of teeth and the bones of broken jaws.
When you need to extract a tooth that is broken due to some cause, first ensure that you pause over the area firmly for one or two days until the location becomes softened; then insert forceps or tongs at the ends of which are assembled in the shape of a cuckoo's bill (called ciconia or guanta), the form of the forceps:
The extremities of their pain are felt inside thus as if by hammer or needle.
And if it does not obey to your attempt with these forceps or tongs, then cover the area with lint and open all the flesh, and insert the instrument which is called a catheter, so it is a small lever of which the shape is this:
And briefly, the extremity is large on the outside and small inside, so that it is not obstructed.
So if the hole is properly made, that is good; and if not, help me with these other instruments of which these are the forms: the form of the first instrument is triangular in extremity, in which there is some thickness:
The form of the second instrument is triangular with a finer extremity.
And now help me with this instrument having two ramps, of which this is the form in the next line: And with other instruments which are used for the rasuration of teeth; for youth is made with this instrument which is like a large spoon, and this is the form:
From the triangular extremity that is twisted or short, which is some kind of swelling, and not engulfed so that it is not tied.
And another note that the tooth extraction tools resemble other instruments.
But the wise and subtle craftsmen find suitable tools for themselves according to what the operation signifies and the various diseases; which are the diseases to which the ancients would neither refer nor pause with their own instruments due to their diverse forms.
But if the bone of the mandible or other bones in the mouth is tied up, or if you need to cure it at that place, then use the appropriate tools and forceps as we have said in the extraction of the roots of the teeth, and aid with the gesture of which this is the form:
And there is some small swelling, gradually and tightly held in the mouth so that it does not escape or flee while all of the bone is being thoroughly drilled; then restore the area with appropriate medicines.
If in the bone there is a small suppuration, first drain that suppurated area and its blackness, and cure it while it is healing.
Chapter XXXII.
Of the treatment of prominent teeth over others.
When the teeth are prominent not according to their natural form, and especially when they protrude in women, particularly in venerable old women; therefore consider this: if a tooth is close to another tooth and it cannot be removed by filing or with any tool, then extract that tooth; but if it is not attached to another tooth, then use this instrument, which has the shape of a pig's snout, made of very sharp Indian iron, to extract it.
And make your incision with the instrument you will use to extract that tooth due to its hardness, and ensure it is not too close to any other teeth.
And if the tooth is prominent and needs filing, then file it with a file made of Indian iron, which has this shape:
And let it be all of iron and the margin tempered; and made of small points like those of a file, on which the teeth are filed little by little over days for convenience, so that there is not another toothed instrument. And draw one there at the end, and cut another with a few razor strokes.
And if a tooth is broken and the tongue lies on it, then cut that area where the sharpness of that fragment may be obstructed and equalized, so that the tongue does not slip nor the word be corrupted.
Chapter XXXIII.
On the restoration of decayed teeth with gold or silver foil.
When the front teeth are damaged by concussion or extraction due to percussion or hunting, and the patient cannot strengthen themselves sufficiently from what remains, and you have treated this with styptic medicines but your treatment has not been effective, then for those that can be strengthened use gold foil and not silver, for silver turns green and in a few days may fall out, while gold does not change at all.
And the bile should be in such subtlety and coarseness according to the quantity that can enter between the teeth; and the form of the session is that you take the bile and put twice its amount between two healthy teeth, and soon there will be two tortuosities of the bile between two molar teeth, or one or spots, until the tissue reaches the healthy tooth from the other side. And then push the tissue into the part from which you began, and strengthen your hand with ease and skill until it is not molar.
And let your grip be such that when you extract the bile, it does not escape from the roots of the teeth.
And then divide the excess bile ducts with forceps or scissors, and add them to any location with your hand, and convert those and the hidden ones between the healthy tooth and the molar tooth, so as not to injure the tongue. And let it be thus strewn like a Roman.
If it is slipped or broken, strengthen it or them in such manner throughout its time.
This is the form of the teeth and the figure of the alignment of two healthy teeth and two molars, as you see these tied:
When returning one or two teeth to their proper places in the socket, and they have grown back as we have described, and when they erupt.
And it is not done by any but skilled artisans.
And sometimes it is appropriate for certain causes of the bones of a cow, and it is made from them as the form of a tooth, and is placed in the place where the tooth was lost, and is strengthened as we have said, and remains and serves for a long time.
Chapter XXXIV.
On the incision of the ligament which is in the tongue and prohibiting speech.
This ligament which leaves the tongue in some cases or is natural to which man is born, or accidental and due to a wound which has already healed.
The operation for this is to open the mouth of the patient, whose existing head is in the sick position; elevate the patient's tongue, and then incise that ligament nerve according to the width between which the tongue can be freed from its attachment.
But if there is any hardness or induration in that area, and this is due to the healing of a wound, then you cut once and incise that ligament according to the width at which you have already incised the ligament and dissolved the induration.
And make sure that no fracture is made in the periosteum of the bone and that you incise here to allow a flow of blood.
And then wash the incision tracts with vinegar or with wine or with hot water; and then place the tongue to dry. If it is necessary, let the patient keep the tongue out at night so that it does not heal again.
If there is a flow of blood, place a glass vessel over the area; if the blood flows, then sear the area with a cautery long enough to fit the wound. And then proceed with other treatments as it heals.
Chapter XXXV.
For the extraction of a ranula, use the tongue.
At times, an abscess forms on the tongue, resembling a small boil, and it is forbidden to perform any operation on the tongue. Yet, when it fills the mouth, it is greatly magnified.
And the operation for this is to open the patient's mouth wide and examine the abscess.
And if you see it is of a brown or black color, hard, and the patient does not feel any pain in it, then do not touch that area.
And if it is turning white, which indicates moisture, then insert a lancet into it, incise that with a sharp blade, and incise all parts. And if blood comes out during the time of your operation, then place a glass vessel above it, so it is constrained by the blood.
And then return to your work when you have brought him to completion, when he has been washed with vinegar and salt; and care for that with the other cure after it is healed.
Capitol.xxxvi.
Of the extraction of pus from both ears and from that which is in the wound, and of other abscesses.
When I find a wound godet (boil), these are glands which are gathered together like a godet, which swell outward and are named the two ears. When you cure them as we have said in the division and they do not heal, then consider if the abscess is hard, of dark color, of little sensation, then do not touch it with iron.
And if it is of red color and the root is large, then do not touch that with iron for the flow of blood; first let that mature, and then either you will incise it, or it will break on its own.
And if it is of white color, rotten, and the root of it is fine, then that is to be incised.
And the operation for him is that you consider, before your operation, if he has already rested the abscess of his foot sufficiently or if it has decreased somewhat; then cut the wound facing the sun, his head be in your lap, and hold his mouth open, and a servant holding between his hands the tongue, lets use the noblest instrument of which this is the form:
And let it be made of silver or steel, and be thin like a knife.
So when you press at that tongue and the abscess is shown to you, and cut over that with your sharp instrument, then take one and put it in the wick, and throw that away as far as you can. Another thing that you throw some cause of the tunics, and then incise that with the instrument of which this is the form:
Another thing that you throw some cause of the tunics, and then incise that with the instrument of which this is the form: and it is similar to forceps, although the ends of it are curved, so that the orifice of each of those is in the straight part of the other, sharp, which is made of iron and bent.
If this instrument is not at hand, then incise that space from which this comes, and make it sharp on one side but not the other.
And since you have incised one wound, incise the other according to this method of incision, and near the incision let the illness be cured by water.
If there is a flow of blood, cure it with water from the decoction of vetch seeds or of hollyhock leaves, and let it resemble that of the causes that restrict the flow of blood, and near its cure let it be healed.
And sometimes sores appear on the cheek or other abscesses besides those two ears, and incise them as you and it is said in the incision of two wounds equally.
And I have already treated a woman with an abscess which was located on her cheek, which abscess had a dark brown color, little sensation, and had already closed her cheek. The woman breathed freely, and had been prohibited from eating and drinking water, and she was near death if more days passed without water.
And the abscess had swollen so much that there were already two handbreadths between where it would exit through two cuts.
Then I cut it incisively and grasped one of its parts, and pulled it, the larger part coming out. Then I held that from which the other cut originated, and forced the opening closed, compressed its tongue, and grasped the part in the abscess.
Then I cut away a large part of it, and from it only a little blood was flowing. Thus the swelling of that woman subsided, and she soon began to drink water and eat food. Then I continued to incise the abscess for a long time, and instead of resolving, it kept recurring, occurring where the swelling had been prolonged.
Then I applied an ointment and cauterized the swelling, according to the method; then I walked around and did not know what God had done to that near me.
Chapter XXXV.
Of the operation when it is slipped.
When catarrh affects the uvula, and it is slipped and long, then it is named perpendicular; if it is in the part thick and round, then it is called a bubble.
When it is cured as we have said in the division, and you do not find your cure, then observe that the abscess caut has already gone and become subtle. You should incise the area that is added and round; if it is at that length, and it bleeds with a dark or black color, and is not more than a centimeter, then you must fear the incision of it, for there is fear of disease in that area.
And when you observe it according to the manner that I have said of its whiteness and length, you must extract the disease and press the tongue of the patient with an instrument of which you determine its form and then fix the thumb in the new opening, and pull that down and incise that with one of the two instruments, which are called in the incision of two bellies.
And cover that not less than what is adjusted over the natural term of addition, for if you cover too much, you will speak out of turn.
And nearby the cover, use that which we have mentioned in the operation of two layers, and cure that within which is healed.
If the patient was frightened by the operation, cover that you use in the cautery of him with some soothing, and the manner of the cautery on him is nothing but with sharp water, for you place the head of the patient in your hand, and then press the tongue of him with the instrument which we have mentioned, and then take from the water which we have said in the chapter of cautery, and warm it to a living heat, and pause it not thick nor thin, and from it fill the cavity of the instrument of which this is the form:
Let the external part of his cavity in which the medicine is paused be as the cavity of a cow's hoof, and pause the instrument on the medicine over the vagina, and the patient contract his lips for so that saliva or mucus from his mouth flows through the internal medicine, for that he does not fall away from that for any cause upon his genitals and it descends.
And then place your hand on the medicine, and express it over the uvula for half an hour between each time you let it darken due to the bite of the medicine.
And if you wish, take some cloth and wrap it around the end of the ray, submerge the cloth in the medicine, and insert the ray with the cloth into a tube so that the cloth adheres inside the tube. Do this as many times as needed to achieve the desired cauterization of the uvula, then let it dry and fall off in about three or four days.
And if you need to apply the medicine again, apply it, and after cauterization, clean around the uvula with a cloth soaked in vinegar, modify what is in the circuit of the uvula from the medicine, and wash it with water, then treat externally with ointment and internally with powders until it heals.
And this method of treatment is both safe and lasting, free from fear.
Sometimes the uvula is cured with what is finer than a cautery and incision, which is treated by inhalation in this manner: take calamus, hyssop, origanum, rue, scikadis arabicus, camomile, powder them like the herbs, and adjust all those causes or some of them into one ointment, and be immersed in vinegar and boil; and let the ointment be well mixed with good plaster, and in the middle of the ointment a wick, over which an iron implement is placed according to this manner; it should be made of silver or iron.
And place the extremity in the mouth of the patient so that the vapor rises to the uvula over the quulka, so that the uvula is moderately affected.
And then repeat over those several times until it is dry, and guard that you do not perform this cure at the beginning of the formation of carbuncles, for it would too strongly affect the carbuncle. You should not do this, but rather declare the presence of a carbuncle with a cautery.
But if you do not have this instrument at hand, then take a cane and put a clove of garlic at its end, so that the opening of the patient's anus is narrowed, for the garlic prevents the vapor from burning the opening.
And this cure is good for health.
Chapter XXXVIII.
On the extraction of thorns and what adheres in the wound and other causes.
Spots or thorns adhering in the wound or from a thorny plant or some other cause.
Then carefully extract what is obvious and visible, by which you can see it. But first press the tongue with an instrument facing the sun, so that you may be able to determine what is in the wound.
And what is not obvious and hidden in the wound, carefully make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach, because if the cause attached to the wound is strong, it will be expelled through vomiting; or have the patient swallow a piece of nap or ragwort seed or a bit of dry bread; or take a piece of sea sponge well soaked in wine and tie it tightly with a thread, and make the patient swallow that, for it will reach the place where the thorns are and will be expelled. And take an eel and bind it with honey, place it inside and gently extract it; or take a pepper and gently put it in and remove it gently.
And if none of these methods work as we have said, then use a lead instrument in this form:
And let it be as large as a small pea, and at the end of it, have its cavity where you will insert it into his throat with ease.
And apply its head upwards, and make sure that the touch of its bone at the throat reaches his body, so that it can either peel off the bone or the spine, or that the doctor places his hand on it.
And instead, let the patient himself insert the object, by his knowledge of the location of the cause, peel it off downward, and pull his hand toward the instrument, doing all this according to the quantity prepared before it is ineffective.
Capitol.xxxix.
From the extraction of gouty fluid attached to the kidney.
When gouty fluid is treated according to what we have said in the division of the treatment with medicines and you do not find relief, consider at the site of the kidney in the patient's body, as you may need to use an instrument that we have recommended.
So if you see the gouty fluid, extract it either with a small needle or with fine, gentle means.
And if it is not possible to extract it there, then take a concave cannula and insert it into the site of the kidney. Then place a burning iron in the concavity of the cannula, and do this as many times as necessary (until the gouty fluid is dead and separates from the kidney). Let the patient abstain from water for the entire day.
And then take a sponge full of water, open its mouth at that place, and wash the area with it; do not swallow any of it, and let the water remain on the area for about an hour with your hand, as the gouty fluid will quickly come out upon feeling the water.
If it is not forcefully opened, then fumigate the patient with cyme or asafetida through the instrument we have recommended in the fumigation of the uvula.
Do this, so that it may take effect.
And another way of performing the fumigation is this: you take a hollow reed in which ignited carbons are placed and cover it with a cloth in the middle of which there is a hole. Place the end of the instrument at the hole; then proceed with the subfumigation. Have the patient place their mouth over the end of the cannula, and close their mouth so that the subfumigation does not stop until you can see that the fumigation has reached the uvula, for the saliva will begin to flow soon.
And if it does not stop, then you repeat the subfumigation several times, and forbid the patient to drink or eat salty foods, and do not let them drink water either; thus, this regimen must be followed.
And this is the form of the instrument with which gouty rheum is treated when seen; and it is similar to forceps as you see, except that there is some curvature in it. And it is placed on the gouty area, and the extremity of it is similar to a stork's bill, which is curved, and is filed with a file, so that when any cause is grasped, it does not slip.
Capitol.xl.
In which the full discourse on carbuncles and sections thereof is presented.
The carbuncles are species of boils, of various types, according to the memory of them, for each one in this treatise.
And they are diverse in their perforation and section through two methods. Of these, one is by the species of carbuncles themselves; and by this, we grasp the humidity.
And the second method is by the places where bodily accidents occur, for a carbuncle that occurs on the head is different from one that occurs on the buttocks; and a carbuncle that occurs in muscle tissue is different from one that occurs at a joint; and each has its own judgment through operation.
And more of abscesses some of which cover that they not be perforated but rather at maturity of the healing in those or complement of their.
And other abscesses some of which cover that they be drawn out when they are ripe, and not matured according to their complement, thus as abscesses that are close to joints, for an abscess that is near a joint, the nature of it is prolonged into where you will be at what is in the circuit of it, and strongly corrupts the ligaments or nerves of that joint, making cause of contraction of that limb; or it is an abscess near the main member, and if you delay the perforation of it until its maturation then it affects the main member; or it is near the anus, therefore pierce that which is not ripe; and do not draw it out raw, but one near the anus, so that no poison from it can extend inward to the parts inside the anus, making a fistula, or something done in the term of it that is not healed. And you must know the time for the perforation of the abscess, and this is when it is ripe.
And know that it is matured when there is the cessation of pain and the end of fever, and then the reduction of redness and pulse, and the decrease in the head's acuteness of the abscess, and other signs.
And know when to puncture the abscess at the location where pus is coming from after the swelling has subsided.
And the puncturing of abscesses should be done along the length of the flesh or body, if the abscesses are in the upper parts or the feet, and at the location of the lacertae, the cords of the nerves, the arches; and, in general, in all locations where there is no reflection; for in those that do reflect, use puncturing according to that member.
When the abscess is in a fleshy location, it is better to wait until the digestion of the pus is confirmed according to its course, as we have said; for if you puncture it too early, it will prolong the duration of the purulent discharge and increase the hardness and depth of the lesion.
More abscesses should be perforated according to the width of the flesh or body as the necessity demands, or according to that from which the member suffers.
And ensure that you administer a small perforation in large abscesses, and a large perforation or multiple sections according to the diversity of the size of the abscesses.
And in other abscesses, ensure that the cord is returned to its cavity and tied, when it is done thus as with bread, it is done in a term that already stands, as is done in cases of crops of dodlet and buboes.
And of those that are incised by section having three angles; and of those in which it is incised thus as the figure of a leaf of hawthorn, as with abscesses of anginas.
And of them, those in which a round section and a crescent section are administered, and similar to those.
More for those in which none is thus, as with superficial abscesses, you should perforate them with a superficial perforation, or flat one only.
And when the abscess is large and has already collected some healthy pus, that you perforate it and do not hesitate to extract all the pus at that time; having extracted one part, then raise the abscess on another day, and extracting a larger part, and repeatedly perform this by degrees until it is completely drained.
And especially if the patient is a male with green fever, or a woman in labor, or a small child, or an old person in decline, for the animal spirit resolves into the exit of the healthy pus, and greatly alleviates the illness, and you may openly perform.
Take great care with this chapter, and when you make your perforation in which you pierce these abscesses, ensure that you clean the wounds and consider whether the wound from the abscess is small, or a flat section, then administer the appropriate quantities of li or coto antico; if the abscess is large, and the fissures of the perforation are significant, then place your hand in each to ensure they heal together.
And if in the abscess a part of the cord is divided or you have concaved it in the circuit, then you should suture it with old thread or a needle made of linen cloth, just as when you have drawn out bandages or roots, their humidity; strengthen it on the third day; and proceed with it and cure it according to what is appropriate from ointments until it is healed.
But if you happen to have a flow of blood during the time of your operation, then administer water mixed with wine in which you soak a cloth, and place that over the location of the blood flow for several minutes.
But if the flow of blood persists, then you must administer treatment and care, as well as powders which I have recommended in various places of this our free and divided text.
But if it is in the time of winter, and the location of the abscess is near major nerves, then you must apply powders mixed with wine and oil with a cautery, and place those over the locations.
And if it is in the summer, and the locations are fleshy, then you must place powders soaked in water and oil or in wine and oil, and all of this should be applied by the third day, as we have said, and then you must incise the abscess, cleanse it, and administer to it what is suitable for it until it heals.
And this is what is necessary for the knowledge of the treatment of abscesses universally, but according to the division I have already said about all abscesses, in what manner is the path of its cure treated separately by chapters.
Capitol forty.
Of abscesses whose vein is in the vein of the head.
In the vein of the head, small abscesses, and their contents which contain tissues that are formed; the substances within them are spots.
And they have contents, and those that contain humidity resembling lime. And those that contain humidity resembling dust, similar to it; and those that are hard, calcified.
And in the section of all, and in the extraction of those, there is no fear, just as you should perform the extraction without causing resistance.
And the operation for extracting those is that you express them using an instrument of the form described nearby, which is called a lancet until you know it contains.
And if what it contains is humidity, then divide that by section along its length using a superficial section according to this form:
And begin at the section of line B between line G. As the humidity is evacuated, then you scrape that skin which contains that humidity, and do not leave any cause of it all, for too many times it returns if left from any cause.
And then immerse it in Egyptian ointment, if present, and otherwise in water and salt; then fill it and leave it for another day, for in this it dissolves everything that is rotten of that skin.
And then repeatedly treat that part with Egyptian ointment gently if you need it, until you are confident that there is no rot causing any issue to that skin; then cure the wound with ointment once it is healed.
And if an abscess contains fatty nodes, then you incise it according to this form: In the section having a cross-like form, and make an incision between the two sides of the section and pull out all parts of it, exerting your virtue in extracting the tunica which contains it.
If your artery resists, then do what I have recounted to you first.
And similarly treat the abscessed lump for sectioning and curing as we have told you before; the sectioning over an abscessed lump is lighter, because it involves little bleeding and little moisture.
And sometimes some of these abscesses, which are on the head, in some people do not have much moisture; the cause is that it cannot be easily sectioned over an abscess on a old woman's head. One should treat the abscess like a hard, rough, white stone, which could not be broken, and if any were struck with percussion, it would heal by itself.
And in other abscesses on the head, this is not covered in this chapter. As with abscesses that occur in children's heads, you should treat the causes of the earaches; however, the sectioning of all these should be superficial.
And place the perforation of those lower parts such that it alleviates the disease in the lower regions.
And then attend to those things that are necessary for the cure.
Chapter 42.
Of the section on scrofulas which occur in the neck.
Black spots often cause abscesses in the neck, in the armpits, and in the groin; and sometimes they occur in other parts of the body.
And those that occur in the neck, and the spots that are generated within them, and all scrofula of these is inflamed with its own tunica, just as in the nodes and abscesses of the head, as we have recounted.
And the species of these scrofulas are spots. Some of them are pale, and some contain moisture, and some are malignant, which do not respond to cure.
Therefore, in that one where you perceive good disposition in the Touchement, where the color of what is manifest is similar to the color of the skin, and is spread throughout the body, and is not attached to the nerves of the neck, nor to the veins, nor to the artery, and is not phlegmatic, cut it away with a superficial incision from above to below the line of G. to the line of B., and excise it completely, extending the edges of the skin around the wound with wax or small strips of wax if you need them, as we have said in the abscesses of the head, and remove it little by little.
And it is more careful that the vein or nerve not be cut.
And let the incision not be too deep, that it does not reach your hand in cutting, or relieve the patient, and cut only what is necessary to cut; for if you cut a vein or artery and stop your operation, then apply a glass blistering salve or other powders which are fluxes of mercury, strengthen the wound, and leave there what causes the heat of the abscess to subside and the wound to become softened and begin to suppurate. When the blood is cut off.
Then return to your operation until it is completed.
And then inquire again as you did before for any other causes of the small scrofulous swellings, and then cut those and clean them.
And if it is near the root of the scrofulous swelling and there is a large vein, avoid cutting that scrofulous swelling at its root. Before you place there a piece of cloth folded strongly, let that remain to fall by itself.
And then fill the wound with old cloth which you have already soaked in Egyptian ointment, and then dress it.
And if you incise the scrofula completely, then you must adjust the two edges of the wound and stitch it tightly so that no excess tissue remains.
But if you see that there is excess tissue due to the size of the scrofula, then you must incise the edge of it, remove that part, and administer stitches as prescribed.
And for the scrofulas containing moisture, make a superficial puncture at the place where it appears, and stop the puncturing when you reach the pus beneath the skin, as we have said.
And then administer the puncture, apply ointment and similar substances to it, so that it dissolves what is rotten from the corruption. And when you see that the wound is already clean, then cure that with a salve of flesh-generating ointment until it is healed.
Chapter XLIII.
Of the section of the boil affected by the cord.
The ancients performed this section in the epilhom, and no one in our land has ever seen it done.
And this is the inscription of the speech of those.
More in men with curvature, a cavity that should be avoided during the extraction of the epilhom, as otherwise it would not be done properly since all the veins and major vessels of the groin are here.
More in those who have boils cauterized on the mouth or cord or ears, when the illness is not in the vein, it is advisable to use the section of the epilhom to avoid the damage caused by perforation.
When we want to do this, incise the epilophon and leave three or four small circles in the space between two rings for size, so that the section is on cartilage, not in it, and this place is appropriate for a section, which is devoid of flesh and the vessels of its blood are loose.
If the doctor fears this, do it when he extends the thread of the needle, and then cut the thread before it reaches the channel, but more avoid the vessels of blood if you see any cause.
Then incise the flesh as we have recounted; and it is significant on the section of the channel by the flame which is of that essence and of its discontinuity and by the absence of voice.
Leave the wound open for some time.
When the time is prolonged in which the perforation is feared, add two loops of the thread of the wound, and sew that one to the cartilage.
And then administer medicines that cause flesh to grow where it is healed.
And I say as Alcucasis states that the main point of the discourse which we have recounted is simply that you see some of those abscesses have already opened the wound of the thigh, and the thigh has come into death, and its artery has been severed, and some go on to incise the epiglottis so that the thigh may breathe over the site of the injury through some respiration, and thus be saved from death.
And for this command that the wound remain open until the malignity of the disease is consumed; and the malignity of the disease lasts for three days; and then when those three days are over, I command to treat the wound until it is healed.
And what I have seen through my method is that a servant took a knife and placed it in the thigh wound and incised there a part of the root of the lung, and I was called to treat this case, and I gathered the pus as it gushes from the dead, and uncovered the wound and applied the salve which was sitting around the wound.
Therefore I must confess that there was no rupture of vein or artery, and the wind from the wound, and healed her with gentle care.
And she did not suffer any injury nor even hoarseness, and soon recovered from her discomfort.
And now I say that in the case of the circumcised penis there is no fear.
Capitol. XLIV.
On the section about an abscess that occurs on the side of the neck, and is called a neck hernia.
This unnamed neck abscess is a large abscess according to the color of the body, and it is common in women.
And it can be classified into two ways: one natural and the other accidental.
And in the natural case, it is not easy to cure.
And the accidental can be classified into two ways: one resembling fatty nodes, and the other resembling an abscess formed by the obstruction of an artery, in which case there is fear. And do not make presumptions about him as if he were iron, but in one who is small. And thou probe that part and investigate that which is said, and if thou findest a semblance of a fatty node, and it is not suspended from any of the veins, then thou incisest that part as the nodes, and extract it from the skin and bursicle it; and if not, then thoroughly examine his entire being, and place the wound in such a way as to facilitate healing until it is healed.
Capitol. xlv.
Of the section on types of nodes.
Of the nodes, there are various types, and I have already mentioned all the types of nodes in the division.
And note that I recount thus the difference between a node and an abscess so as to avoid any doubt.
Therefore, I say that in an abscess there is a quality of heat and fever and intense pains until the boiling of the superfluity is sedated; and once the putrefaction is complete, then the fever, pain, and heat cease.
More than that there is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and concerning that mark of the lion which is on his flank.
And it is according to the color of the body, and its beginning is like a spot and is made thus, either larger or smaller, and they are according to two species, either fatty and contain humidity, and the colors of the humidity are spots, as I said in the division.
Therefore, when you arrive at the treatment of nodes, express that and inquire about it from its beginning in the flesh which is called intumescent, according to what its form will be in the chapter which is nearby.
And this is the manner of inquiry for carbuncles and all nodes, and it is that you take this flesh and insert it in the place most humid which you find in the carbuncle, and you will mix the threads little by little into it until you know that the flesh has penetrated the core.
Then place your hand near the measure of the size of the carbuncle, and then extract the inserted flesh and consider what is set in the cavity of it.
And if the running moisture of any color is overlooked, then you incise according to a superficial section as I said in the other abscesses.
And if there is no moisture from the intrusion, then you know it is fatty.
And if it is dry on the surface and has a form like a cross according to this form: As I have taught you, suspend it with a cord, and completely remove the cord from all parts with ease, and keep the skin or bag above it, if possible, and extract the clean part at the node.
But if it breaks during the operation, it is not possible to extract the clean part. Instead, you place pieces of it down, and then extract them piece by piece so that it does not break for any reason.
But if it breaks for any reason, either little or much, the node returns according to what is best.
And if you see that any part of it has broken slightly, then fill the wound with some sharp and strong powders, strengthen the wound, place your hand over the area that is to be an abscess, and cure the rest with another treatment until it is healed.
And if it is not large, then you close its two lips and treat that which is within.
And if the vein is pulsatile on the opposite side, or non-pulsatile, then you incise and fill the area with one-third salt that is vitriol and let it stand for two days or three until the swelling subsides and the boiling of the blood calms; and then return to cutting what is ruptured from the node.
Capitol XLVI.
Of the forms of instruments necessary for section and perforation.
Of those, these are the forms of the instruments, and they are of three species: some are large, and others are medium, and others are small.
The form of the large instrument is this:
The form of the small instrument is this:
Make them of iron, of aluminum, of fallen edges properly, so that the instrument enters the abscesses.
These are the forms of the experienced ones, and they are called albered, and one of them is called berid.
These are made of three spices, one of which is major, another medium, and the least.
The form of the experienced one is large, its form:
The form of the experienced one is medium, its form:
The form of the experienced one is small, its form:
It is advisable that they be used for those abscesses, discharges, fistulas, and swellings so that they are located between the bones and other causes.
And they are made round, large, like large needles to which ligatures are sewn, and they are made of iron, or steel, or silver. The best are those made of steel.
And they make the experiences with blackbird feathers, which are said to work because those reflect light due to their levity compared to those reflections.
And so of three species, some are long, and others are medium, and others are short, according to the width of the fistula and its stricture.
Forma dell'esperienza grande di piombo:
Forma dell'esperienza mediana di piombo:
Forma dell'esperienza piccola di piombo:
The forms of the feathers are of three species. Some are simple, having only a single curvature, and are of three kinds: long, few, and medium.
And some are feathers with bodies, and they are of three species.
And some of those feathers have two curvatures, and they are of three species.
And from them you have three curves, and they are of three species.
And all these are necessary in their place.
Shape of a single slight curve, its shape:
Shape of a great single curve having two curves: Shape of a moderate single curve having two curves: Shape of a slight single curve having two curves:
Shape of a great single curve having three curves:
Forma of a woman having three curvatures:
And these are the forms of the scalpels which are sharpened and filed for nodes and abscesses, and there are three species, one of them is great, woman, and pauc.
Forma of scapel gran:
Forma of scapel woman:
Forma of scapel pauc:
The extremities of those which are to be cut are acute, while the others are blunt. They are not so made in this manner, but rather to prevent the danger of incision into a vein or nerve when making the incision in the opening of the nodes, and for these, healing is promoted and there is some relief from the heat which causes the excoriation of the abscess.
And these are the forms of the amagidas, and there are three species: great, woman, and pauc, as you will see.
If they are formed from heat and resemble a red spot on which alcohol is applied.
And if it is in the outer side of the lower leg, prick it with a needle and apply a hidden blistering agent there. When you want, do so as you see fit.
The forms of blisters, which are hidden between the fingers, require the puncturing of abscesses and not the patient's lower limbs, and they come in three species: great, female, and small. And these are the forms of those:
The forms of hemorrhoids, which require the cutting of the flow of blood, come in three species: great, female, and small; the forms of it:
If they are formed from heat of citrus, round and of certain length, and are subtle.
And these suction cups you should make some large, medium, and few, so that through those incised wounds the flow of blood is rapid when needed, and when previously it was not present.
But do not use those to incise blood from the entire body, and use them only on fleshier areas, such as on the inner sides of the legs and thighs, and on the inner sides of the breasts, abdomen, armpits, and similar fleshier creases.
And some small ones are made with those instruments, resembling curved sickles in shape; through which blood is incised when performed by venesection, or from the incision of a vein or artery.
And some small ones are made round in this shape:
Capitol. xlvi.
Of the treatment of the breasts of men which resemble those of women.
Sometimes the breasts of some men swell when they begin to be flabby, and at times the breasts swell, and the breasts of women gather together, let us wager that this is due.
And to him who has this, cut those areas of the lunar section according to this form, from the line of B to the line of G, then excise the tumor entirely, fill the wound with red medication, suture the two lips of the wound together, and cure him until he is healed.
More so, if the breast droops to the sides and is softened due to its size as in women, then cut it into two lobes, each of which resembles a lunar section. Each should be contained within the other such that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form from line B to line G. Then excise the cord which is between the two lips of the wound, remove the fat, and administer what we have said about suturing and powders as necessary during the cure until it is healed.
And if you do not complete the incision that needs to be made due to the discomfort of the patient and the flow of pus, then you must fill the wound with cotton soaked in corrosive ointment and leave it there until it eats away the roots of the necrotic tissue, and then cure what remains healthy.
Capitol. xlviii.
Of the perforation of abscesses where pus leaves through titillic.
Of abscesses where pus leaves through titillate, they are of the kinds of scrofulous, hard swellings, which contain a core that is extracted.
And of those that contain humidity, they must be incised at the lunar phase of the moon according to this figure: from the line of G to the line of B. And when all the pus in the abscess is evacuated, you fill it with cotton and leave it for another day.
And then the cotton is left in place and treated with appropriate ointment until it is healed.
And if the abscess from the glands or scrofula is, then you incise there in this way as we have said in the section on scrofula equally.
And if the wound is extended to the point of becoming gangrenous, then apply a cautery to it as we have previously stated.
Capitol XLIX.
Of the section on abscesses that occur from an arrow or vein.
When an artery is broken and the chain (vein) that is above it is consolidated, then dark spots appear as abscesses. And the signs by which one can know that inflammation or abscess is due to the artery or vein: for when you press on the abscess with hot objects, you feel a stridor in it.
And that which is due to the vein is round in appearance on the surface of the body.
Of the section on this abscess: it is especially dangerous, particularly when it occurs in the axillae, in the inguinal regions, and in the neck; and it is very large, so that its cure should be avoided, and that which is in the extremities or the head should be carefully avoided.
For that which is due to inflammation of the opening of the artery, cut in the middle section along the length; then enlarge the section with clips near the artery, and remove the tunics where it shall be exposed.
And then place a needle over that and make it penetrate into the other side, and strengthen the artery with double thread in two places, — which you should demonstrate to me in the extraction of two arteries which are in the temples.
And then cauterize the area which is between two sutures with smoke until the bleeding stops, and let the abscess dissolve.
And then administer a cure where powder is applied until the sutures fall out; and then treat it with appropriate ointments until it heals.
And if it is an abscess due to venous congestion, then draw as much of the abscess with your hand as possible; then insert the needle in the place you have drawn with your hand, and make it penetrate; then put a double thread around it where you extract it from the other side, and tie the abscess tightly with good sutures as I have said to you with the grape suture in two parts around the ends of the thread.
But if you fear that the thread will come loose, then insert the waxed needle into that pinhole and leave all the abscess from the first puncture, and strengthen your threads in four places.
Then dry the abscess in its middle location where it is situated, and when sitting on it, cut away the excess of the cord, and leave what is soaked from it.
Then place the powder you have soaked in wine and oil over it, and administer the cure which is made with cloths and ointments until it is healed.
Capitalize the abscess which occurs due to nerve damage.
Similarly, when an abscess occurs in an artery or a vein, and similarly, an abscess occurs in the nerves when there is a percussion or excessive work, and for similar reasons.
And it is most commonly found in the areas of the helpers or the thigh, or in any place where the joints are affected.
And it is a heavy abscess, and resembles the color of the rest of the body, and is in the major parts of his disposition seven of its kind, when stretched by violence, one feels the patient's illness seeming like stupor.
And it is not an abscess attached to the front of the body, and for this reason, the chain is left off, and he is able to move freely in all parts and does not go to the front or back parts.
So what is in the joints does not need to be filled with iron, for strong leaven will bring about contraction.
But that which is in the head or on the forehead should have the chain made of lead. But if the abscess is small, then use lead for the chain and cut that part with flax threads.
And if it is large, then suspend it with a hook, and incise that part, and place something over it; and adjust the wound with sutures, and cure it until it is healed.
Capitol li.
Of the section on abscesses that occur in the cheek and the abdomen.
Some people have abscesses in their abdomens and in other parts of their bodies. These are called funguals due to their similarity to fungi; the core is fine, but the head of it is large; and the membranes around them are thin, some being small, and others being greatly enlarged.
And I have seen one, and in its abdomen there were two masses which resembled fungi, and there was no difference between those whites, of fine core.
And the membranes of those masses were inverted and split, and moisture flowed from them continuously.
Then I incised those and treated one on the foot that was eighteen inches long, and the other that was six inches long.
And in the incision of them, consider whether the patient is wet, and the color of the mass is white, wet, with a fine core. Then you should incise it with a broad blade, and burn it in the fire, for the wet masses must be thoroughly burned to prevent infection; if you encounter the infection, burn that area.
And if the patient is fearful and trembling, guard yourself against injury with iron; rather when you take recently melted lead powder, strengthen that part, the manner of which we have said; leave it for two days.
And then adjust in the constriction of the lead wire; therefore, do not cease to strengthen the lead gradually in that part, until it is cut and falls by itself.
But if the part is of large size, then in cutting it there is some cause for fear and anxiety, especially in that which is in the abdomen.
But it is possible that you cut the majority of it, and then cauterize it to prevent it from returning.
And then cure the area until the wound is healed.
And beware that you do not presume to cut a part which is of dusky color, with little sensation, and of poor appearance; for such a part is thus cancerous.
And I will recall the pain nearby.
Capitol. lii.
For the treatment of protrusion around the navel.
Protrusion around the navel is caused by various reasons; or by fissures in the ciphac which is above the abdomen, and through them the membrane or intestine protrudes according to the nature of other ruptures; or by a sore that flows from a vein or artery as stated before, or by constricted hernia within it.
More specifically, if it is due to a fissure in the ciphac and the swelling is caused by the membrane, then the color of the abscess resembles the color of the body; and the pain is severe, and often appears in various locations. And if it is due to the protrusion of the intestine, then the location of that differs from what we have described, with greater diversity. When you press on that area, the pain disappears and soon returns; it is strong in that place, and you should use a strong method for its introduction into baths and vigorous work.
If by humidity, when you press with your hand it is evident and not concealed, nor constrained, nor believed.
And if by scald, when these signs appear the abscess in black declining.
If by no flesh at all, when the abscess is severe, large, and hard, and is situated according to a quantity.
If by dampness, when you touch it, it is evident.
And the operation in it is that you consider when the prominence of the navel is by scald from artery, or vein, or by dampness; then cover what you are prohibited from treating it, for there is fear and terror as you were taught in the Capitol where I said abscesses from arteries and veins.
And if the prominence of the navel is by the intestine or the hernia, then cover that you command the patient to have their own ale, and stand extended; then place something to test around the entire navel, and command him to lie between your hands on his sides; then surround with a wide space around the circuit of the navel over the area you tested with the test. Extend the size of the abscess towards the upper parts greatly; then put a strong ligature or a cord in the circuit, firmly and in a proper manner.
And then you should extend the apex of the abscess over the membrane and insert your finger in that space to find the intestine; and if you have touched it or disturbed it with the membrane, then you carefully extract it and push the intestine into the inner parts of the abdomen.
And if you have touched the membrane, then take it with forceps; and incise the superfluous parts of it.
But if it is contrary to your artery or vein, then circumvent that spot, and then return to your operation; and take two needles and put them into those strong threads and insert two needles in the circuit you have made around the abscess in the manner of a cross, making sure they penetrate; and then strengthen the abscess in four parts over the needles.
And if you wish, hold the needles and let the area extend and drop by itself; or incise it when it becomes subtle and can drain, and then dress the wound with ointments until it heals.
And if the eminence of the navel is of flesh and not in it or due to humidity, then you must drain what you find in its cavity as we have said and remove the pus or the humidity which you find there, and then cure that place where you drained and consolidate the area.
Capitol. liii.
Of the cure of wounds.
We have already said, in the division, about types of wounds and how they are treated with medicines. And that the cure is avoided if it becomes ulcerated; and we have said that wounds are generated in a certain manner and caution in the treatment of them.
And the ancients said that some wounds can be treated by removing them from their location, as with a wound in the breast or in the thigh and similar parts of the body, where one would extract all of it, especially when it is just beginning.
But when it is old and hard, you must not drain it, for I cannot heal such an ailment nor have I seen another, nor has it been treated in this way.
And the operation on them is when it is laid out as we have said, that you first expose and leave the patient and purge of black bile several times, then drain it, if found, and refill with a clear one.
And prepare the patient for the preparation in which the operation is located, and proceed with the cuts that lead to it; and from all sides concave the wound well for a good excision so that no part of the cause remains. And let the blood flow, and do not stop it lightly, and squeeze the wounds, and wipe away the thick blood with your hand or an instrument that is within your reach.
But if you experience difficulty in stopping thick bleeding from an incision in a vein or artery, then cauterize that area once the flow of blood has ceased, and treat it with another method until it heals.
Capitulum. Liv.
On the treatment of dropsy.
We have already treated in the division of the species of water dropsy and the signs of each species, as well as the cure by medicines.
And that which is cured by iron is nothing but the species of althitas alone, and it is not approximated by iron to the species of timpanites nor to the species of yposarch, for that is fatal.
And when you have medicated this species of water dropsy called timpanites with medicines and find that your treatment is not effective, consider this: if in the patient there has already been achieved debility from another illness or another water dropsy, such as in their cough or abdominal organs and similar to those, then do not treat them with iron, for fear is associated with this.
But if you see the patient suffering from an excess of virtue, and in them there is no other illness but only water dropsy, neither child nor old, then the way to perform the operation on them is that you lift the patient between your hands, and apply your hand near their abdomen to express the abdomen, pushing the water out through the opening at the base of the penis, and then take a thorn spasm according to this form:
It should be of two sharp parts, with acute ends like a spike; yet it is in him some small brevity little by little, for in the operation do not enter into the intestine, and to lead that.
And then consider if the generation of dropsy is from the intestines, for when you reach the section you should be about three digits away from the parts at the right side of the umbilicus.
Yet if the generation of dropsy is due to malaise of the liver, then your section should be on the left side of the umbilicus by three digits.
And if the generation of it is due to the spleen, then your section should be on the right side.
And do not place your section on the side where the malaise is felt, so that the superfluities do not flow to that area.
And then perforate the instrument completely through the length, and insert it into that section, elevate your hand with a spike between the length of the instrument and the siphon, and you extract it; if the quantity is about an ounce or less.
And then puncture the abscess so that the pus reaches the desired location, and this is the place of water. And then extract that and insert an instrument of this form: And it is similar to a fine silver cannula; it is made of silver or brass, in which at the lower part there is a small hole, and on its sides are three holes: two from one side and one from the other side; and the end is incised like a feather pen, as you can see.
And at the end of the instrument above is a stopper; when the instrument reaches the water, it quickly lets some water out through the hole in a few minutes. If you evacuate more than can fit in that time, the patient may die due to the sudden release of his animal spirit, or suffer five signs that approach death.
But evacuate from there according to the quantity of the virtue of the fluid and according to your assessment of the patient's condition by examining his pulse and judging its quality.
And then extract the instrument, and stop the water which causes it so soon is stopped by the cord which I will tie that is above the chip of which you are to perforate it according to that manner.
And then repeat the instrument on another day if the patient tolerates it, and extract a small quantity of water, and do this for several days with caution, and beware that it does not swell from the water but slightly.
But if you fear for the patient, and let a large quantity of water remain, then cure that with burial in sandy earth, and soaking in cold water, and under the sun wait for a long time; and cure that with drying medicines until it is healed.
And cauterize on the stomach, and the liver near the extraction of the water, as I have recounted in what was preceded.
Capitolium.
For the cure of children who have stones in the urinary tract that are not perforated.
Sometimes some of the child is miscarried from the mother's belly and the head of its mixture is not perforated (or is taken straight or is not in its place).
Therefore, make the incision for the perforation of the belly as soon as it is born with a subtle spatula according to this form:
Then place a thin lead stylus and close it, and let it be for three days or for four.
And when he wants to urinate, let him do so; then return it.
And if you do not place the lead, it is possible that the urine which falls on the area will prevent this from closing.
But that which you remove should be treated with a lead stylus, as we have said, for several days before it is expanded.
But those in which it is removed not in its place, are said to cause this condition. The one that is native and occurs during childbirth should be placed at the end of the head of the fetus so that it cannot urinate inside; while lifting the head with their hand above the upper parts; and it is not a generative issue, because the sperm cannot reach the mother according to its correct position, and this is a malady lasting.
And the manner of the operation on him is that the patient is placed on his side, and then extend the head of the penis with your left hand with strong extraction, and incise the head of the head of the penis in the place of the peripucium with a sharp blade, thus like the cutting of a feather, or any part you do not cut out, so that the vein of him comes forth resembling the head of the penis and that I pull it down into the middle place as it suits.
And watch that in your operation for the flow of sand, if you see any spots occur; pause there and apply something to it where you cut the sand, and dress the wound until it is healed.
Capitol. lvi.
Of the white substance which occurs in the prepuce, on the head of the penis, and is associated with corruption, discoloration, and adhesion of the prepuce to the head of the penis.
Spots appear on the penis and are an elevation of whitish flesh.
And of those two, one is malignant and the other is non-malignant.
And of those two, non-malignant, you should suspend one on a thin string and cut through that in which that monster is entirely contained; then place your hand over it to submerge it in Egyptian ointment; afterward, treat it with diafinicon until it is healed.
And if the abscess is malignant, of a white color, then you should apply a cautery near its incision and around it.
But if the abscess is in the prepuce of the head of the penis in an uncircumcised man, and one part of the abscess is inside the prepuce and another part outside, then you should remove the part that is inside at the beginning, before it becomes consolidated; and afterward, treat the part outside. For when you treat this together with the prepuce, it is not assured that it will not be torn.
And we have examined accidents in the genitalia and in the black prepuce with corruption. Then you should evacuate all that which is already darkened and which is about to腐烂或已经腐烂；然后在其上方划线，使用蜂蜜，它是由新鲜大黄粉、三味切碎并筛过的药草制成的。
And then cure that as in another treatment when it is healthy.
And if there is a flow of blood, then apply a lunar cautery according to this form:
A lunar cautery is used in two positions together, either for a flow of blood or during the plague when there is corruption.
And if the head of the abscess is corroded and is completely destroyed within an hour, then you should introduce a lead cannula into the meat of the prepuce so that the malignant urine flows through it.
In the adhesion of the prepuce to the head of the abscess (and this adhesion occurs only in that part from which the prepuce originates, and on which circumcision is not required; when such adhesion occurs due to the plague or an apostema), you should excoriate with a blunt spatula while the adhesive is dissolved and the head of the abscess is completely released.
And if it is difficult to excoriate those thoroughly, then you should excoriate with a spatula some part of the head of the abscess and the prepuce, and this is because the prepuce, when thin, being light, is perforated slightly by its thinness.
And then separate between the prepuce and the head of the penis a strip of the fine skin, which is already moistened with the rubbed medicine so that it does not adhere again.
And then let it be cured with vinegar soaked in cloth until it is consolidated.
Capitol. lvii.
On the purification of children and the treatment of what occurs to those who have been circumcised.
Circumcision is not a solution for continuity as are other infections: nevertheless, since it is of our operation and our will, and those of others are properly in the children, it is necessary that we assign to it the best operation and the most gentle way, losing nothing for health.
Therefore, it is said that the ancients did not use circumcision among any of the free peoples, for they do not use it in their laws, and it is only because we have acquired this knowledge through experience. The reason is that I have examined the majority of craftsmen and barbers who use circumcision and purification with a knife and with torches; and they use lint with wine and incision with unguents.
And I have already tried all these methods and cannot find a better modification using scissors, or lime or vinegar in modification like unguent, for you will always find the cord above, for the cord of the prepuce is between two tunics, and relax the inner tunic and fortify the light one so as to another incision and certain pain. And in modification by alphectomy, which is digital, of which cobblers use it, the incision at the extremity of the male member is not secure, for it deeply penetrates its channel.
In the operation with unguent, you must use iron and corrupt your operation. And the cord of the child is short by nature, and often does not need to be cut in such a manner that there is no necessity for modification, and I have seen it.
More of the modification that is made with scissors and lime or vinegar, the quality, I have observed through experience, for the scissors are of proportional incision, for which the acuity above is thus as the acuity below; and therefore, as you press your hand proportionately on two acuities, you cut according to a comparison in one time; and it is made compression of the vinegar in a figure containing the cord of the foreskin from all parts, with which no error can arise.
And the manner of the first operation is that you make the child stay primarily if it is among those who understand a little, that you do not do so but that you tie the lead in its foreskin only, and that you leave it for another day.
And then make that recovery in every way that is possible for what receives its intelligence. And then place it among your most skilled helpers, and not more than a hundred; hide the scissors in your hand or hold them behind your back so that the child does not see those nor any other of the instruments.
And then insert your hand into the foreskin and blow into the glans, and pull that out so that it sets the head of the foreskin free, and then modify that which is attached to it due to stiffness.
The shape of the forceps after modification, this is the shape:
If the tips are not sharpened and the other tips are sharpened, let the shape of the fork be such that the length of the two curved tips is equal to the length of two equal-sized handles.
More importantly, in modification, the error is that if you lift the intrinsic ligament entirely or partially, you must incise it.
Therefore, make sure that you incise that part with your finger in front of the flap of the area and incise it according to equality.
And if you cannot hold it with your finger, then lift that part with a needle and incise it.
If they have passed three days and remain what is swollen due to the inguinal abscess, then you let it be until the abscess is lanced with a cautery, and excoriates that area for ease, and incises that according to how you are prepared.
And guard the head of the abscess, for if not done properly it will not heal.
And therefore treat that area where the wound heals from the powders which we have recommended in the treatise on powders.
And if it is incised beyond measure, and you adhere to the rules above, this will not harm it.
And therefore treat that area as we have said until it is healed.
Capitol. lviii.
On the treatment of retained urine in the bladder.
Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by an obstruction due to a stone, or a sore carbuncled, or pus, or flesh wound, and resembles those we have said of in the methods of treatment in the division.
And if what we have said is not dissolved, then strongly the cause must be brought to the attention of the patient. Then know that you should administer extraction from the body with an instrument which is called a syringe, of which this is the form: It is made of silver and is thin and hollow, like a goose quill in thinness and length resembling about half a palm, to which is attached a thin tube at its head.
And the way to evacuate the urine through it is that you take the tube folded and tie its end with good thread or fine wool; then insert the ends of the tube into the part left by the syringe, and cut with scissors if there is any excess cause from the wool, but firmly insert it into the canula with vigor. Then closely apply the syringe to the skin and to the inside of the thigh.
And press the scrotum over the seat, and sponge the bladder and groin with a mixture of olive oil and vinegar.
And then introduce the string easily until it reaches the root of the groin; and then fold the groin upwards at the part of the string; and then push the string inside until it reaches the bladder; and then push that towards the scrotum so that it is delivered to its cause being reached by the string, and not be made thus according to this order, but the meat in which it goes becomes tortuous.
And then extend the thread slowly in the wool, for urine dries the wool.
And then extract that and use urine for treatment, and apply the string, continue doing this until the bladder and scrotum are evacuated and recovery is achieved.
Capitol.lix.
Of the quality of cleansing the bladder with enemas and using instruments that are appropriate for this.
When an ulcer or abscess occurs in the bladder, or there is a wound with gangrene, and you wish to pour waters and medicines into it, then make an instrument which is called clampcedra, and this is its form:
so that at the extremity of it is closed, so it is clamped. And in it there are three cuts: two on one side, thus twice.
At the beginning it is concave, in which what is pushed in lies, and according to the quantity that fills it, its addition, within which when any cause is drawn by the humidities, it is drawn, and when it is expelled, then it is drawn again, and when it is expelled long, according to how it clamps, on which naphtha is placed in the battles of sea.
So, in order to prevent humidities in the bladder, insert the extremity of the clampcedra into the humidity, and draw out what is pushed to the upper parts, for the humidity is drawn into the cavity of the clampcedra.
And then insert the end of the cedar stick into the vagina as we advised in the operation; and then push the moisture with what you push, for that moisture will quickly reach the bladder, and the disorder settles there.
The form of the subtle catheter through which the bladder is catheterized, and that is the form:
And it should be made of silver or copper, with its head resembling a small feather, and insert the canal inside cotton.
And then take a bladder of mule, place the moisture you want to catheterize in the bladder, and tie it between two strong ligatures with double thread, and heat that moisture over the fire.
And then insert the end of the catheter into the vagina.
And then strengthen your hand on the bladder with the moisture in a descending structure so that the disorder centers where that moisture has reached the bladder.
If you do not have a bladder present, then take a piece of parchment and make a circle from that; perforate it completely round its entire roundness; then insert strong thread through those stitches, as they are turned; then attach the circle so that it is attached, for you pause in that which you want of the humidities, smell and waters.
And then you tie that to the instrument and do so with it as you did with the bladder, and keep your hand there so that the humidity may reach the bladder.
Capitol. lx.
Of the extraction of pear.
We have already discussed in the division the species of pear and its treatment with medicines, and the difference between a pear generated in the hernia and a pear generated in the bladder, and the signs of that.
And we have discussed the pear in which case the major operation and sectioning are performed.
And the stone generated in the bladder properly is that which is lodged in the bladder.
And I now narrate that matter in an exposition and abbreviation.
Therefore, I say that the stone generated in the bladder most commonly appears in children; and its signs are that the urine discharged from the bladder is similar to water in its subtlety, and forms that sand; and the patient grinds his teeth, feels severe pain, and soon becomes restless; and for this, he often writhes in agony.
And this is the recovery of children within about four years; and it is a difficult cure in old people. More in young people, the change occurs through that which is between them.
And of that which has the stone more and the cure is easier; And if it is small, it is contrary to that.
Therefore, when we arrive at the cure for that, begin with the modification of the patient's diet by having them take crystal which excretes through all the orifices in their intestines; for that orifice sometimes prevents the passage of the stone and facilitates its inquiry.
And then place the patient's feet and ensure they are extended and bent slightly so that the sole descends to the neck of the bladder, or that it swells in some places.
And then place those clothes that you have prepared under your hands, while the others keep the patient's limbs, so that the bladder is made to hang downward.
And then apply that and all that incision.
And if you feel the sole in the space, then quickly apply heat to it.
And if you do not feel it all with your touch, then check that you anoint your index finger of your left hand with oil, if the patient is a child, or your thumb if the patient is an adult, and insert that into its anus. And apply heat to the sole while you feel your finger. And gradually insert that finger into the neck of the bladder.
And then press upon that area as you have said, and expel that to the external parts. Look for the place from which it came.
And command the minister to press the bladder with his hand; and command another minister to extend the genitals upwards with his right hand, and with his other hand draw back the codena which is below the genitals, at the location where the section is made.
And then insert a speculum; this is the form of which: And cut in it what is between the anus and the genitals, not in the middle, before the left thigh; and let the section be on that stone which you said is in the anus, and make a transverse section, so that the section outside is wide and inside narrow according to the quantity that flowed from the stone to it as possible, and no greater, for we carefully examine the section which is in the anus, the stone you should make the section, and it is surgically created.
And know that from the heel there is some angle and margins, because the movement of it is made difficult by this.
And from that there is something that resembles a lion's claw, and it is round, and they make the movement of it light.
And if that which has angles and margins is adjusted in the crack.
And if it is not so perforated, then you must either probe it or strengthen it with a gesture decently, the extremity of which should be like a rasp on which you strengthen the heel, and do not deviate from it; or you must insert a thin instrument with a curved extremity into it.
But if you cannot do this, then you slightly enlarge the crack, and if you wish to induce a flow of blood, cut it strongly with vitriol trisser.
But if the heel is more than one, then at the beginning you press your hand to the mouth of the bladder, and then cut slightly over it; and then press a little there; similarly do if its spots are more than two.
And if the stone is very large, then ignorance leads you to incise that great section, for when it happens to the patient one of two causes: either that he dies or that he achieves a continuous urinary distillation, by which the area is not completely consolidated.
Administer the expulsion of the stone when it is within so that it is expelled, or use forceps in the fracture of the bone to extract it from the wound.
Then, after you have completed your operation, fill the wound with slices of aloe and dragon's blood, and strengthen it. And place the soaked cloth on it in oil and wine, or in linseed oil and wrung water, so that the abscess may yield.
Then raise the patient's leg on a stool, and do not apply the bandage on the fifth day.
And when you have removed it, smear the area with water and much oil, and then treat it with ointment containing diafinicon and ointment containing diabazic acid until it is healed.
But if in the wound you encounter an abscess that is hot, corrosive, and appears as if the blood were frozen in the bladder, and through it urine flow is prohibited (this is known by the discharge of blood with urine), then insert your said instrument into the wound and extract that blood, for if it remains it will cause corruption of the bladder and its putrefaction.
Then wash the wound with warm water and salt, and oppose all species, using what you find suitable for the cure until it heals.
And observe the hours for all the treatment you perform, placing your hands on both thighs and applying the medicines which are placed over the area.
And if the stone is small and located in the meat of the penis, and its passage is prohibited by urine, then treat it as I have recommended before you reach the point of excision; for too many operations of this kind are blamed for causing excision. Now I will describe this: take a needle file, which is the shape of this:
from a triangular instrument, sharp, inserted in wood.
And then take honey, and bind it to the gland so that it does not return to the bladder.
And then insert the iron into the gland, piercing easily where the puncturer will reach that stone. And turn the puncturer with your hand in that stone little by little, and you make the perforation complete before you do it on the other side; so that the urine is quickly relieved.
And then press your hand on what is torn from the stone of the part pierced through the gland, for that is jagged, and the wound is cleansed by the urine, and the patient is cured.
But if this cure is not done through your apparatus for some reason that prohibits it, then bind honey to the stone, and another piece of honey above the stone. And then apply something hot over the stone on that gland between two layers. And then extract it there. And then untie the bandage and change the wet dressing, which is done on the wound.
And do not use a flax bandage for the stone, but only to prevent it from returning to the bladder. Instead, place another bandage above, for when the flax is removed near the edge of the stone, the constriction recovers and heals the wound.
And for this reason, when you remove the flax above, you must elevate the constriction to the parts above, or the stone will return and take its place, and the wound will heal as we have said.
Capitol.lix.
On the extraction of stones from women.
Stone in women is less commonly generated.
Yet if a stone does occur in any of them, the cure is difficult, and it is prohibited by too many methods.
One of them is that a woman who is very light is a virgin.
And the second is that you will not find a woman well versed who can describe to the doctor whether she herself has had intercourse, or if she is among women who have husbands.
The third is that you will not find a woman well knowing this art, especially the operation among them.
And the fourth is that the location of the section near the kidney in women is far from the location of the kidney, so you need to perform a general section, and there is danger.
But if necessity prompts you to do this, then seek out an experienced old woman who is well versed in these matters, and such one is not easily found.
But if you are deprived of that, then seek out an experienced and subtle doctor, or present an elderly woman skilled in the affairs of women, or a woman who has knowledge of this art.
Therefore, have her present and command her to do everything you will tell her, from the examination of the kidney to the beginning; the reason for this is that she should check if the woman is a virgin, and then insert her finger into the woman's vagina to feel for the kidney.
Then if you find it, cut it out and leave his said [wound], and then command him to rest over it.
But if it is not a stone, then command the midwife to insert her finger into the bladder and feel for it, while placing her left hand on the bladder, and keep a good grip.
Then if you find it, gradually wash out the bladder through its orifice with water, making sure to retain as much of its virtue as possible so that it reaches the root of the thigh.
And then insert your finger into the opening to hold the root of the thigh in any part where it is stopped and center the stone there, so that the patient is not harmed by the stone as you cut it out.
And let the incision be small at the beginning; then insert the probe into that section, and if you feel the stone, adjust the incision according to the quantity you know the stone will be removed from there.
And know that the grains of pepper are motas: some are small and large, lion and spicy, long and round, and having spurs.
Therefore you know what spices are in it so that you may signify about what you want.
And if you want to induce a flux of blood, apply vitriol tripartite to the area for one hour until the blood is absorbed, and then return to your operation once the pepper has been removed.
And make sure to prepare for yourself the instruments you mentioned in the extraction of pepper from men, so that you may be assisted by them during your operation.
And if you want to induce a flux of blood, and know that the expulsion of blood comes from the artery that is incised, then apply powder to the area and strengthen it with powders and allow descent; do not repeat this; leave the pepper and do not extract it, for strongly removing it will kill the patient. And then cure the wound.
When the heat of the wound subsides after several days, and the place heals, then you return to your operation while the stone is forgotten.
Chapter LXII.
On the section about inguinal hernia.
Hernia aquoea is nothing but the addition of moisture in the white cell which is left by the chain of the generations containing the humor, and it is called achipac.
And sometimes it is in the own linen cloth which nature prepares for the part of the humor before it is cooked and another humor has already taken its place; and this is the chain of the generations among the white cell, which we have said, and it is not this other than a tart.
And the generation of this hernia is due to weakness which occurs in the generations, because this material infiltrates into them. Sometimes it occurs due to percussion made on the generations.
And this moisture having colored spots, its color is either declining to yellowish or reddish, or brown, or it is black and floury, or it is white watery, and this is the most common.
And the signs by which one knows where this addition of water is located are these: if it is in the white cell which we have said, then the abscess is round, slightly tapering in length like the figure of a gourd, and the root appears, for the moisture contains that from all parts.
And if the moisture is in the proper flesh, then the abscess is round, detached from the gourd, and for this reason one estimates that it is another gourd.
And if the moisture is between the root of the gourd and the white cell, then cut away the root.
And to know the color of the moisture, you probe the color of the moisture in the abscess through a small incision made before the form appears; and according to what happens in the trace of the incision, judge what is inside it.
Then when we come to the treatment of it, you must command the patient to bleed if this is within your capability, and often raise his body.
And then lift it up on its back for a moment or two, and place the rest of the cloth.
And then set yourself on the left side of the patient, and command the minister to stand on the right side of the patient, who extends his hand to one of the sides at the hip bone and to the part of the flank.
And then take a spatula and split the hip bone at the midline along its length near the pelvis.
And make the section according to the correct distance from the line where you should split the skin of the hip, until it reaches the white linea composita.
And excise that, and observe, and guard it for this: do not go deep into that; your incision should be just wide enough to excise the lesion, hanging it on the greater and finer hook, and carefully examine the incision according to the quantity you can manage.
And then puncture the linea alba full of water with a broad perforation, and extract all the water.
And then separate between the two lips of the section with clips, and extend the clamp above the parts; and do not touch the chord around the genitalia, and incise the clamp in that manner which is possible to you. And incise that completely or in pieces, especially its thin edge, for if you do not thoroughly examine the incision, there is no guarantee that the water will not return.
But if you proceed with the hot process outside of its chord in the time of your operation, when you have completed the section of the clamp, return inside that, and properly adjust the two lips of the genitalia's chord with sutures, and properly care for it as for the other wounds until it is healed.
And if you find the hot process corrupted by another illness, then ligate the vessels which are over the suspensory, extract the hot process, and properly care for it as we have said.
But if the water is added in two parts, then you know that there are two hernias; therefore, incise that part according to how you have done in the other equally; and if it appears to be a single operation, then you perform it.
And then you clean the blood, and interlace in the sections wet wool soaked in oil or rubbed oil; outside place another wool which you have soaked in wine and oil, and spread that over two genitiae and ·the miracle of the belly; outside cover with folded cloths and powders, and apply those on top of plaster which is according to this form:
And then place two cloths and fill them with pounded wool according to this likeness; and make the ends which are pressed with a clot or wet wool, and attach them to the structure in the pocket of the breeches, and one end take into the two, and the second take to the part of the gusset, and two ends leave on two thighs, and the other two ends on two ankle supports, and all structure be adjusted in the pocket of the breeches.
And sometimes this hernia is treated artificially with a cautery at the section instead of iron; so you take a thin surgical cautery and incise there at the cord of the genitiae, and ignite it as we have recommended until the white chaff containing the water is revealed, and then you take the cautery in this form: and it resembles Greek letters.
And then puncture that pouch, and ignite it so that all the moisture is expelled.
And then stretch the pouch with needles, and incise it with needles, and burn it with a fine cautery ignited; and cut it as much as possible so that you remove all of it; and guard it from the heat so that the fire does not touch it.
And know that this operation is safer and more distant from the flow of blood, and better than an incision.
But if you find it contrary to apply a cautery at the time of incision or during the time of cautery, or when there is a flow of blood, then treat it as any other contrary condition, applying the cure that is appropriate according to what is said.
But if the patient is afraid and does not expect the second operation because of its horror, then administer a puncture as I will advise you; and when you are certified by what we have said about the significance, that hernia is dangerous.
When you need to incise the abscess on some elevated part, then puncture the apsema in the lower part of it with a spatula, and pause the puncturing according to the length of the body.
Let the incision be wide enough to drain all the water.
Then place your hand firmly over the area, press it, and release, to allow the water to continue flowing out. Then take care that the wound heals properly.
But if contrary to the flow of water at that time you puncture it: this is not done except because the white lint causes a contrary effect and prohibits the effusion of water. Then, when you need to put in the wound a needle or instrument from which the water of dropsy is drawn out, use the form of which is preceded; or apply a small sponge in the region of the wound.
And know that the water returns, and is absorbed approximately six months or even more; and when it is absorbed, then puncture according to that method, so that the abscess passes its days.
Chapter LXIII.
On the section about fleshly hernia and its cure.
Know that in the section about this hernia, there is fear of losing great danger to the major organs; for I have seen its dismissal and been saved by the better method.
And I am remembering the operation in that case and the types of abscesses.
Therefore, I say that abscesses naturally occur in the parts where the glands are conjoined, and this is done for various causes: either due to acute excess that is poured into the glands, or due to percussion.
And the color of the abscess depends on the color of the part of the body, and there is no pain in it; it is a serious abscess.
And the abscess that is hardened has a dark color, and there is no throbbing in it.
And sometimes abscesses are formed due to the concretion of the arteries, and due to swelling as you already remember, or due to swelling of the veins.
More than that, when caused by the inflammation of arteries, it is known as the dispersion of the abscess when you press upon those points said; and one should not touch it.
More than that, when caused by the inflammation of veins, it is not dispersed for any cause; you should apply compression to those points.
And it is possible that section be made on this species as well as on other tissues; and you incise the cord of the glands, then extend the knife upwards, extract that from the white cyst, and deliver the suspensory ligament of the vessels, ligature them, and incise the suspensory ligament after you have delivered that from all parts of the kidney.
Then if the kidney has already consolidated with those tissues, you should extract the kidney and incise it.
And if there is an adhesion due to something in the cyst, or between what is between the vessels, you should deliver all that adhesion and incise it with a round incision.
If the native flesh is in the place of adhesion which is behind, then thoroughly incise all that belongs to it, and extract the humor as we have said.
Then since your operation is completed, fill the wound with wool soaked in rubbed olive oil and wine; and then cover it with another dressing until it heals.
Chapter LXIV.
On the cure of hernias that are viscous.
A vit is an apysterma enveloped by some envelope similar to a blister, and it makes exertive movement, exercise, and walking on the affected side difficult.
And in the cure of this illness, there is a fear of what preceded it, which is remembered.
However, perform the operation there according to how we have described first.
And I say that you should incise the affected side on an elevated cloth; and then draw the suspensory ligament of the testicles towards the parts left; and place the codena of the inguinal region on your thumbs which are tried by the touch; and have another minister with you, and extend those thumbs vigorously.
And then incise sharply with a sharp knife across the vessels among which the vessels are exposed.
And then excise from all parts as we have said in the extraction of arteries which are in the temples.
And then place a needle in which there is a double thread, and tie that at the beginning of the locations where you cut, and tie the other half at the end of them. And then incise those in the middle location with a straight cut according to the length of the body, and extract what is accumulated from the foul and corrupted humors.
And then cure the wound with the treatment of other wounds in which you want health to be generated so that it causes the vessels which do not nourish one of the two spirits, which is not bad for this.
But if you cut all the vessels, then ensure that the testicles are extracted or that they wither due to the cutting of the vessels, so that it is deprived of all nutrition due to the incision of the vessels, and become established, or that they wither for this reason.
Capitol. lxv.
Of the cure for intestinal hernia.
The occurrence of this hernia is due to a seance that ends in the diaphragm extending over the abdomen from the muscles of the abdominal wall, because from the rupture of those intestines, some of them are displaced.
And this rupture is either of the diaphragm or of its excision, and these two species occur due to various causes: through a blow, by jumping, from shouting, from lifting some heavy cause, or from similar actions.
And the sign of this, when it is due to the extension of the diaphragm, is that it occurs gradually over a long period of time and does not occur suddenly. It is an abscess that grows within the cavity, as the diaphragm compresses the intestine.
And the sign of this is when it is due to the seance of the diaphragm, for at the beginning it causes sudden and intense pain; it is an abscess that appears differently from the nearby apparent wound, as this is due to the compression of the intestine, and the body around the parts outside the diaphragm.
And sometimes the intestine protrudes through the skin, and this hernia is called zirbal.
And sometimes it is caused by distension, and sometimes a hole forms in the intestine, where it gets stuck, and this causes great discomfort to the patient, and sometimes it causes severe pain, especially when pressed.
And in the treatment of these symptoms of this illness, there is fear, because it is thought that hunting should be avoided at that time.
And the method of the operation is that you command the patient to push the intestine back into its cavity with their hand at the internal parts of their cavity if it obeys on its return, and then tie it over their collarbone between your hands, and lift the patient's shoulders.
And then stretch the cord which holds the testicular cord above, and incise the testicular cord entirely along its length; then place it in two folds of the incised section according to where you need to open the section.
And if the section according to the quantity that it is possible for you to have been perforated.
And then excise that cyst which they leave near the string of the testicles, after the white hard cyst of each part has been discovered.
And then insert your thumb into what you are excising from the testicle, in what is between the white cyst, which they leave near the hernia, and between the second cyst, and separate all the adhesion that is in the rear part of the hernia.
And then hold the testicle with your hand near the front part, and with this extend the white cyst on its side, and raise the hernia above the cyst to the part of the section; and command the assistant to extend the hernia upwards while you dissolve the adhesion behind with the completed solution.
And near your thumbs, say that there is no cause for the intestine being enveloped in the white hard cyst. But if you find some cause, then you peel it off to the abdomen and lay it down.
And then incise in the part left of the cord of the testicles by section of which flows pus and healing as we have recommended in what we have said.
And then apply wool soaked in oil, and place it on the wound; apply the plaster which we have recommended (and after several applications the white cloth is cauterized, which we have already mentioned near the incision of where there is a flux of pus, for several days this occurs). And leave the plaster until it falls by itself.
But if the healing of it is delayed, then apply warm water, and place it on that area until it falls as we have said.
And then heal the wound with the other treatment for wounds until it is healed.
Chapter LXVI.
On Hernia Ventosa.
In this hernia, it is not seen that anything has been burned during the treatment of it.
And the first ones would say that it is done this way as we have recounted in the hernia case; which is that you tie the vessels near the section at that place of ease; and then dry out in the middle location around the apostema with what I operate there, before the vessels fall.
And cure the plague according to what we have said until it is healed.
Chapter LXVII.
Of the disorder that occurs in the ankles.
In some cases, there is a rupture in the ankles as we have said, and you apply a poultice to the area.
And the genii do not give any cause of the hernias to the genii; and if they do give one, it is rare; and returns soon in all hours.
But if the time at that is prolonged, there is an appropriate crack in the hip where the hernia descends into the hip; and this happens due to the extension of the hip, which occurs in the ankles as we have said, the cause being that the hip is extended, and soon becomes softened, and the area becomes an apostema and poultices are applied.
And the treatment of it is with a cautery as it is preceded by the narration of it.
Sometimes it is cured with iron according to this manner: and the patient lies on his side between your hands, and then the place of the rupture of the abscesses dries out by evaporation according to the width as per the quantity of three fingers.
And then strengthen the white cloth that is under as it is uncovered.
And then take the wick and place it over the prominent part of the cloth, and press it against the front of the abdomen.
And then stitch the two prominent parts over the end of the wick of the cloth, and adjust one to the other with the stitches.
And then extract the end of the wick, and do not go through the entire cloth, nor extend the wound, nor any other cause as I have faith in the treatment of intestinal hernia.
And then cure that in the treatment of wounds, and as you incise the flaps, purify it and restore the wound while it is consolidated; for the cloth contracts and the prominence of the rupture is not adjusted.
And cautery is better in this place, because it is more proximate to health.
Capitol. lxviii.
For the mollification of the skin of the testicles.
When the skin of the testicles turns dark in some men, it is mollified by this because the flesh that is between them is mollified, and care is taken of it.
Then it is necessary for him who is in charge of the cure to make the patient lie according to his condition, and completely extend the area which is mollified over the natural skin; and then he should bring together the two lips at the suture.
And if you want, make three or four initial stitches in the excess of the mollified skin and perform a firm suture.
And then cut between the stitches; and proceed with the cure of the other wounds until it is healed and the stitches fall out.
Capitol lxix.
Of castration.
Know that castration in our law is excommunicated, but by necessity I am reminded of it in this treatise; and the recollection of it is necessary to me for two reasons, one of which is that when asked about it as a doctor, he should know the cure for whom it happens; and the other reason is that we may sometimes have need of castration for our young animals, such as mules, boars, pigs, and similar beasts.
And therefore say that castration is performed in two ways: either by incision or by making a cut and separating.
But in that which is performed by incision, the way of the operation is to slaughter the beast in cold water so that its genitalia are softened and relaxed while they hang. And then take those parts in your hand so that they are relaxed and no marks appear upon touch.
In case of castration caused by rupture and desiccation, make sure you have the animal and press its testicle with your left hand.
Then lift the suspensory ligament, and incise over each groove between two processes.
Then incise those abscesses that have formed from the excoriations. And do not incise those of the scrotum for any cause, but incise the thin layer which is over the veins.
And this method of castration is better which is done by traction, for traction firmly leaves no cause of the testicles since the animal desires copulation.
Then treat the wound until it is healed.
Chapter 70.
On the treatment of hermaphroditism.
Hermaphroditism in males is according to two methods: one where it appears that the space in the scrotum is split, and in which there is a figure between the two testicles resembling a female with its pelvis.
And sometimes a flow of urine comes from that part in the cord of the testicles.
In women, it is special: and the woman's scrotum is such that it has two testicles like a man, but slightly smaller and hung forward like the penis of a man with its two testicles.
And the cure is of three kinds: two for men and one for women. And you must incise those tight flesh areas where the excretion of that fluid escapes, and then proceed to treat those with the cure for other wounds.
And in the second kind for men from which urine comes from the cord of the testicles, neither cure nor operation is performed on it.
Chapter XXI.
On the labia and flesh protruding due to causes in women.
Labia firm and tight is placed over natural causes where it is stretched and made lax by examination; and sometimes it is enlarged in some women to such an extent that it stretches like in men and protrudes during intercourse.
Then you should have the superfluity of phlegm in your hand or cup and suck it.
And do not end by sucking, especially in the root of the tongue, lest there be a flow of saliva.
And then attend to those wounds that need care for their healing.
More hidden flesh is flesh that arises in the horror of the mother until it fills that space, and a large tumor is situated outside according to the likeness of a mass (and for this some first called this "cured gout"); therefore, you should incise it thus as we incise phlegm, and attend to it until it is healed.
Chapter 72.
On the cure of arthritis.
Arthritis is when the joint of the woman is perforated, or is torn slightly. And it can be natural or accidental.
An accident is due to ill-health which has preceded, and that is caused by flesh not fitting well or by a fine or thick thread.
It is caused in the swelling of the groin, or in the sides of the abdomen, or in the upper part below it, or in the lower part of it, and you prohibit cure, conception, and childbirth, and severely prohibit menstruation.
The knowledge of that is made by observing the midwife, if the obstruction is obvious, probe gently; but if it is not obvious, then you should feel for it either with your fingers or with a rod.
But if the obstruction is due to a fine thread, and is close to the two lips, then you should gently separate and untangle that.
And you should place powder over the two lips, and then feel with your fingers for the indicators on both sides near them.
And the woman should be on her back, her thighs extended, and then spread the two lips with force until that fine thread is broken and the obstruction is opened.
And then take wool and dip it in oil and place it over the area, and keep someone there to ensure that the incised area is not consolidated.
And if the ulcer is large and deep, then you must incise it with a lancet or leaf of myrtle.
And if the oppression is due to a mass, then suspend it with an incision, and incise there.
And use those medicines that stop the flow of venom from bites, such as aconite, dragon's blood, and ensete, adjusted with alum.
And then administer an ample lead tube to prevent the plague from consolidating lightly.
And keep it there for a few days and administer cool water.
And then cure it with the other consolidation treatment once it is healed.
And sometimes accidents occur in the main site of other tissues, then you must incise according to this manner. If this is due to a chronic abscess, in the chronic abscess which is in the major part do not make any counterpressure by means of iron in any manner.
Capitol LXXIII.
For the cure of hemorrhoids and of tail and of red boil that occurs in the groin of women.
Hemorrhoids are appreciated as the result of small veins situated between which constantly carry flowing blood; and since old hemorrhoids are formed they become hard.
And I have already said in the division the species of those and the signs of those, and to say likewise which receive cure and which do not receive cure.
Therefore say that hemorrhoids and thrombosed ones when they are in the pelvis and do not appear by sensation, then in those do not make any cure.
But those that are in the pelvis near which one has sensation, are those that can be cured.
And ensure that you put the woman in a warm bath and then extend the thighs with scissors or a rough cloth, and incise there where the roots are.
And then sprinkle above those wounds the flux of the blood from one of the incisive powders six times by biting into it, thus causing a similar effect in appearance to those.
And then wrap her feet for an hour, and place her in cold water.
And if the bleeding persists, then apply her to a decoction of sumac and cloves of garlic and ginger and mint.
And then take flour of ocher and apply it with honey and vinegar, and make a poultice with this on their back.
And if the bleeding is stopped, that is good; otherwise, apply two ventosas (cupping glasses) to the breasts, and perform six scarifications.
And then take wool and submerge it in the juice of cumin or the juice of arnica or the juice of purslane in sour wine, and apply it to the area; and cure the area with ointments until it is healed.
And cure that which is within, making it healthy.
Chapter 74.
On the perforation of the vein in the thigh.
Various specific cases of abscesses occurring in the thigh, such as carbuncle, abscess with hardness, ulcers, hematomas, erysipelas, fistulas, and swellings, as well as other abscesses. And I have already described these diseases and their specific types, as well as the signs of these conditions, and their treatments in this division.
And you should know that I have described in this treatise how to apply a cautery to an abscess that occurs in the thigh among those abscesses that heal well, and if you want to know how the operation is performed.
Then you should consider whether the pain of the abscess at its initial onset is acute with percussion and fever, and observe if it turns red and if touch on it gives a sensation. When there is no perforation of it, treat it according to what helps in promoting maturation until the acuity of the symptoms ceases.
And when you must place the woman on a stretcher that has two divisions; recline her on one side and adjust her feet to the part behind the abdomen, and spread her thighs, and place her arms behind her back, and tie a quascum with linen as is appropriate.
And then the midwife follows straight to the side and administers the instrument through which the space of the vagina has been opened, the form of which will come in those cases that will be described later.
And when you want to administer this instrument, place it along the side of the vagina opening, and what part of the instrument enters the vagina should not exceed the opening of the vagina and reach the patient. And if the instrument is larger than the opening of the vagina, then you should sprinkle powder on the tissue of the vaginal opening to prevent the instrument from entering the vaginal opening.
And you should sprinkle the powder that runs along and above the instrument of the vagina, ensuring that the instrument is held and the powder is rotated inside until it has opened the vaginal opening.
And when the excitement appears, and it is touched with the hand and is hot and moist, then cover that which you have dried with the head of a sponge.
And when the flux is evacuated, then place a sponge soaked in olive oil or green olive oil with some astringency on the wound; and keep the wick in the dry section at the base of the thumb.
And place the thumb and over the patella a clean woolen cloth soaked in water in which vervain has been boiled.
And then it is properly cured over two days by applying ointment which you apply to that until it is healed.
And sometimes wash the thumb and the wound with water and honey until it is cleansed, then with water in which rue or wormwood has been boiled, and then return to applying the ointment.
And if the wound is deep in the thumb, then do not attempt to treat it with force, but attend to it as we have said in the division.
Capitol seventy-five.
To instruct midwives how to properly treat cases when it occurs according to an unnatural figure.
Necessary cause is that the midwife know at the beginning the figure of a natural birth by signs thereof. And when you see the female bear down at the openings and desire to smell the air, and about this she is soiled by what comes from her, and hastens the delivery of the child, then you know that this part is according to the natural figure, and its delivery above its head, and the second one either at the side or suspended or pendant from the navel.
Then, when you see those signs, then know that the abdomen is compressed so that the fetus descends lightly; when it comes above its head, it brings forth the second one, and it is cleansed of those superfluities by good cleansing.
But that which is another from this part is unnatural and unseemly, for when the fetus comes above its feet and the body of the mother is delivered in front of its head and its feet, and its hand on one side or at its belly, or the head of the fetus is delivered and its hand, or at its abdomen, and strongly it is turned over its neck, resembling unseemly figures.
It is necessary for the midwife to be wise and subtle in all those causes, and to guard against error and deception.
And she should show all the figures of those causes, and what engine is in those so that it is significant by that and be placed there.
When the pain is set over her head by natural accident, and it is vehement against the woman and is made at a difficult part, and sometimes the virtue of the womb is weakened, then make that sezer, or what women have for it, and evaporate the juice from fenugreek and olive oil.
And then introduce the midwife between her thighs slightly and place the second one, or dry it with her finger within which flows what is in it of humidity. And press the woman's abdomen until the fetus descends.
But if it does not descend, then make the woman drink a mixture of plantain mucus and fenugreek mucus with water.
And quickly command him, the patient, to breathe through his nose and mouth with difficulty; and close his mouth and nostrils for about an hour, so that he will soon faint.
And if the patient's hands become too faint at the beginning, then you should reduce them gradually with ease. But if the patient does not obey the instrument, then place the woman on a cushion and lift his feet up, and quickly pour the water over the ground; and the woman must hold her to prevent her from falling due to the shaking.
And if the hands have not been turned inside and the patient has died, then incise those areas and extract the wound from the patient's body or hold the body with a cloth and extract it equally, so that he will soon faint.
When the patient's feet are affected, then you should push those areas back in, and quickly reduce the swelling, and gradually take hold of one foot and extend those areas little by little.
When they are situated between the thighs, then you command them to express it, and do let that evacuate through the condition, for so it will be discharged if God wills.
And if it is not discharged as we have commanded, then you return the fetus little by little until you place it according to the natural figure, for it will be discharged thereafter with a slight effort.
And if all that we have commanded is prohibited, then take of alum and dissolved gum, and pound them together in the mortar for good pounding, and then lay it over the woman's abdomen, just below the waist. And then make a decoction in clear water, until it reaches the hypochondria.
And when you see that the parts of her have become relieved, then perform a fumigation on her with mint and place it over her. And when you have performed the fumigation for an hour, then set it aside on a cloth, and then make her sneeze by tickling her nose, and remove it, and apply a light compression to the lower part of her abdomen, for the fetus will be discharged soon.
Lift the foot laterally with one of the patient's hands. Gently reduce the hand, but if you cannot reduce it, then lift the woman and attempt to dislocate it.
And if the patient cannot lie down, then place the juice over the lying place, and shake the patient's thighs with a strong concussion, and nearby administer liaments which you have prepared from mucilages.
And if the childbirth has come, then place the sizer over cheesecloth, and nearby study on the reduction of the hand, and restore the fetus according to its natural figure, and make the woman sneeze and command her to contract herself within a short time.
Place the fetus over the mother's abdomen with its back expanded and the mother's belly is at the front of her body. Have the midwife hold the fetus and nearby rotate that small one slowly, so that it becomes more easily placed.
And when it is restored to its natural position, then place over the mother's loins what we have prepared from oil and mucilages.
And nearby command her to urinate slowly, and when you have done this, then place the sizer over cheesecloth and command that it be inclined over the right flank, and nearby command that she contract herself; and make her sneeze with a gentle concussion. The fetus's exit has been prepared on the side.
When you make the incisions for the major hemorrhage according to this method, consider, and then cut the second incision with your knife so that it is evacuated of moisture.
And if the fetus is suspended over the face and neck, then cut the incision for the amniotic fluid, so that it is not retained and death occurs.
Then push the fetus into the internal parts while pausing the second incision as it fits, and tell the woman to take some deep breaths, and let it be gently expelled by her own efforts, if God wills it.
The exit of twins or multiple fetuses. Know that twins or multiple fetuses are naturally born, and sometimes even three or four are born, but this is rare and strange and needs to be investigated; yet the causes are generally natural, not supernatural.
And concerning these, whether they are multiple, one additional incision, and they are separated by ligature, distinguish those in the umbilical cord of each. Sometimes a few breaths are gently expelled thus as if it were a fetus by natural expulsion, and some a few breaths by non-laborious expulsion as we have recounted.
And if some are difficult labors you should bring about the delivery and proceed to what we have said about unnatural figures, then you cure those thus as we have recounted.
And if the midwife is skillful and does what she does with subtlety, and with delay, and be ingenious according to all figure as is prepared in her mind leading to health.
Remembrance of that which is formed in the matrix from embryos and are aborted.
Sometimes one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and more up to ten are formed in the matrix, and you must verify that a female aborts with six, and another with all ten formed, the cause of which is made by the measurement of the glorious sages.
And all this covers what is in the science of the midwife who must attend to that which seems to her like this, and then act according to what is appropriate.
Chapter LXXVI.
Of the extraction of the fetus when it is dead.
When you treat a dead fetus, as we have said in the division of medicine and it is not far from birth, you may be forced to use surgery more. Then consider whether the woman has good health and is not among those accidents for which her safety is feared.
Then place the woman lying on her back, and let her head be bent forward and her thighs elevated.
And the minister hold that one in two parts or tie it to the bed so that the body does not extend during the extraction of the fetus.
And then moisten the mouth of the mother with sweet-smelling oils and almond milk, fenugreek seed, and linseed.
And then the midwife places her hand on those oils and milk mixtures, and further insert her hand with facilitation into the mother, and then seek with her hand where the fingers should be placed in the fetus.
And in this place: then you consider if the wound is prepared to be placed on its head, and there you keep the fingers in the palms of him, or in the neck, or in the mouth, or in the palate, or let the beard, or in the clavicle of him, or in the nearby places of the ribs, or let the hypochondria.
But if the descent is on his feet, then in the instep, or in the middle of the ribs.
And make sure the finger is on your right hand, and curve it at that location which is between the fingers of your left hand, and insert your hand easily and place the finger in one of those locations which we have mentioned, until you reach the underlying cause.
And then place and keep another finger, or the third if necessary, so that it is an equal pressure, and not extension according to its straightness solely.
And let it be held at all times, so that the tension of the thread be alleviated as is done in拔出牙齿的拔除。
And explore there where the extension should be softened; and if any part of it is retained, then the midwife should apply some of her known ointment and skillfully insert and rotate those things that are retained.
And if the part of the fetus is forgotten, then the fingers should be inserted where it may be; and do so while all of the fetus is not yet forgotten.
And if the hand is placed in front of the other, and it is not possible to reduce it due to the constriction, then cover that part with a cloth; and extract it while all of it is forgotten, and incise it at the wrist or at the elbow.
And do so with the other hand and with both feet.
And if the head of the fetus is large, or it experiences constriction during extraction, or water is pressed in its head, then insert sponge-tipped forceps between the fingers and open the head to drain the water, or use an instrument called "alundat" to evacuate it, the shape of which will be described in the chapter on other instruments, which follows this.
And the operation seems so great by nature: and then cut that part open, or draw that part out as we have said; then extract the bones with forceps.
And if the head is swollen and constricted, you should incise the furcula, then cut into where the moisture which is in the foot has infiltrated.
But if it is not complicated, and does not respond to incision, then you should incise the head as soon as possible according to what is convenient for you.
And if the swelling in the abdomen is suppurated or is in hydrops, then you should perforate it where the moisture is located.
But if the wound is on his feet, then the direction of it towards the mouth of the vein is light.
But if it is constricted, you should incise the abdomen and foot, then you should extract that which you have wrapped around your hand, and cut into the abdomen and foot where what is within flows out.
But if the other limbs are cold and return the head, then the midwife intervenes with her left hand; but if the mouth of the mother is opened, then insert your hand into the space under the chin, seek out the head, and pull it in between the fingers towards the mouth of the mother, and then insert one or two fingers into her and pull them out.
And if the mother's mouth is narrowed by an abscess, and such an abscess occurs in him, then ensure that it is not squeezed; first, ensure that you administer effusion of wet, fatty causes. And administer plasters; and follow the patient with waters that soften and moisten.
And if the pain is on the patient's side, then if possible, lance it: and administer what we have said about the live abscess.
And if that is not possible, then incise it into pieces, and extract it.
And ensure that you do not leave any cause inside the patient.
And when you have completed your operation, then administer what we have said about the cure for abscesses by cauterizing those that occur from the mother.
And if there is a flux of blood, then apply cold waters and administer the other cure.
And I have already seen a woman whose belly contained a dead fetus, and nearby another pregnancy began, so the dead fetus remained. It happens that after a long time an abscess forms in the breast; and when the wound is open, it begins to drain.
And I was called to cure it, and treated it for a long time, but the wound did not heal properly.
Then I applied some strong attracting plasters to it, and extracted one bone, and after several days, extracted another bone; and I was too amazed, for in the breast there is no bone.
And then you will find that they are of the bones of the dead foot.
Then you will ignite the wound, and extract from it dead bones, the matter existing in the socket's dispositions, and having visibly done so in such a manner for long times, correct of it a little with the arm.
And you should not consider this strange, but rather that in this is science and aid to what the physician artfully administers for cure.
Of the forms of the instruments that are necessary to extract the foot.
Form of the vertigo from which the thigh is opened:
This is the form of the stretcher on which you place the thighs, to which position two vertigos are at the ends of two rods. But let this vertigo be hollow, more slender in construction, and made of elm or wood of young shoots.
And the width of each wound should be two fingers' breadth and the margin on both sides one finger's breadth, and the length of each is a palm and a half; and in the middle location of two wounds are two stitches of that manner, the ones already tightened, whose length is the span of a palm and a little more, and the width of each is two fingers, or a little more.
And these two additional stitches should be inserted in the mouth of the wound to keep it open when you revolve the two prescribed vertigges.
Form another similar to that one, subtle and light:
Let it be made of threads of flax or hemp according to the likeness of forceps. However, at the extremity of it, there are two additional stitches as you can see, and the length of those stitches is about a palm, and the width of each is two fingers.
And when you want to open the wound, then place the woman on her side with her feet hanging down, opening what is between her thighs. And then open your hand with the instrument as you would with scissors equally according to the quantity you want from the depth of the mother's mouth until the metrona does what you want.
The form of vertigo which the ancients would say:
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:
Forma de amisidat am le qual es conterit le cap gran
And it is similar to forceps with teeth at the extremity, as you see, and sometimes it is made long like forceps according to this form, as you see, with teeth similar to sheep's teeth, upon which it is inserted and held. Forma de amisidat pauc:
Forma de uncus having one spine:
Forma de uncus havent duas spinas:
Shape of a spatula having two ends in which the head is to be incised:
Shape of two lateral spatulas:
All these instruments are exercised, and when more species of those are multiplied, the artisan should prepare them, making their operation lighter and more convenient.
And even if the work of these instruments is already prepared by you, you should still prepare them, for the necessity of those is not excusable.
Extraction of the second child.
When the second child is retained, you should induce labor, when you command the patient to hold her breath, and then apply a stimulating fomentation, and firmly place your hand over the mouth and nose of the patient. If this succeeds in expelling the fetus, it is good.
And otherwise, when you take a needle and perforate in the covering a tract and pause at those herbs burning the mouth of the main one, as with calamus, rue, nettle, chamomile, scikado Arabic, cinnamon wood, and santoor. All these herbs or some of them may be submerged in water in the needle, and pause that over the fire.
And then place a cane tube in the mouth of the main herb, and hold that so that the vapor comes to the cavity of the main herb.
And then make that sneeze as we have said, and the second one shall be performed quickly.
If this cure does not succeed further, then command the midwife to submerge her left hand in sesame oil or in the powder of aleertia, and then insert that into the nose and search for the second one with that, as you have found. If it is attached in the root of the main herb, then insert your hand according to what we have recommended, and when you have found the second one, extract it little by little so that the main herb does not fall due to the strong attraction. Before you turn the patient's back to the right and left with ease.
And if the mouth of the vein is constricted, we have already recommended the cure by cauterization and treatment of the wound with herbs.
But if it is not fully resolved by all the causes we have recommended, then guard that you do not fatigue it in iterations of abstraction, but rather lead what has succeeded to the mouth of the vein to the woman's thigh, and properly anoint and apply tetra-pharmaceuticals; for that will cause it to dissolve and resolve over several days.
But when it should be removed, raise the bad humor to the head and to the stomach, and this will bring the illness; then you must administer fumigations and what is suitable for this.
But some of the Ancients already recommended fumigations with nard and dry figs.
Form of an instrument with which a woman is fumigated below to retain menstruation and the second period:
It should be made of wool or of hair.
And place the fine end in the coign and the broad end over the fire, and the fumigation be placed on the brasiers of the fire.
And hold that there until the fumigation is consumed and then repeat another.
For the cure of the anus of an unperforated child.
The child cries and its anus is not perforated, which have been closed with a fine ligature. Then the midwife should perforate with her said ligature; otherwise, perforate it with a sharp spatula, and take care that it does not touch the membrane.
And place it over that wound infused in wine and oil; and cure that with ointment until it heals.
But if you fear it is obstructed, then place a cannula through the traunch for several days, and block it when the child wants to defecate.
And when there is an obstruction of the anus due to the consolidation of a boil or abscess; then cut into that consolidation, and proceed to treat it as we have said for the cure and the lead.
For the treatment of fistulas that discharge.
The fistulas that discharge at the side, with pus below, and which are located near the anus outside or in the space of one side.
And it is a fistula or abscess.
And when that abscess is old and comes from watery white moisture or subtle corrosion, sometimes some of these fistulas penetrate.
And those that penetrate are known by the symptoms of those due to discharge and windiness; sometimes the patient complains of discharge, and strongly the worms are present.
And some of those fistulas penetrate into the space between the bladder and the flesh of the groin; and some penetrate between the hip joints and the notch of the pubis.
And in distinguishing between a fistula that penetrates into the anus and one that does not, you should insert your digit into the anus, and introduce a thin probe of reed or iron into the fistula when there is no pus.
But if there is pus in that, then introduce a thin probe of lead or horsehair into it, and feel the probe or hair with your digit.
And if you do not feel it at all, nor observe any cause of evacuation, worm, or obstruction, as we have said, then know that it does not penetrate, and proceed with the treatment.
And when the fistula penetrates into the bladder or the flesh of the groin, its significance is an increase in urine flow from that and a prohibition to it until the area is medically consolidated.
But if it penetrates into the joint of the groin or into the bone and causes pain in the circuit, then a sign of it is that the tenta permeates here if there is not tortuosity in the bone, and pain in the circuit of the part; and that from it there is always gout; and it does not avail in that medicacio, nor is consolidated by ointment.
And in all those fistulas that penetrate, there is not complete cure, and the cure of them is labor and vainness of the leaves of doctors over which they firm.
But in that which does not penetrate and is not old, cure by iron is hoped for according to what I will recount to you, and that which we already have and prepare.
And that gout affects your feet in the second toe and elevates the legs within them, the thighs incline toward the abdomen, and then insert a lead or iron probe into the fistula if there is tortuosity, so you can feel where the probe permeates.
And if that area around the neck seems ill, then carefully insert your thumb in the neck.
And if you feel in your thumb that the tumor is already partially revealed and can be easily penetrated, or something between your thumb and the tumor or flesh, then you can certainly determine that it is penetrable; and then do not operate on that, for it is not where the cure lies, as we have said.
But some may say that it is sound in some men and not in others.
And concerning the treatment in which hope of healing is placed, you should heat a fine cautery according to the size of the fistula, as previously described, and insert that heated cautery into the fistula until it reaches around the neck; then repeatedly insert it two or three times within which you determine that all those tissues adjacent to the fistula are properly adhered, resembling feather quills.
And then cure the area with cloths wrapped in bandages until all those tissues that are adhered are thoroughly treated, and subsequently cure it with medicines generating and consolidating flesh. If it is healed, well and good; but if not, then it will not be cured in any time by another treatment.
And if the probe enters but does not penetrate into the rectum, you say which one is in the anus, and between that and the probe that is a veil of flesh or skin, and wash the fistula in what seeps from the surface of the leg, then dry the leg from the beginning of the fistula, and you dry the probe itself, and in the fistula where the drying reaches the place where the extremity of the probe passes, through the probe it is cleansed and healed.
And then cleanse those fistulous tissues which are assembled around the anal canal and do not drain from any other cause.
But if a flow of blood comes between you and your operation when you have exposed those tissues, then let the greater part of it be removed, and for the light pus use a cauterizing instrument either with fire or with acute medicine. For the cautery with fire, adjust it to give two good doses: one adjustment of those tissues tightened, and one excision of the blood by the elimination of moisture.
And then cure that which is caused by water or by third-degree burns before the area swells, and then cure the wound with a thick ointment that generates and consolidates flesh.
And in medicines where there is stiffness and excitation; when once restored it is cured and you fear no recurrence.
And if the fistula has penetrated into the pelvis and is long from the surface of the body, then insert your finger into the anus and inquire about it.
And if there is a tendon and between you and her it is covered with cicatrix or flesh, and is close to the penetration, then it is not an operation in it but rather according to the way of faith and hope.
That cause is to administer in it one of three ways: either cauterize that as we have said; or excise it until you achieve the cavity of it so that it is possible for you to insert and cure it properly; and do not proceed with cutting for fear of injuring the muscle containing the cord, and doing harm over the malady by excessive intervention; and then cure that as we have said which will be greatly healed; or elongate that cicatrix and cleanse that part which excise that close to the anus, as we have said, either with a tendon or another sharp instrument, and then modify those fistulated tissues which are in the cavity between where you can reach pericrustation; and then strive to perform the restoration of the entire wound by cutting, and if the opening above is not consolidated, and rupture the open fistula at the part of the anus, it will be easier for the malady. And sometimes the fistula is closed this way: when you insert the probe into the fistula, and place it in the cavity of the buttock near the surface of the body and around the margin of the anus, then take a punctured extremity of it as if it were an awl prepared according to this form:
And insert it there wrapped in several threads or around them; then insert a probe with thread into the fistula until you reach its cavity.
But if it penetrates into the margin of the anus more deeply, then you extract the thread from that by doing as I have said to insert your hand into the anus; then extract the end of the thread and adjust both ends equally, strengthen each one, and leave it for a day or two. When more of the thread has been incised into the flesh, strengthen well that part where those muscles are incised between the two ends of the thread.
And then cure the wound as it is consolidated and healed.
If the openings of the fistula are not penetrable, then make them penetrable in any manner you prepare, but do it gently so as not to tear the skin. Then place something inside that will heal.
The shape of the spinal spike for which the fistula is cut: the curvature of which is acute and the other part is not acute, so as not to tear what is unnecessary, thus you see.
For the suturing of hemorrhoids where there is infection at the site of those.
Hemorrhoids can be of two kinds, for some appear as if they are made of charcoal, or others resemble grape seeds. And some hemorrhoids are small and large, and the infection flows from them constantly and is one, as well as the spots, and the external part of the anus, at its extremities.
But the external hemorrhoids are according to those with less humidity, from which yellowish water or a little of bloody discharge continues, and are according to the color of the body.
And the treatment for that which is inside the belly is to command the patient to lie down and press between where the belly bulges and the veins appear. Then you lift up and suspend with your fingers those which you feel with your hand, and then apply pressure to them gently.
But if your fingers cannot feel them due to the moisture and softening of those parts, then take rough cloth or coarse or flaxen wool, and extract them with the tweezers mentioned, and then apply pressure to them and sprinkle some finely ground substances over them near the application, so that they act as a cautery; or cauterize them according to what is described in the chapter on cauterization. And then treat them with the other treatment until they are healed.
And if the anus does not yield to evacuation, then apply a small bite of the crista (a sharp instrument) to the patient's anus, and wash it with the fluid from the belly that allows slight evacuation when the patient strains.
If the hemorrhoids are outside the anus and the cause is slight, then you take those with your finger or pinch them with one finger, cut them, and later cure them with what we have said when they are healed.
And if you have a cut, ensure that you suture it according to this manner: take thread wrapped around a needle and carefully extract the hemorrhoids from above, making the thread penetrate through one part into the other, wrapping the two ends of the thread around the parts behind the needle, in a lateral direction; strengthen the hemorrhoid with strong stitches, and later remove the needle.
And do this to all of them, leaving one unsewn so that the excess blood can flow from there.
And place a warm cloth on the anus in olive oil or ointment; place this over the anus and command the patient to rest. And leave it there until it heals; when healed, treat them with ointments or other treatments until they are completely cured.
And since they are ancient and not valid in that medicine, you should lance them either at the tip of the spatum or with your finger where they are made soft and let them drain; then cover those with a poultice, which prevents consolidation. And place those that are consolidated under treatment.
And when you lance them with strong incision at the first sign of infection and they become inflamed; then treat those that are healed.
Know that an ulcer, this is crucial, and it should be round according to the color of the body, resembling a turnip head. It occurs throughout the body but mostly in the areas around the feet and fingers, and due to these pains, you must treat them.
And then cut what is in the circle of the key and hold it with tongs or forceps, and eradicate it from its root; and place care there.
And if you wish, cauterize as follows, which is described in its chapter.
More of a veruca is a small sharp pointed round prominence on the surface of the body, and spots often appear in the veins of children.
And the treatment for it is to extend and cut that, or tighten it with a needle or with a thread that holds. And if you wish, cauterize it as we have said, with fire or with sharp medicine.
More of a formica is a small fibrous or fistulated prominence on the surface of the body anterior to the groin, and when you palpate it, it resembles the sting of an ant, and it is formed around the body.
And the treatment is that you take a needle of iron or a lance, strong, and place it over the tumor between which you contain it with the ring of the needle from the parts of the body; then return your hand around the needle as you enter what is in the circuit of the tumor, and place it in the center of the flesh, and that you remove the tumor from its root.
And if you wish, do this with a needle of reed or iron according to this form:
Let the upper part of the needle be fine, blunt (i.e., unperforated), wrapped so that above it the learning of the hand is shielded and the revolution of that [needle] is concealed.
And if you wish, cauterize the tumor according to what is said in the cauterization of athylos at the head of the cautery.
In the manner of the instruments that you will administer with great care.
Sometimes the instruments are made of silver or tin or reed that has been melted or hammered; sometimes they are made of those instruments small and large according to those you will administer, for that which is administered in the treatment of small children should be small; and of those whose buttocks are swollen or painful, the instruments for them should be small.
The form of striking hard and often:
The head of the cannula above which the bag is tied should be wide according to this manner; and there should be a place where the bag is tied as you see.
And the lower end of it, which is inserted into the anus, should be closed (i.e., not open) like a lion's mouth, slightly narrowed; and on one side of the tube there should be two openings, and on the other side one opening, with the width of the opening according to the size of the rays and somewhat larger.
And the bag in which the medicines for the beast's bladder or sheepskin are placed should be about a palm in length.
And it should be pierced with several openings as it is coiled; and the space between the openings should be about the thickness of a finger.
Then insert into these openings strong raw honey or something prepared with it; and adjust the bag to that. When the bag is placed there, make it straight at the head of the strike between two distinct ones with firm constriction, and then strike each opening: More specifically, the quality of striking at each one is that you fill the bag with medicine, which should be warmed according to the quantity of tolerance of the patient; and ensure that it is neither too thick nor too cold.
And the patient is placed on his back, elevates his hips, and places a cushion under him; then applies oil or honey or fenugreek or similar to the tip of the cautery; inserts it into the anus, and the minister takes the bag and expresses it with two strokes, expelling this with force entirely from the intestines through the rectum.
And if the medicine forces it to evacuation, have it as much as it can; and if it sleeps for the whole night, it is better for recovery.
More so if you intubate that in cases of stomach distension and its evacuation, then repeatedly apply the cautery until it is healed.
And if in the anus there are hemorrhoids or abscesses, then use a fine and hollow catheter, among the catheters that children use.
For the cure of wounds.
And I have already said in the division of the cure of the plagues what was appropriate for the free and I say thus the cure of those more and of medicines according to the completion.
Therefore say that the plagues are diversified according to what causes the plagues and according to the place on which the plaques fall.
And the causes why such stones form plagues are thus: by a stone in the bladder, or an incision of the vein or sword, or a blow with a lance, or a blow with a stick, or an arrow, or something similar to those causes.
More so, the plagues that affect parts of the body are thus: a plague that affects the head, or the neck, or the feet, or the belly, or the groin, and something similar to those affecting the members.
And I am now recounting the cure of some plagues, so that you may apply that reasoning and rule to other plagues.
And I will begin with simple head plagues, for the recall of composite ones will come at the beginning of the third capita.
When an injury occurs in the head with pain and is not a fracture, consider: if it is due to a fall or blow, and has already crushed the brainstem so severely and extensively that you fear an imminent onset of apoplexy, then you should immediately trepan the skull and perform venesection of the cephalic vein as soon as possible; and you withdraw the blood according to the quantity of its virtue if no other reason prevents it; especially if the blood extracted from the injury is minimal.
And the venesection should be from the opposite side of the injured area; and precautions should be taken to prevent swelling, edema, and heavy foods.
But if some cause prevents bloodletting, then reduce the diet and do not approach meat or wine.
And place your hand over the injury, if apoplexy with pus occurs, apply heat in olive oil alone or in wine that is infused with astringents.
But if you are certain of apoplexy with pus, then place your hand over the injury, if it is recent from its own blood and the air has not changed that powder which I will collect soon.
And if the air has already changed there, then place yourself over some ointments until it is healed.
And if the wound is large or due to a tear and the edges do not fit properly due to swelling, then adjust those with sutures as I will instruct regarding the suturing of wounds.
And if the wound is already exposed to bone and flesh, and it is not a retention but a small suspensorium, then incise that area and properly treat the wound with medicines, restoring the flesh in its place. Command the patient to eat foods in which they take pleasure: bread and vegetables similar to their usual diet, until they recover.
And if you find putrefaction in the flesh and it does not adhere to the bone, then incise all that area and let out the pus, and properly treat that.
And if in these wounds an artery or vein through which blood flow can occur is present and it has not been incised by medicines, then inquire about the artery. If you find that part unincised, then incise it with a lancet or ligate it; and if necessity compels you such that what we have said does not apply, then cauterize it before the blood flow is abated.
And if these plaques are simple and small, when the cause of them is light; try that you powderize this powder over those, which shall consolidate before the air changes those.
And the manner of the powder is this: take one part of turpentine, two parts of dragon's blood, three parts of caustic but non-extinct substance; mix them all together and sift them, and apply this powder to the area, tightly constrained within a good seal over that adhesive, and let it coagulate with the dragon's blood.
And then strengthen it above with powder and leave it there, not removing it while it is thus unapostemated, for the medicine will not be absorbed until it is healed.
And sometimes alone it makes a small cautery, when you do not have turpentine or dragon's blood in your possession.
And this method of operation is used for large plaques when you deem it necessary to apply them and stretch them, and for recent plaques with their own blood, which the air has not yet altered.
And if the air has altered them, especially when it is summer, then do not understand the position of this powder, but rather take care as we have said, try that you place yourself over those woolen bandages, or that you place yourself on those poultices made from flour of coriander in water and honey that turn red; and then take care during the other treatment until they are healed.
And if you encounter a small fracture in bone, then you extract this with your fingers.
And I will say the treatment for fractures of the head in what follows.
Of the wounds of the neck.
And if the wound occurs in the neck, then there is no difference in treatment, and it is similar to a wound on the head when simple.
And if the nerve of the neck is cut or an artery, then if it is a nerve, do not attempt to treat it but rather avoid any treatment that causes strong constriction, as is done with ziniar and zegi, which are vitriol and similar to them in their effect on nerves and counteract those. And do not place any cause over the wound from cold at all, for the substance of the nerves is cold and their continuity is in the brain, which is the root of all members.
And if it is cured with light medicines, such as a wash with water two or several times infused in olive oil, whether pressed or unpressed, and thyme when washed with water twice and the other herbs mingling according to this manner, and applying it moist.
And if the wound is large, then administer suturing, or draw the edges of the wound together, and subsequently cure it with powders once it is healed.
And if the wound is deep or has accidents in the lower part where pus has formed, then puncture it in the most congested area.
And if a vein is already incised in the wound and there is a flow of blood, then separate or dry it out, or ligate it, or cautery it if necessity demands it for that.
If the spinal vertebrae of the patient are fractured or dislocated, and the veins in the neck have been saved, then you adjust the lips of the wound with sutures over the spine and do not touch that; straighten that and place it back into its natural position, and firmly strengthen that with proper structure for some days; and after, treat that with ointments where there is stiffness and excitation until it is healed.
If the injury in the bone has already caused damage, then tap that area, and if there are fragments of bone in it, extract all those you can; and what is not suitable for extraction, leave it until the injury decays, separates, and the inflammation subsides.
And if the injury is recent, then dust that area with the powder recommended to you. If a fistula has formed in the injury, then treat that with what will be remembered further in this chapter.
If it is a lance wound or a cut, and you measure its depth, then consider more if from the wound there is edema when the pain arises; then know that the wound is fatal.
And if there is no depth to the wound and the wound is recent with fresh blood, then you should apply powder for the first hour, and do not press it so that the blood is not retained in the depth of the wound and does not return to the heart, and worsen the wound, but apply an attractive ointment, and remove the powder after two days.
And if the ointment is not present, then you apply to the wound as much as necessary so that what has of moisture drains out; and make the wound sleep over it so that what is in it flows out.
And if already three days or more have passed from the wound and no spasms or heart tremor nor constriction of the lungs occur, and other good dispositions of it are present, then know that the wound is saved; and then treat it with salt water and the other cure until it is healed.
If the healing of it is refused, and all time is opened, then you know that a fistula is made; cure that according to its chapter.
And if the wound is due to a stab or a cut, and it is simple on the surface of the foot or the hand, then cure that as preceded by suturing, if it is large, or with powder, if it is small.
And if it has already pierced the bone, and you must incise deeper to extract those pieces, then twist the wound and lift to extract those pieces, if they are separate. And if they are not separate, then let the pieces rot in the wound, as their extraction is alleviated.
And for other accidental wounds in other members, the treatment in cure is as we have said.
Of the wounds of the abdomen.
The disorder that occurs in the abdomen is either great, or small, or mixed.
A small disruption is made difficult by another method, and I know that the reduction of it is more difficult if you do not make incisions to allow its contents to enter their proper place quickly, as it opens and becomes swollen making the instrument difficult.
Therefore, the best disruption is median, for in that case, the reduction of the intestine is not difficult, as it is difficult in the two species mentioned before.
And know that the suturing of the abdomen is done in four ways, but two sutures are common and agree with the sutures of other parts of the body.
And two other specific sutures communicate with the other parts, but more properly belong to the suturing of the abdomen.
And I urge you in each exposure and declaration.
So say that when the swelling is small and some cause of the intestine has passed through it, making it difficult to reduce it back, then this is in one of two ways: either due to the smallness of the rupture as we have said, or when the intestine is swollen due to the coldness of the air.
And when this is so, then know that you should cool it by submerging a sponge or a wet cloth in pure water, or by using squill, cyperus, and spica, and wrap the intestine in that until the swelling resolves.
And on some occasions, it is better to use the water with styptic substances in resolving the swelling.
And when you see the swelling resolve, then moisten the intestine in water in which hyssop and mallows are steeped, for by this the pain of the patient is alleviated due to little cause.
But if the pain in the area around this treatment is necessary, then incise the rupture a little with an instrument on which are inserted ligatures.
And the first cure is better when it is properly a non-sewing, and not an occupation to be dried soon necessary and deficiency.
Of the instrument, see its form:
One part of the knife is sharp, and the other part not sharp, and the tip is fine, but not too fine like a needle; it should be slightly blunt.
And thus, when the wound is enlarged and the intestine protrudes, ensure that its reduction follows its natural form, in its proper place. If possible, do it over the area, for this is better.
More when the disruption is wide and is in the lower part of the abdomen, then make the patient lie on their back, and place their hands farther apart than their shoulders; and if it is in the upper part of the abdomen, then place their head and feet farther apart than the other parts.
And if the disruption is in one of the two parts of the abdomen, then place your hand and your consideration there for some time so that the part where the wound is becomes farther than the other.
And thus you should apply this in large wounds and in medium-sized wounds.
And in small wounds, place what you have prepared, and ensure that the minister stands between your assistants, holding all the disruption with his hand and adjusting the edges of the wound, and then uncover that to the one who will suture for any cause nearby.
And this is the common method of suturing: take the needle, or a counterneedle according to the width of the wound; then leave from the extremity of the disruption at the tip of the ring finger, and tighten the needle once, or another you do not put thread in both extremities of the codena, at both extremities of the ciphac that is left the codena from the inner parts, while you make it penetrate from that part; and you have already added two extremities of the codena and two extremities of the ciphac, and so four orders are made.
And then tighten the thread doubly in the circuit of the needle, and several times from both sides together, and then add the edges of the wound for a decent closure; and then leave the thickness of the finger and place another needle in it, and then tie that with thread thus as you did with the first needle; and do not cease to do this if necessary among the needles until you complete all the tension of the wound.
And if the needles are of medium hardness between subtlety and coarseness, for the fine ones penetrate the flesh lightly; and the coarse ones are difficult to manipulate in the wound, therefore they should be both subtle in fineness and coarse in hardness.
And it should not be that the needle is placed at two ends of the wound closely together, for then the flesh would be lightly incised and the wound would close before its healing.
And they should not be overlength in suturing lest the wound hinder its healing.
And then incise the ends of the needles so that they do not slide out of their proper place; and place powder expanded from all parts over the suturing, which contain the ends of the needles; and leave those in until you can tell that the wound has already healed.
And these needles and threads for suturing are more convenient in small wounds, for only one or two needles are needed for their suturing.
And the second suture is performed as follows: and you must suture the four extremities, from the shoulder to two extremities of the hip, in one go, with a needle wrapped equally in subtlety and thickness.
And when you have the needle penetrated these four extremities, withdraw the needle from that stitch started from which, so that the thread retraces its path back to the beginning, going down from above, so that the suture is like a seam in cloth where the threads are tightened.
And pause between each suture the width of a little finger.
And this suture is known to men.
And with this suture, I closed the wound which was inflicted upon a man in his belly, which had been cut by a刀具，伤口的大约手掌大小，位于腹部两侧约一掌宽处，是肢体中部的破裂；然后我将那个部位在伤口穿透后forty hours.
The wound is consolidated in the space of fifteen days or so, and heal that and it is cured; then those viscera are returned to their positions.
And the other doctors had judged that it was not cured; by miracle fire, for I did not heal that without ointment, for it was in a place where neither ointment nor any medicine could reach, but I placed my hand over the wound as an old woman would two times a day and applied frequent wet dressings with honey water until the fire healed.
And I will speak of two kinds of stitching proper according to the narration of Paracelsus.
And you should start with the stitching of the chain, and insert the needle from one side through to the other inside.
And thus, as the needle penetrates through the chain and along that thread according to the correct path and the length of the entire body, you leave the end of the thread on which you have inserted the needle; then pass the needle from the other side inside to the outside in the other end of the stitch.
And when you have made the penetration, then make another penetration in that limb at the external part from the internal part; leave the end of the catheter that is on this side, and insert the needle into the other internal part from the external part.
And make the penetration with your penetration which you make penetrate into the catheter at the end of the limb which is in the internal part until all of it penetrates.
And then begin from this side and push it in the catheter at the end that is of the catheter on this other side, and remove the needle which you have penetrated, and then return it into the catheter with the end of the catheter that is on this other side; and remove it from the catheter which is on his side.
And do this one time and again, and do this one more time or another time until you sew everything that is external according to that example.
And the sum of this manner of suturing is that you sew with thread which you sew the skins, try that you sew the catheter one time from the part of the end of the needle, and leave the other time within until the operation is complete.
The second type of suturing which you should do as Gualia does, and this is by talking about it and recommending it, is that you suture that according to semilitut, which some doctors suture that way, in an effort that all parts are added to their corresponding part to him convenient by nature; and they apply the extremity of one of them to the extremity of another, and this is done as I have recommended to you.
When you place the needle at the extremity of the tissue from the outside, make it penetrate into the inside part in that direction, leaving two ends of the thread; then, turn the needle and make it penetrate from the outside to the inside with the other two ends of the thread.
Then turn those threads, and make each part from the inside penetrate into the part from the outside with two ends of the thread that are not in the opposite layer.
And this method of suturing is better than the common loose suture, and it is the suturing method of which I have previously reminded you.
This is the saying of Gualia
And more some would say, for the belly wound, it is corrected with two needles, so that you insert into these a thread, and starting from the needle insertion, make that one penetrate through the other layer according to the stitches which equalize the wounds.
And know that when the disruption is in the middle part of the belly, then the stitch there is more difficult than in other parts of the belly.
More the judgment of plague treatment is the judgment of other plagues.
That cause is when you obtain the recent plague from its own poison before the air alters it, and you reduce the intestine and sew it properly, then place it over that red powder.
And if the air has already altered the plague, then place it over that, some ointments which are present and cause them to dry up and break the threads, and be consolidated tightly; and cure it in this way as is the treatment of other plagues until it is healed.
But if you do not have the medicines at hand, then pause over that for now, rather than starting to administer it frequently, and change it every two hours during the day, as shown to you, until it is healed, in which case you would not need any other medical treatments when the sores are simple.
But if you fear that the sore might communicate infection to the main limbs, then you should submerge lion's wool in well-refined oil or in linseed oil, and place it around the areas between the joints and leave the openings.
And if there is pain or putrefaction in their intestines, for several hours you should apply it, then compress that with a piece of stiptic black Egyptian cloth, especially if the inflammation has affected the intestine and caused an exitura penetrating into its cavity.
And know that the one from the large intestine is more mildly healing than that from the fine intestines.
And it is difficult to heal, for the intestine called "gut" does not receive healing from any sore that enters it; this is due to the great number of veins in it, its large size, the fine nature of that part, and its proximity to the nature of nerves.
If what you are treating is the skin, and you obtain that recently, reduce it according to your skill with which you return the intestines equally.
If it has passed to the space and is already red or black, when you cauterize that with a hot iron over the part that is discolored, so that it comes to have a flow of pus, for in the skin there are veins and arteries.
Then cut away what is another from that ligament, and place two ends of the hot iron at the edges left by the wound, so that over you the attraction to it is alleviated; close the opening of the skin and the emission of the arm of the wound.
Remembrance of the wounds when they occur in the intestine.
When disruption occurs in the intestine and is small, it is possible that it can be reduced in some people, for I saw one who had been wounded in his abdomen by a lance strike, and the wound was old, having become a fistula, and healed from the treatment and distension.
Then I pursue the cure of him whether he was not fixed in the healing of him, but strive to subtilize that among which is health and the place is consolidated.
And when I see the place already consolidated, examine the patient that you discover over his accident of ill in his own belly; and do not discover any through this bad accident and harm his inner workings by eating and drinking, and further immerse him in baths and exercise his words.
And some experienced ones have said that when an inflammation is in the intestine and small, then you must bind it according to this manner: and you should take pieces of wax from large candles; and further adjust the two lips of the inflammation and place one piece of wax with its mouth open over the two lips of the inflammation; therefore when it takes on those and strengthens its mouth, cut off the head of it, for it adheres and does not dissolve.
And further place another piece of wax nearby, and do not cease to make pieces of wax one after another according to the quantity of the entire inflammation.
And then return that and the hernia to their cavity; and when healing the intestine, fix those adjacent ends inside the intestine until it is healed; and do not damage the patient in any way.
And it is possible that the intestine be pierced with fine thread made from the adjacent intestinal tissue, which is finer than a needle; and you should take the end of this thread of the intestine, make it sharp, and then bring the end of it with fine thread wrapped around it, and insert that thread into needles and tie it to the intestine, and return it to its disruption.
And this method of suturing with threads is simply done out of trust and hope.
But if the wound is large and extensive, especially in one of the fine intestines, then there is only a slight hope, and it may not heal completely.
Of the cure for abscesses and fistulas.
Know that any wound or abscess when enveloped and left to fester, turning into an ulcer, not healing completely and discharging continuously for a long time without resolving, in whatever part of the body it may be, is universally named a fistula and we call it an abscess.
And according to truth, fistula is a fibrous, hard, white node, in which there is no pain and which has its cavity like that of an abscess; therefore, it is named that way, i.e., ulcer.
And in some people, it is a moist node, which gets inflamed; and the moisture is expelled in some hours. And sometimes this moisture is hot, small, large, and fine.
All those causes have been shown, and the signs of them and their cure by medicines in this division.
And cover thus so that you may know the cure for fistula which is caused by surgical operation with the hand.
And know that fistula can occur in all parts of the body; for those are fistulas that reach the great veins and arteries, or the nerves, or the liver, or the intestine, or the bladder, or to some of the ribs, or to one of the vertebrae, or to some joint composed thus like that of the hand and foot; and these are those that are near the main part and resemble it.
And thus of these fistulas that proceed in this manner they are among the illnesses of difficult cure, and do not receive a cure, and the occupation with them is labor and ignorance.
And if any of these fistulas is deep such that it does not reach the locations mentioned, and you hope for its cure and want to gain knowledge of it, then try with a probe or a needle. If the fistula follows a straight course, you will be able to find it.
If the fistula is tortuous, then investigate with that of lead, for lead, due to the lightness of its body, is alleviated and curved to reduce the tortuosity.
If the fistula has horrible movements, it is not possible for you to signify about it with a probe.
Then christetrize the openings with their own openings, for the humidity by which you christetrize that one will affect the other openings and flow from them.
And then inquire meticulously, according to the manner in which you can know if here it is flesh or nerve, and whether the fistula's cavity is distant or nearby, or whether it is a fistula with only opening movements and is entirely above what you use of your strength, through your inquiry, upon which you inquire about the patient, and by your compression with your hand on the area, and the appearance of the significations and the causes of the swelling.
And when you have stood by all those causes in their true position, then go to the cure according to confidence: for you consider now if it is a nearby apparent fistula or in a place solid, distant from the joint, or from the nerve, or from the artery, or from the vein, or from one of the places which I and you call.
When you dry the fistula as described earlier from its narration, and stop what is in that filtratio and of corrupted flesh, and what is born in the orifice of the flesh, or theith and similar, cure that within so that it may be healed.
But if the fistula is of great depth and straight, then you must enter it in the preon until it is as deep as possible, and thoroughly remove all corrupted flesh; and then administer sharp medicines wrapped in cloths, and insert those into the cavity of the fistula, which you have grasped with forceps.
And do this with that several times until the sharp medicine corrodes all that is rotten in the cavity of the fistula and the corrupted flesh.
And then restore it by applying ointments that generate healthy flesh until it is healed.
But if it is not healed by this, then you cauterize it as we have previously recommended.
If the cause of the fistula is bone and you must certify this, then inquire about that dry and that moist one according to what we have recommended, if you do not prohibit any cause of vein or nerve or of principal member as we have said.
But if the bone is exposed and there is some corruption and blackness in it, then you must incise into that area until the corruption is completely drained; and then cure that part as the flesh within it heals.
And if it is not healthy and you graft another piece of flesh as you do, then you must know that you have not completely eradicated the corruption; then you expose it again thoroughly and carefully explain its nature and purification with your final fortification, and then restore that area.
And so if it is healthy, that is good; but if not, then you must know that the corruption is deep within the body, which you have not reached, and then in that case, you should simply leave it alone.
And if the corrupted bone is small, or if it is possible to extract it with forceps, then you should remove it with fine forceps that are suitable for this.
And if there are bone diseases, then carefully perform the extraction of all of them, and do not leave any due to your strength.
And if there are any contrariness due to humidity, and in their incision there is neither fear nor error, then incise those ligaments or muscles if they are here, and deliver the bones.
And if you are not prepared to expose the bones at your time, then pause over the area that can be freed from it, and leave it in a place near those bones of muscle and ligaments, and guard the area that is not yet consolidated, and keep the section you have incised during your operation tightly closed.
And if you fear, pause over the joint submerged in warm oil, or in Egyptian balm, or in any of the green ointments, until they can be freed from it, and when the bones are free from it, perform the ablution, and the traction is alleviated.
And if it is a large bone such as the hip or thigh bone or similar, and what is corrupted in it affects only its surface, then rush that part with resin only behind to where the darkness and corruption are stopped, and then restore the area.
If what is of it is corrupted and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to close that and incise thoroughly into the place where the corruption has occurred, and then cure that once it is consolidated.
And I advise you when examining a man in the groin to place that as an example and helper for your operation.
Let there be a young man around xxx years of age, to whom pain in the groin occurs, and from the internal parts maugava (a term similar to inflammation) is over the material inside the body where the matter has reached the groin, and the matter is of an abscess, a great abscess, and it is not due to an extrinsic cause.
And then there was prolonged time due to the error of the doctors as the abscess became established, and the matter motas (pus) began to accrue from it. The cure was nearly paused as the hernia fistulated, and you made small orifices in the mass where all of them discharged pus and the body's humors.
And then for about two years, the master doctors surround him, and none of them in that wisdom in the art, among whom I was called.
And there is the leg and the materials that were flowing from it through those openings into the body; and already the condition of that man was completely swollen and the color of his skin was yellowish.
And then I inserted the probe into one of those openings and guided the probe to the bone.
And then I examined all the openings closely and found which ones lead to them from all parts of the leg.
And then I positioned myself and incised over one of the openings among which I disclosed a part of the bone, and found the corrupted tissue, which was already terrible, corrupted, and discolored; and a part of the leg had already become corrupted where it had penetrated into the marrow.
And then I clamped what was revealed to me and prepared the part of the bone that was disclosed.
And I concluded that it is not in the bone but that corruption which abscides and constricts. And I had already razored it.
And then proceed to restore the fracture with consolidative medicines for a long time, and it is not yet consolidated.
And then you iterate and uncover over the bone according to the first discovery, and find continuous corruption in the bone.
And constrict that which appears to me from that corruption, and then you proceed to perform the cure and restoration, but it is not restored.
And then you uncover it on the other side and do not cease to incise the bone little by little particularly, and proceed with the restoration. But it is not restored until you incise around a palm's width of it, and there you extract its marrow. Then you restore that part with medicines, and it is slightly consolidated and healed.
And there is no need for iteration in the operation of the section of the limb, but rather due to the positioning of the limb and the lack of tolerance and fear of death in the patient, who experiences distress at all times due to excessive evacuation leading to poor circulation.
And so health is through complete healing, and nothing is in place of the flesh lasting; and it is done well the disposition of him in his body and return the virtue of him; and it is converted in his dispositions and not forced upon him contrary movements nor injury in any cause.
And if the bone is protruding in a place already injured, then extract it as follows: you should grasp firmly and strongly that end of the protruding bone, command someone to extend that part; cover it with a larger woolen bandage than the first; place this over the flesh left behind by the bone, extending its end so that it draws the flesh towards the place left. You should uncover the flesh at the location you wish to cut for the blade not to pierce the flesh.
And place a stick or board properly under the bone, for when you do this, it is not forbidden to cut the damaged flesh with the blade.
And ensure that the cut is small and gradual at the damaged area, for if the corruption is inside the bone and does not appear in its appearance through sensation, you may need to make another cut.
And if the bone is corrupt and not prominent, one edge is continuous with the other, and the corruption is in the middle of it or part of it, then you uncover the flesh from all parts; then place a fust there, and apply that of the first piece where the corruption is located so that the closure of the other piece remains continuous.
And the closure should be smaller according to the location of the corruption, as we have said.
And if the corruption is in the joint, incise that corrupted joint, and set the bone where it continues from the other side.
And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it is not in its proper place but irregularly.
And if the corruption is in the pit of the hand or the groin, it is very difficult; however, you must inquire how the corruption appears to you, and incise and clean that area according to any disposition which is within your capability. In every case, it should be corrected as you see fit, provided it does not contravene veins or nerves.
And consider which are incisives and the saws to incise these bones are made of according to the position of the bones, and the preparation of those, and their size, and their subtlety and greatness and smallness, and their hardness and rarity; so that you prepare for every kind of operation an instrument suitable for that operation.
And consider that operation for you concerning the type of instrument of which you will need; when you have great study and long knowledge of the ways of this art, and experience with the ways of ailments, so that when you have them before your eyes, you can choose what is convenient for it from the instruments for all ailments.
And you shall count at the end of this chapter the number of instruments which you will use, some of which you will prepare according to your prohibition, which you will then test on others. Form of the saw:
Form of another saw:
Forma of another will be great:
Forma of ray: Let the head of this ray be according to the form of the head of a star key, and its points be according to the form of the stars' points.
And do not place them, but rather have those that are to be rubbed at the heads of the joints when they are broken, or at the large opening.
Forma of the smaller razor:
Forma of the broad razor:
Forma of another saw decently made: let it be made with an arc above and the sharpness of it of iron, and the member of it of well-made pointed blades. Forma of it:
Forma of the razor which has a cavity:
Form of a razor or else subtle:
Form of another razor with a curved extremity:
Form of a small razor resembling a needle:
Form of another smaller incisor:
Form of another incisor; this resembles a ray, and its extremity is like a锋利的边缘，其在骨的比例位置上显示出来。
Form of a ray which conforms to the ratio of that which is perforated in the bones:
And its extremity is triangular and尖锐的。
And it is made of Indian iron, and similarly grooved like all the causes we have said about razors, incisors, and saws.
For the incision of extremities and the bone sawing.
The extremities may be affected either by an intrinsic cause or by an extrinsic one, or as you have medicated that corruption through the treatment of those medicines and the treatment does not bring relief, or sometimes the corruption goes away from the member which you do not perceive any cause for, then you must enter that member into it where the corruption accedes, so that the malady escapes by death or malice which is greater misfortune of the member.
The sign of him upon whom this happens is that the member turns black before it rots like wood already burned, or you may see near the blackness turn red a burning which enters that member and seeps throughout the body; therefore, quickly enter there.
And similarly, if the cause of the corruption is a blow from some venomous causes such as a scorpion, a viper, or a rattlesnake, and similar.
And if the corruption or blow is in the extremity of the finger, then you must cut the finger and do not give space to the corruption so that it enters your hand.
And when you approach the hand, then incise that of the elbow, and do not give space for corruption to enter within the arm.
And if you prefer that one, then incise the arm between the elbow and the joint.
And if corruption passes and surrounds the elbow, then this is the death of the patient; and to administer another cause other than this for cure is a measure of virtue.
And similarly do for the foot when corruption prefers the toe of the foot, then incise that between one of the toes.
And if it takes in the sole of the foot, then incise the entire foot. But if it enters the sole, then incise the leg between the joint of the sole.
And if corruption has already permeated the sole, then there is nothing but dismissal, and leave the patient to death.
And the method of incising the member or sewing it is that you hold the ligament in the part and leave which you want to incise, and hold another ligament over the place; extend the assistant a ligament to the parts left, and extend the assistant another ligament on their side; you separate the flesh which is between two ligaments until all the flesh is uncovered; then it should be incised or sewn.
And ensure that a cloth of linen is placed all around so that it does not touch the affected area, and that the wound and abscess are properly aligned and cauterized.
And if you happen to have a flow of blood while working, then cauterize the place frequently, or place some constricting powders on it to stop the blood; then return to your treatment until it is completed.
And then tie the injured member with a ligament as needed, and care for it until it is healed.
And I advise you that when someone finds a dark spot on his foot, this incident which we have both observed, is caused by a burn that resembles the combustion of fire.
And that corruption accidently first occurs within the said intestine.
And then that man prepares himself to put more when he sees the cure going to the member with the urgency of what attacks him from pain and heat, and cuts that part into the joint, and heals the sore.
Long time that corruption accidently occurs in the thumb of the hand indicated.
And then I arrive, and so I force it to reflect the excess back onto what is held over the hand of the patient, near the transformation of the body; and the excess does not reflect back but begins to go into the other thumb where it began in the hand.
And they ask me to cut the hand of the patient, and I do not want to do this hoping for the reflection of that excess, more because I fear the cutting of the hand of the patient leading to death; for the virtue of gout was overabundant.
And when he wakes from me, he returns to his land and informs me that that man prepared and cut his entire hand, and he was cured.
And I have added this narrative only to serve as an aid regarding what is known about this illness, and as a guide so that it may be acted upon accordingly.
On the care of colic and the quality of the enema with medicines.
When an apostema occurs in some fleshly members and the space of the apostema is prolonged such that it collects pus, and then is broken and punctured, and the pus is drained, and the place left void as if it were a vessel, and the cover above it remains like a thin cloth, and no further corruption occurs, and it does not imprint on the bone or nerve nor on the sinew, it is called a colic, and is not named a fistula.
However, if the space is prolonged such that the corruption imprints on some member, then it is called a fistula.
And the treatment for it is to insert that cloth entirely as if it were stirred, especially when it is thin and made like a cloth, and ensure that it does not stick to the place due to the corruption.
If you hope that the stone will adhere and that the corruption has not yet reached an incurable state, and on the bladder there is passage through, then you cure it with a clyster.
And you consider the stone, and if it is large and the hand that holds it has a foul odor, then use a clyster with a medicinal Egyptian remedy which consists of oil, wine, and ziniar, each part in equal shares, and be sure to mix them in a vessel until the medicine becomes hot and reaches the specific part.
And then you take what is necessary and dissolve the medicine in water and honey; clysterize it into the stone, strengthen the orifice of the bladder, and leave the medicine in it for the quantity of two hours.
And then extract that medicine; do this for several days until the stone is purified and the swelling subsides.
And sometimes a clyster is made with water of ashes when this medicine is not present; you take the ashes from vitriol, put them in water; and then extract that and clysterize it until you are certain that the stone has passed.
And if the patient does not tolerate the Egyptian medicine or the water from the ash, then make a decoction with water and honey mixed in a three-to-one ratio, and make another with wine and honey mixed, for it is the property of honey to purify and wash, and wine causes the sinew to adhere, especially when there is an excess of dryness and aridity in the wine.
And when you have applied it several times and you are sure that the sinew is already softened, then use a decoction that promotes flesh growth in the sinew.
And you take dyafinicon ointment, dissolve it in oil and wine that is dry; or you make a decoction with some medicines and apply other ointments that have the properties which I have already written about in the treatise on ointments.
And if the opening of the sinew is narrow and does not receive the catheter, then gradually enlarge it with a small iron instrument, and place it in the opening wrapped in Egyptian or basilicon ointment while it is being enlarged.
And if the opening is wide, then you add the lips of it with a suture and leave sufficient quantity in which the enema will be added.
And if the opening from which the arm flows is elevated towards the upper parts, then dry that area below which it is located so that the arm can pass through. When the arm is inserted into the sinus cavity, the flesh will be displaced.
And if it is not possible to dry the sinus cavity within the vicinity of the bone below as you wish, then you should puncture the member with a preparation that allows the arm to flow through lightly according to what is convenient for you and so that no cause blocks the passage of the arm.
May he who is over the opening of the sinus, whom you warm at all times so that it does not come out of place in his arm. And so that you may know if what flows from his arm is much or little, or is digestible, or is non-digestible.
And so you consider the place of that sinus, if in it the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess.
And as your medication is prolonged in this manner, and you see the matter that is discharged over the opening of the sinus has already adhered, or is approaching adherence, then hold it loose or let it dry for one day. When you remove the dressing, then change the cloth to another and renew the ointment.
May it be that the sinus has a subtle virus nearby, then do not worry about its adherence, for the healing of it is approaching. For some people, the generation of flesh in their wounds takes longer, and in those, the opposite occurs.
And if from the sinus for several days there is a sitting with indigestion, then you may know that the sinus does not adhere; and if the adherence of the sinus is delayed due to prolonged cause, then you adjust in drying by means of medicines, and if the medicines are moist in their substance and in their virtue, they are dried thus as an ointment yaffinicon when there is excess addition of zegi.
And the best remedy for what is cured, is that you take an ointment of yaffinicon and dissolve it in sweet oil, and apply it very gently on the area, and use only this.
And pretend in that action when there is no pain, use yaffinicon ointment, honey when it is mixed in to make it thick, and use it; or what you take myrrh and aloes and incense, and grind them all together over the fire with honey, then line the area with cloth and strengthen the sinus; and line that with honey which you have mixed until it is thick, and sprinkle cloth and strengthen that.
And sometimes these are administered to him long speeches and reasonings about the celestial lily (and the celestial lily) and flour of pearls and centaury, and use those simples or adjusted ones, squeeze them and sift over the honey which I have prescribed; and use it.
And if the sinus is prolonged and is not cured by this treatment, then you should know that the corruption is in the root of it, and make an inquiry into the bones or other hard members or ligaments; then you cure it with a fistula cure, as was said above.
For the treatment of tumors, nail attrition, and incision of the digit with sectioning.
Panarici is an apostema which leaves the nail of the finger of the hand or foot, and is hard in other fingers, and as it prolongs, its cure is less valued, or it becomes a cautery apostema, or it is corrupted, and you insert a brace where you corrode the root of the nail, and thoroughly corrupt that entire part, and allow its corruption to pervade the bone within which there is an odor produced, and the extremity of the finger is cut off, and the color of it becomes jaundiced.
And when you have done that as we said in the division and do not apply your cure, then you must enter and remove all the superfluous matter that is released from the joint and place a cautery near it, for cauterization is beneficial in this case.
And if the bone is sound and the joint is healthy, and the additions of the joint have already compressed the flesh at the inner parts, and begin to pierce and release it, then you must pause with a sharp knife at the angle of the joint that pierces the flesh, and push it out and incise that flesh with ease, placing your hand over what remains of the flesh until all the medicines containing corrosive substances are thoroughly absorbed; then cure that area by applying ointment until it is healed.
And if the corruption has already entered the bone, then you must incise the bone and remove it, for nothing is healed that remains in the corrupted bone.
And if you see the corrosion and corruption spreading to that area, then you must incise it at one of the joints according to where its location is remembered, and then cure that area until it is healed.
If at the joint there is percussion or friction, and the pain is intense there, then you should at the beginning phlebotomize the patient, and subsequently dry the joint with an incision using sharp extraction in a transverse section above with juice, and guard yourself so that the drying does not penetrate into the flesh left by the joint, for you will cause the patient intense pain, which is due to the natural excess of adjusted superfluous flesh in the area; and cure that area with what alleviates pain.
Moreover, by "adjusted," which in some people is born with flesh that is very heavy, and bones that are very light, or joint that is very heavy.
And in some people it is born in the recess of the joint, or the natural condition of their fingers contains several nodules. Moreover, that which is born in finger nodules is not so dangerous, and this that is born in the joints is more serious.
And for those that are born fleshy, the drying is light, and you should incise it along its recess with a sharp blade.
More difficult for that which is near the site of the joint, the cure is; therefore, beware of its removal.
More difficult in that which is near the site of the kneecap, cut into the beginning of the flesh at the circumference inside the bone, and nearby will be one of those convenient seams for this, and cure that within so that it may heal.
More difficult the consolidation which occurs to the fingers between their veins or by nature of the man who is born with it, or by consolidation of plague or by burning, or by similarity, then you should correct that consolidation so that the fingers return to their natural form.
And place between their bandages what is enfused in olive oil so that they do not consolidate lightly, and separate between them, or place between them a thin sheet of lead so that they may consolidate as needed.
And similarly, if consolidation occurs in some fingers at the palm, then dry that consolidation as prepared and conform to the figure of the member.
From the cutting of veins, so are varicose veins.
Veins are varicose veins, and they are enlarged veins filled with excessive melancholic fluids which occur in the parts of the body, and their most significant occurrence is in the legs, especially in those who travel, work, or stand.
Then administer purgation of the body from black bile several times until there is a strong expulsion, and subsequently bleed the patient from the internal jugular vein.
More often, the treatment of varicose veins can be done in two ways: one way is to cut and remove that black blood, and the other way is to elevate the vein and extract it entirely.
The sectioning is done in this manner: moisten the beginning of the leg with hot water until the thick blood is resolved, which is clotted from the leg. Then strengthen the part of the patient's thigh above the groin by placing a bandage between the inner and outer parts of the thigh. Next, dry the vein in one, two, or three wide sections. Raise the black blood with your hand on the outer part of the leg, above the fold, until the quantity you desire has drained, which is sufficient to allow the virtue of the thigh to prevail.
And then bind her, and command her to abstain from foods generating black bile.
And continue the cure with phlebotomy when the veins are filled and this is noticed by the patient.
Raise the limb in this manner: you raise the thigh of the patient, if there are hairs on it, and then place it in hot water and apply the cloth to the thigh with wet heat until it becomes red and the veins are dilated; or exercise it through strong exertion, if hot water is not available, until the limb is warmed.
And then dry the cord along the length of the vein. If it is in front, you lance it; if it is at the back, you cut it.
And then cut the cord with scissors and scrape the vein from all sides until you feel it appearing. You should appreciate the sight when that rope begins to decline into blackness.
And then, when you have incised and cut the cord, you see that white thing which is the vein.
And then you place that ligament elevated and curved from the knee, suspending it on an ounce or lion's skin.
And then dry another section near that section for three digits, and then scrape the knee from above the vein where it appears.
And then elevate that and incise the rear section of the tendon, and then extract and elevate it where it enters through the second section, and then extract it from the section above that.
And do this where you extract it from the section that is higher above or above all other sections, where it is fully inserted; then incise it.
And if you do not follow this to extract and elevate, then insert a needle with strong thread and tie it there and extract it, or insert something the size of the tendon and rotate your hand in all directions where it is curved. And make sure it is not incised; for if it is broken, it will be difficult to elevate that part and the damage has come about through that break.
And when the whole has been washed out, then place over the wound wool soaked in wine and oil, and another of undipped oil, and cure that until it is healed.
And if the vein is constricted having tortuosity in which there is an encapsulation in its parts, and it does not follow straightness as we have said, then cut into that entirely at all parts of its tortuosity and at the locations of its encapsulation, and raise that completely by suspending it.
And guard yourself in your section that you do not incise the vein and that you do not pierce that, for it will be difficult to raise that; use your prudence there.
Form of the incision where the vein is dried:
It is not as deep as other incisions nor does it have a sharp extremity so that it does not pierce the vein; and it is of great flexibility. If it were too thin, it would cut the vein due to its thinness; having this in its superfluous thickness as we have said.
From the extraction of the leg vein.
This vein is generated in the legs in lands of swamps thus as in the lands of Arabs and in the lands of India, in those swamps and arid lands with little tenacity and in which neither grass nor trees grow.
And strongly it is generated in other parts of the body besides the legs.
And its generation is from putrefaction that breaks the chain thus as worms and vermin and lice breed between the chain and the flesh.
And the sign of the susceptibility to the advent of this is from this vein that you accidet in the leg inflammation; and then the area becomes vesicated; and soon the vein starts to issue from the place of that vesication, seeming like a plant shoot.
And then as its extremity appears, when you cover it with a piece of lead weighing the weight of a dragon's foot, about two dragons' worth, smell that and let the lead hang from the leg.
And as many times as there are reasons for it on the parts outside, wrap this in lead and press it. And if the wound is prolonged, then you incise a part of it and wrap the remainder; and do not incise that which is inside while it is outside, for if you incise it, it will contract and enter the flesh, causing an abscess, suppuration, and bad ulceration.
To be treated adequately and extracted little by little, until it is expelled from the end of it and no cause should remain in the body.
And from this vein, some men have been laid out whose length is more than five palm breadths and I have been told that one was cut to twenty palms in length.
And if it is incised at the time of its medication, then insert the probe into the tract of the vein and perforate that along the tract through the body, until all that is in the material is evacuated, and administer putrefaction to the area for several days with medicines; and then cure it by the treatment of abscesses.
And this vein sometimes has small openings, especially when it appears at the joint of the foot or in the foot, and brings blood to these openings.
And therefore care for it this way as we have said in the division and above.
Of the section on worms generated under the skin, which is called bovine illness.
This illness is named in some lands as the bovine disease. It is caused by small worms that often affect cows, and these few worms are native between the skin and the flesh, and they ascend and descend throughout the body, and their movement can be felt from one member to another, breaking through the skin and coming out.
And the generation of these worms occurs through the putrefaction of some humors, just as happens with maggots, snakes, worms, and roundworms in the belly.
And it is feared because of its malice, for when it enters the body and rises to the head, and affects the liver, then greatly weakens it and intrudes and destroys the liver, and this often occurs.
And when you want to cure that and extract it, it is not done if you do not consider its mobility and appearance with respect to sensation, then check what is upon it and what is left from it in liquid and strong constriction, and dry it thoroughly before extracting it.
And if it is swollen in the flesh and you do not find it, then place a cautery on fire over the area where it resides, and the main fear is corruption of it, which corrupts the area as we have said.
If you see that it has reached the head near the ear, then apply strong constriction over the supraorbital ridge, and dry it thoroughly, and extract it; and check that the ailment uses modification of its body with medicines that evacuate putrid and bad humors, and avoid foods causing putrefaction.
Of the section on the illness of the nose.
This illness is called "nafir" in our land, and it is a pain that occurs in some members, and often is shifted from member to member.
And I have already seen that according to which I will recount. I was called to a sick woman at a village, and upon examining her arm, I found a small swelling in the vein network of the arm. After it had risen for about an hour, I saw that this swelling rose up similarly to how vermilion rises, but less intensely than feared, appearing as if it were living silver moving from place to place.
And then the pain was in that place, and a clot settled in the muscle, and there it remained for about an hour.
And then it receded in the other arm as it approached the other side of the body.
And then I was told that she moved around the entire body as I observed; it was too marvelous to see the change in her and the speed at which it moved from member to member. And I had already seen this before in my patients in that manner, but I have also seen movements where the pain is perceived to be permuted from member to member. But not all have such heels as in the female.
And I do not consider it to be so, but rather that it is because the female had a slender body and exposed veins, and in this case there appears a sensation of that fullness changed.
And it is necessary that this backward curvature not appear in those who are slender and have soft, engorged veins.
And since you want the cure for it, and the patient feels that pain, when it does not appear to your eye as those heels we have said, then strengthen there and let it be slightly and gently on that area until the constricted fullness is inserted, and cauterize the place.
But if you do not see it in the heels, then cure that by releasing the body and what you expel of fullness, and cleanse those with stinky pills and snake root pills and similars.
From the extraction of arrows.
Arrows are diverse according to the species and according to the places of the body where they lodge, for their diversity is that some have large points, small ones, concave, and dull ones, which are solid; and some have three angles, and those to which belong tongues; and those to which belong fletches.
And of the signs of the arrow, when it wounds the brain and passes through the bone, and is situated above the foramen which is over the brain, for it happens by its violent toxicity, scotoma, vertigo, redness in the pupils, inflammation and redness of the tongue, spasms and confusion of understanding, and vomiting of bile, and strongly the speech is cut off and the voice is destroyed, and is situated above the place of the wound a white moisture resembling powder, and it appears from it as an excess of fleshiness.
And therefore if you observe these signs, then abstain from the cure and extraction of the arrow, unless it is outside.
And the signs of the arrow when embedded in the heart are that it is close to the left nipple, and one feels a hard lump there, which is not easily caused; and the strong movement of the arrow seems like the pulse, and the flow of the black bloody wound, and the coldness at the extremities, pallor, and syncope; and from this you would know that death descends totally.
And the signs when the arrow has pierced the lung are spitting of foamy blood from the wound, and the vessels near the neck are swollen, and the color of the patient changes, and he exhales a great breath or sighs for air.
And if the arrow is embedded in the periosteum which is in the foot, and the pain then is near the small bones, and causes a great and violent pain along with sighing, and does not affect all the members or muscles.
And if you cut the arrow in the stomach, then forcefully extract some undigested food from the wound.
And if you cut the arrow in the belly, and it is embedded there, extract any wound opening, or the tissue, or intestine which is ruptured, and there is no hope for the recovery of the wound from the extraction of the arrow.
And if the arrow cuts into the bladder and pierces through it, causing urine to leak out, and any process from this causes pain in the patient, then notice that there is a mortal danger.
Moreover, other members such as the face, neck, shoulder, arm, helper muscle, spine, furcula, and coxa, along with their corresponding parts of the body, are saved according to the major dispositions when the arrow does not hit a vein or artery and is not a poisonous arrow.
And I will recount to you what I have seen about the nature of these arrows, so that you may understand this regarding their treatment.
The cause is that an arrow struck the lacrimal bone of his eye in the socket of his nose, and I extracted it from another part, left his ear gray, and he was healed, and did not suffer any harm to his eye.
And I extracted another arrow from a Jew which struck him in the gray of his eye, leaving the eyelid, and the arrow was hidden so that only a small extremity attached to its shaft could be seen, adhering to it. It was a large arrow among the sharp arrows of the Turks, with a lion engraved on it where no ears were present.
And the Jew was fine, and did not suffer any harm to his eye from the mishap.
And I extracted another arrow from a Christian man who was struck in the shoulder, and it was an Arabic arrow, with ears on that arrow; then I incised over it between two ribs, which was already submerged in his shoulder; then I scraped at that area, and soon extracted the arrow, and the Christian was healed.
And another arrow was extracted from a man which was lodged in his belly, and I perceived that he died of that; and therefore, after thirty days had passed and no change occurred due to his condition, I incised upon the arrow and removed it, and he was healed, and no further accident befell him.
And I found a man in whom an arrow was embedded in his back, and the wound had healed over. After approximately seven years, incise the arrow near the thigh.
And I found a woman in whom an arrow was embedded in her belly, and the wound had healed inside her, and there had been no change in her condition over time, and the woman did not experience any discomfort during her various natural operations.
And I found another man in whom an arrow was embedded in his face, and the wound had healed, with the arrow remaining. He did not experience any more pain, and appeared similar to this.
And I extracted the arrow from the king's principal man, who was embedded in the middle of his nose, and it had already tilted slightly to the right side a little bit. The entire arrow was hidden.
And I was called for the treatment around the wound within three days.
And then you will find the wound of the arrow broad; and then you will inquire about that which is felt beneath but not above; for he felt it when you pressed with your right ear, and then you suspected that that press was at the extremity of the arrow.
And apply a poultice to the place to be applied which has attractive and digestive virtues, trusting that the place will be indicated to me where the arrow is, so it dries up there.
And do not be misled by the significant place where the arrow has hit; and continue applying the poultice to it for several days without being misled; and meanwhile, the wound consolidates, and the patient suffers from the pain of the extraction for several days until one day I feel the arrow within its sheath and tell you this.
And then place a sharp corrosive medicine on the wound for several days until it forms a sore, and over the swelling, I will touch it, and find the extremity of the arrow beneath it, which adheres to the shaft.
And then you adjust the incision of the wound with that sharp medicine until you clearly see the tip of the arrow, and proceed with this for the space of time between four months.
And then, when the wound is sufficiently enlarged, and it is possible for me to insert the forceps into it, I widen that, and without hesitation or delay, I proceed to manipulate it in various ways until one day I was able to grasp it with forceps inserted from below, according to which will be described at the end of this chapter; after which I extracted it; and then restored the wound.
And some doctors judged that the cartilage of the nose is not restored, but I restored it and the wound healed, and the patient recovered entirely, with no scar from any cause.
And I recount to you the quality of extracting some arrows, so that you pause and consider this rule and significance of what I have not said, for the parts of this art and the definitions of those are not understood in the narration nor do they comprehend them freely.
And the wise craftsmen compare a little about motion; and about what is present they compare it to what is absent; and find new operations and new instruments for the descent of foreign causes when they occur.
And therefore I say that arrows are not removed from the members in which they are inserted but according to two manners: either by attraction of the place where they entered; or by the contrary part.
And that which is removed by the place where it entered, or the arrow proceeding in a fleshly place and being shot and withdrawn.
And if it does not obey the estimation of the hour in which it entered, then you must leave it for a few days until the flesh around it can heal, and the attraction and its exit are alleviated.
And similarly, if it is inserted into bone and you do not obey your estimation, then leave that for a few days and use attraction and motion on any day, and it will be removed.
And if your attempt does not succeed after some days, then you must pierce in the circuit of the arrow at that bone of any part moving subtly where the area is enlarged by the arrow.
But if the arrow is already hidden in the place of the body and hidden from sensation, then you inquire about that area with your hand, and if you feel it, then probe with some instruments which are suitable for its extraction.
And if you cannot reach it due to the depth of the wound and the length of the arrow, and here there are neither nerves nor veins, then you incise the wound so that it is widened and it becomes possible to extract the arrow.
And if it is in the ears where it is embedded, then you incise the flesh in which it is stuck as much as possible with all the means you can; and use ingenuity about this, if you cannot extract the flesh in the fracture of the ears and in torsion of those areas that must yield.
And when you administer the extraction of the arrow in any place where it is, then you use a twist of your hand with forceps at all parts so that it yields; and use subtle skill to ensure the arrow is not broken and that it becomes easier to extract.
And if you cannot operate on that side of your hour, then you let it be for some days until the parts that are in the circuit of him heal, and then repeat that which is alleviated. But if it makes contrary irritation of the blood, then you administer what we have said for cure in its chapter.
And guard your virtue in incising veins or nerves, or cords, and administer engen in every manner for the avoidance of the arrow; and do this with facilitation, tranquility, and tardiness as I and you have recommended.
And therefore do compress the arrow by itself so that the patient is according to the figure according to which you should place the tip of the arrow in him, for this is more advantageous. But if this is not possible for you, then administer what is possible for you according to the figures.
But the arrows that are counter-thrust or pierced by the other part, or that you have already treated parts of from the outer parts, or cause swelling at the tip of the arrow due to pain in the part further above the shoulder; then you dry over that; and let the drying be according to the quantity in which the forceps take hold; and then remove it, for it is made light by ejection.
If it is retained in the bone, then twist the bone according to the opposite direction where the arrow presses on the bone, and enlarge it by doing so, and then extract it.
And if not, leave it for some days, and then apply it to the place where it hurts.
And if the shaft of the arrow is there, then push it out from that place.
If the shaft is broken and you want to administer pressure, then insert it there. If it is stuck, stir it with a concave tool so that its concavity enters the groove of the arrow, and then push it out from that place.
If the arrow is concave, then push it out by stirring it forcefully into it, for the arrow will be expanded by doing so.
And if the arrow is poisoned, then make sure you indent all the flesh where it entered, if possible, and then treat it with whatever is appropriate.
And if the arrow hits the foot, or the belly, or the bladder, or the side, and is close enough for you to touch it with your hand, and it is possible to extract it there, then extract it, and afterward treat the wound as needed, and cure that part until it is healed.
The form of forceps to which arrows are applied:
Let the ends be shaped like the mouth of an eagle, so that they can grasp the arrow and not let it slip.
And these are made in special forms, large, few, and medium-sized, according to the size of the arrow and its smallness, and the width of the wound, and its shape.
as you do so that the instrument in the curved groove may be forced there.
Of femoral vein puncture.
Of the femoral veins from which phlebotomy is customarily performed, those in chapter XVI are two pulsating veins near the ears, called auriculars by al-Ahsaī. Two herbs that are apparent on both temples; and two veins that are on two eyelids called asymptics. The vein prepared in the middle of the forehead, and the vein that is at the extremity of the nose; two jugular veins at the neck; two veins on the upper lip; and two veins on the lower lip; — these are the veins called algelic;— and two veins behind the tongue. But the veins that are phlebotomized in the wrists are V; of which one is cephalic and is from the wild thistle; the people call it "the vein of the head," and it is a midline vein composed of one branch of the basilica and another branch of the cephalic. They call that one the people "vein of the whole body," and the basilica is the vein that is from the domestic thistle, and is called "circumflex" or "citillar," and the vulgar call it "vein of the belly"; the veins of the forearm, which are placed over the cubital fossa, and these are the ones on which phlebotomy is performed, and they appear on the arm due to a manifest appearance; the saphena, which is the vein between the said auricular and the smaller one, and it has two branches.
In the foot and thigh there are three veins; one of them is that which gives curvature to the curve of the wild deer vein; and the second is sophena, and its place is given in the thigh of the domestic deer; and the sciatic vein, and its place is given in the thigh of the wild deer; and in the thigh there are other veins similar to those.
The condition of the veins near the ears is catarrhs, headaches, meningitis, and old evil ulcers of the head.
And the quality of sanguifying those is according to what I will recount to you: it is that you rub the patient's head, and rub the patient's head at the occiput in the place of both veins with a wide cloth with good friction; then firmly hold the patient's neck with a band where the two appear and their places are near the ears in two pressed areas of the head; and when you feel those at your own side, here you will sanguify them by touching.
Then you take the surgical lancet, and that is the one that will be inserted, and then you introduce it into the vein between which the phlebotomist will come to the opening. Then raise your hand to the vein and its branch parts above, and incise the vein with an oblique cut. Let the length of the incision be the width of two fingers adjusted or around that; and let the blood flow out as much as you want.
Then apply powder firmly and leave it there until it is healed.
And already it was mentioned at the beginning of this book regarding the incision and their cautery.
More of the two arteries that supply the temple with blood for phlebotomy, it is an ancient and evil headache, as well as chronic eye disease and a body full of acute excesses in the veins.
And the quality of phlebotomizing those is according to what I will advise you: restrain the patient's arm with your hand so that the two veins appear by palpable sensation, and demonstrate the pulse at their location by your finger; then you can proceed when you sense this.
And then you elevate the codena above the vein at the parts superior to what you have just indicated, and insert the flebotomy instrument incidentally. Elevate the vein in them; incise that thus as you have done in the two other veins; and let the blood flow according to the quantity of your necessity.
And then release the constriction of the patient's groin, and place your hand over the vein for an hour, and then place a compress and powder there and strengthen that above with a strong compression, and leave it until it is healed.
And after the recollection of their cases, and after that the incision, and the puncture at the beginning of the limb.
And the treatment of flebotomy of the vein of the forehead is near the flebotomy of the cephalic for the ancient ailments of the face and for headaches, fever, and foul ulcers.
And the quality of the flebotomy is as I will recount to you: it is that the patient strengthens his side with a bandage under which the vein appears; and then take the instrument named fossor, which has this shape:
Pause the point突出的那个点在排泄孔的顶部静脉之上，并倾斜手或因其他原因施击该点，让血按照你想要的数量流出；然后解除排泄孔的穿刺，并加强那里直到痊愈。
Sometimes the space is opened by ligature, but I do not know if the ligature should be of acute extremity as with other ligatures, being before of lateral extremity, and ligate there according to the transversal, for the bone is close and strong, and would break in it the ligature when it is subtle.
More the youth of the two veins that are at the corners of the eyes due to irritation and inflammation in the eyes, and for facial diseases.
And the quality of the ligature is that the malady strengthens the colliculus with a bandage, and then ligate those, and you stand over the head of the patient.
And make the ligature according to the transversal length slightly, with a ligature that is slightly long, for in that place there is no flesh; and if the ligature is subtle, strengthen its extremity so it does not break.
And then let the blood run until it is as necessary for you, place your hand over those cuts, and strengthen them with one night, and then remove those.
May the femoral puncture of the vein be performed for acute fever and intense toxicity, for facial ailments, migraines, and swelling that occurs in the face, especially when it is chronic.
And the quality of the femoral puncture is that the patient holds their neck straight and places their nose to your left hand, and take the thin lancet under the skin and place it in the middle location of the head of the nose according to proper alignment, for the vein does not appear here by sensation, and for the blood begins to flow soon.
Cover your hand with the lancet little by little and let the blood flow according to your necessity; then remove it after one night, for it is restored rather quickly.
May the indication for the femoral puncture of the vein guide to consumption and the beginning of leprosy and various other ailments and destructive bad ulcers similarly as in phlebotomy.
And the quality of the femoral vein ligation is that the patient strongly leaves each side on their own side with a ligature; and the surgeons are above the patient's head, and the patient lies on a bench.
And gradually ligate the vein along its length with a small and ample cautery; and extract blood according to the season's quantity or according to what is necessary; and make a similar mark on the other vein.
And gradually remove the ligature and tighten both veins with a median strain so that the patient is not overheated, and leave room in the flesh for the wound to heal.
And the benefit of ligation of the Algerich veins, it helps in small abscesses and pustules of the mouth, decay of the gums, bad ulcers and fissures, and bad ulcers that are in the nose and around it.
And the quality of the Algerich vein ligation is that you make the patient lie down in front of you, and tie a bandage around their neck, and then rotate the lips and look at two veins, one from the right side of the lip and the second from the left; the demonstration of each is by the blackness of each of both, and this is more so where the veins are small and dark in the area of the lips; then incise each through an incision.
But if you are uncertain about which one it is, then you understand the incision of the larger one and the most obvious one among them.
And make the appearance of the two veins that are above the labia.
But of the two veins that are left, the tongue's juvament is near the phlebotomy of the cephalic vein, for conditions of the glossoptysis, and for ailments of the mouth.
And the quality of phlebotomizing these is to follow the illness as it moves in front of your left side before the sun, and to elevate the tongue from the patient, and look at the tongue, noting one half of its vein and the other half of its vein, and the color of each is gradually turning black.
And then phlebotomize each; and be sure not to end your hand in phlebotomizing these, for they are arteries.
And your veins that are ligated in the groin are in which it is customary for all men, and the ligation of their veins is made according to two methods, or they place a mirtilat or olive needle of fine thickness; or dry them with a surgical ligature, and call it alnessil, and this is its form:
It is the flax species thus as you see, and you apply to opening the concave full veins from obvious large origins, and to those that contain thick turbid blood.
And this ligation is of lesser width and finer tip, and you apply it to the ligation of fine veins that contain thin citrus blood.
May the youth of the femoral vein phlebotomy, which is one of three veins: from where we draw the blood from the maladies that are left the gout and the cold, and from what affects the feet and the abdomen.
And it convenes to the phlebotomist, when performing that phlebotomy, that he guard well that and be over-cautious in that, for if he misses and adjusts in the puncture of the phlebotomy, he will incise that artery and cause flows of blood, so that it is fitting that you do not phlebotomize at phlebotomy puncture, before cutting like a razor.
And if the basilica vein does not appear by clear sight, then it is fitting that you leave that and change to the other, or that you search for one of its branches; or that you phlebotomize in a place at the end of the arm, for that is manifest; and stop phlebotomy with the razor in such a way as we have said.
May it be that you wish the phlebotomy of the femoral vein, then before the constriction of the arm touch the place between where you know the location of the pulse, and soon place your hand over it with a thick cloth; then lift the arm and stop the vein with a concave section for phlebotomy with the razor as we have said; and guard that the percussion does not reach some space of the location of the artery.
And when you see, as you strengthen the ligament, inflation occurs in the place that you have touched with your thumb, then that inflammation is of the artery, and therefore avoid it.
And if you see the blood flow in the femoral vein as the color of a child's urine, and the blood is thin and clear, then you know it is arterial blood; then you close and place your thumb over that area for a long time; and press closer to it, and if the blood stops flowing, and four or five drops stop, then you strengthen your arm and leave it there.
And keep the patient from the mucus of it, and have no fear of it, and do not wet that area for a few days until it is healed.
And if the blood does not stop flowing, and you see that the appropriate medicine is not present for this, then incise the artery if it appears to you; where the extremity contracts, and the blood stops flowing; or take some from a fistula, and perform that, and take one half and strengthen that over the location of the vein with strictura descent on the ligament and with powder on the other day.
And if the wound is incised, that is good; otherwise, then cure that as was mentioned before in the place of the powdered wounds' flux of blood.
And the incision of the wound is difficult in small parts due to the size of the wound and the possibility of stitching the arm.
More from the dark vein, bloodletting is beneficial that you extract the blood from the part above the bend of the arm and from the part below the body; for this, it is composed of a branch of the basilica vein and a branch of the cephalic vein, as we have said.
And when bloodletting that part which is over-temperate in the bloodletting of the arm, then leave that part as it is; for there a nerve is located. Then, if you puncture during the bloodletting and find the nerve, it will cause stupor, and recovery from it is difficult, and it does not heal completely for a strong person. This nerve is often felt in sensations; and if hidden to some people and very subtle without being evident, then pause your bloodletting at the section of alnessil, and avoid the nerve with your force.
And if the vein is between two nerves, then cut the vein lengthwise.
The purpose of bleeding from the cephalic vein is to draw blood from the head and relieve ailments of the feet.
And here precisely, if you want to perform a phlebotomy with an olive needle or a myrtle needle; for it is the pure fluid from all the veins, and it does not damage the artery or nerves.
However, in some individuals, swelling is apt to form if phlebotomy is not performed in the first percussion; but do not neglect that swelling.
The first is that you must know that fistulotomy is not administered except for preservation of health and hope for it and caution regarding the occurrence of ailments; and that fistulotomy be performed on one of the veins that are in the groin, namely: cephalic, femoral, and basilic; and that fistulotomy be done at the beginning of spring, after fasting in spring and autumn, and in winter near eating, when signs of repletion appear.
And fistulotomy should be performed on the third day or after three hours from the beginning of the day.
The more fistulotomy is performed, the more it should be done when it causes convenience and necessity at that time, whether night or day, in any hour, and at all times.
And you must know that an infant should not be fistulotomized until it is four years old, and a woman who is pregnant should not be fistulotomized unless in the fourth month between the seventh and eighth months. And elderly women who have passed fifty years of age should not be fistulotomized.
And when someone wants to be lanced in some manner, make sure to modify his intestines before the lancing with a leon clyster, if there is any obstruction of retained feces, so that the veins do not carry superfluous matter into the lancing of the intestines, which are purified, and do not harm the principal members.
And the patients should not be lanced while they are nauseous, vomiting, or suffering from illness or drunkenness until this is remedied, nor from dropsy or bad humor, more so that lancing is feared during colicky pain, and during vomiting, and during abdominal distress, and during an increase in copulation and work and exercise after fasting or watching over (the night), and from any cause that dissolves the virtue, either bodily or animal.
And consider in the subtlety of humors before this if the wound is large, with food and drinks, and with medicines if it is possible at that time.
And consider bathing the wound if any cause does not prohibit it, or exercise for some exercise so that the wound becomes subtle.
And pause the femoral incision at the foot of the bed, so around three o'clock, as we have said.
And I assure you that the foot of that person should be kept on the day of all bad accidents, as when there is anxiety, anger, fear, and all bodily accidents, as when there is toil and excessive pain, or similar.
And at her side, let there be present the causes in the use of which custom has accustomed men with regard to aromatics and odors, and with balsams, according to the quantity and possibility.
And follow the femoral incision over a cushion that is placed above the cushion on which the patient should be incised.
Then extract his thigh, and rub it with your hand the femoral incision two or three times; then tightly bind it with a bandage and wrap it twice.
And let the incision be tempered, for if the incision is not equal, or if it is due to excess, then prohibit the flow of blood; or if it is due to softening, then temporarily restrain the body's flow of blood.
And near the stricture, make sure that those who are to be lanced press their hands together between them while the veins are swollen and clearly discernible.
And near the lancer, anoint his lancet with a little ant oil properly; then place your left hand's index finger on that vein, leaving the spot where the lancing is to occur, so that the vein can swell slightly and the percussio be exact. For the vein that you find to escape like a string of a violin when you pause the lancing, it is full of wind; and when you pause the lancing over that area, it contracts, revealing the lancer; and if the lancing does not open the vein, or if it does, it is strangled.
And therefore, make sure that the lancer is attentive to all these causes.
And when you pause the lancing, if the vein bursts in one go, that is good; otherwise, repeat this or the other passageway, leaving that area a little, or over it with haste, if the area is not abscessed.
And if the place is suppurated, or the patient becomes feverish, then you let it be for one or two days, and do not strain the wound, for a strong fever might bring on an abscess, nor should it enter the bath.
And then repeat the phlebotomy if necessary.
And if the perception is small and the wound heals subtly, and you fear that it will not heal sufficiently, then repeat the phlebotomy in that vein according to rectitude and adjust the incision a little. Do this with hastiness before the place suppurates, for when the place suppurates, you should make less perception.
But if you see that it has already suppurated, then do not repeat the procedure on it, for it is unnecessary for any cause; place your hand over a part of the wound's margin, for it alleviates the pain from the wound. And it is better in this place than oil and other oils.
And similarly administer a margin of oil in all phlebotomies where you puncture the veins; they do this with tyriaca alfadoc and sagzenea when placed over the area, for the wound becomes subtle and is agitated when it is large.
And if in the place of the incision a large abscess is generated, many vesicles occur, especially to those who have not been bled at that time or in the anticipation of the small vein, then you apply and hold over the area a sponge infused in water and salt, slightly heated, and strengthen it for about an hour, as it is dissolved.
And make sure to do this near the site of the incision of the vein at the completion of it or another vein.
And if there remains any blackness or greenish color in the area for a few days, do not note this; if you wish, place over it some cause of aloes and myrrh dissolved, or some cause of menthol extract or vinegar or something similar.
And many vesicles occur and abscesses form from the incision of the basilica.
And place your hand over it. If then you find it soft, keep the compression on that area; if that eminence is bad and harmful; then guard that you place over it some cause of what we have said, as strong fluid will flow from the artery of the vein.
And apply a plaster where there is stiffness, so that the area may become hardened, and then treat it with the other treatment until it is healed.
And know that you should draw from the vein according to the quantity of its virtue and according to the color prevailing over the vein as it appears.
And if the blood is black, let it remain until it becomes clear; and similarly, if you see it thick, let it continue to flow until it becomes thin; and similarly, if it is sharp, let it continue until its sharpness is moderated.
And for one who is full and strong and has the need for a bloodletting from the vein in one session, the incision of the vein should be enlarged and the bloodletting should be thorough.
And for one who is weak, do the opposite, and know that you should draw off the blood in several sessions, and that you should do so gradually.
And the best method in venous bloodletting is to make a transverse section, not a puncture.
And this method of femoral puncture saves from flux of blood and injury to nerves, and is more preferable and safer than puncture according to length and breadth.
And to which it is accustomed to happen fainting from the femoral puncture, cover that with a piece of cloth soaked in vinegar or simple infusion of wormwood; and extract the blood in three or four draughts.
And if there is a sensation of constriction, then apply before the femoral puncture a compress soaked in mirbane syrup or in flavored honey syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and similar, or in flavored and fragrant syrup.
And if fainting occurs from the femoral puncture, and is caused by the passage of fine blood, then cover that with a drink of meat water and fragrant thin syrup; use its aromaticity with ginger, and apply it to their feet.
And use the other causes that we have mentioned in the division on fainting by evacuation.
And here the patient will swing his arm and dissolve his blood for the second time, apply to him of which venesection is by major evacuation, and the virtue of it is refrigerant, that evacuates the blood little by little, so according to the quantity of the virtue in continuous days.
And when one wishes to swing his arm and draw his blood for the second time, and his body is strong, then do this about seven or nine hours after the first venesection.
And when one wishes to draw the blood from his body in the opposite direction to which it naturally flows, apply it on the second or third day.
And when the body in which there is hot blood already inflamed and causes fever, apply the bloodletting in one session and let a large quantity be taken. Increase the sensation between the onset of fever and the occurrence of syncope; for you must have all the conditions of venesection preserved; and place your hand on the pulse to control the body's loss of blood, so that it does not die instead of experiencing syncope. When the venesection practitioner is ignorant and negligent, this should be done in multiple sessions.
And do not pull when you want to remove the arm and evacuate the blood a second time, as the openings of the vein are already closed and it is difficult for the blood to escape, that you press upon it with firmness and slightly extend it, for this is too dangerous.
Leave it to drain by second puncture; or keep the vein opening closed by the coagulation of blood in the vein's openings; or place your hand over the tyriaca alfargan or sagenea, and apply a light compression until the blood has settled.
And if the vein is swollen, do not touch it until the swelling is subsided.
And if necessity compels you to evacuate the blood a second time, and there is no excuse, then let it flow from that same place or to the other arm through another vein.
And the vein called "funis del bras" is punctured instead of the profunda or basilica when they are not palpable or hidden, for it is composed of those.
And the quality of the femoral vein ligation is that the patient inserts his hand in cold water while the leg becomes red and the vein clearly appears.
And then apply pressure on that area with a stick for midwifery; and then perform femoral phlebotomy according to the small transverse vein, neither longitudinally nor by length.
And let the incision be broad, and let your phlebotomy be in the area where you perform it above the wrist of the hand.
And if the flow of blood is forbidden, then immerse your hand in cold water and let the blood run into the water until you achieve your necessity.
But if you are in the days of summer, then you are excused from immersing your hand in cold water, and instead keep the body of the blood in cold water during winter.
And the phlebotomy of this vein is safer than of all other veins, for it does not have a pulse or nerves.
And the phlebotomy of the vein in the right hand is relevant to the ailments of the liver.
And the quality of the phlebotomy is that you tighten the hand with a ligament or with your own hand, placed more in an inferior position, between the vein when it is swollen and well demonstrated; then quickly perform the incision; and if you incise all of it, no harm will arise from this.
And make sure that you do not close your hand over the phlebotomy, but leave it so that the nerves of the fingers are naked and exposed.
And then place your hand in the inferior position and let the blood flow through it, for if you do not place it in the inferior position, the blood will coagulate in the orifice of the vein, which is forbidden to occur.
And when the blood is extracted according to the necessary quantity, then pause over the vein with oil and salt, so that it does not become completely consolidated; similarly ensure that you do this for all related parts.
The treatment for the femoral incision on the left side is that it is related to the ailments of the thigh.
And perform the femoral incision on the other side in the same manner as you have done on the other.
And the treatment for the vein phlebotomy is for ailments that affect the left side of the body, such as ailments of the liver, and retention of menstruation, and for ailments of hernias and old chest ulcers, and their similar manifestations of ailments.
And the quality of the femoral phlebotomy is that the patient inserts his leg in warm water and makes friction thereon until the veins appear; then place a band around the joint of the leg, and with a pointed tool, cut the location of the vein where it is apparent, and from there its branches spread across the surface of the leg.
And therefore, perform the phlebotomy on the larger vein or the old chest, cut it well, and add to its coagulation, which is better and more secure.
And if you perform a flebotomy there on the surface of the foot, then you must guard against the nerves that are left there on the surface of the foot, and place your flebotomy needle at the point where you puncture it transversely, as if you were incising it.
And let the flebotomy be sufficient.
But if the bleeding is prohibited; then you prick the foot in cold water and let the blood run into where it should be evacuated.
And if the flebotomist makes an error in the first attempt, then repeat the flebotomy with a small prick, for the location is saline. And do not fear its malignity, but guard against the nerves as we have said.
And do the same for the other foot similarly.
And for the sciatic vein, at the location as we have said, you should make a incision in the thigh with the parting wild knife.
And the relief from the femoral incision is in hip pain when it is due to cauterization.
And the quality of the femoral incision is that the patient feels cold, rushes, and strengthens the thigh from the cut above the knee into four fingers' width using a thin long bandage, which does not appear externally except through this.
And when it appears, then you perform the femoral incision according to whatever means are at your disposal and according to the tranversal, which is better; or incise there by incision or extract it by extraction, for the place is clean.
And it is often more easily found in men; and if you find it but do not appear by the feeling of the whole, then perform a femoral incision on some part of it, which is that appearing just below the knee between the tibial and fibular arteries.
And guard the nerves, and let the quantity of blood run that you wish.
Then release the tension and place your hand over the site of the femoral incision firmly, for it heals quickly.
Of ventilation and of the qualities to use of those.
Ventilations are of corns, or of ear, or of eye.
Ventilation is done according to two methods: one involves incision and drainage of abscesses, and the other is ventilation without incision.
This ventilation that involves incision is done according to two methods, either by fire or with fire.
For ventilations that are administered by incision and drainage of abscesses, there are fourteenth locations in the body. Of these, one location where ventilation is applied occasionally is at the very end of the head; and the middle part of the neck in two halves; ventitations under the chin leave the jaw intact and then the mouth; ventilations on the cheeks leave the lower jaw exposed; ventilations on the forehead are over the tip of the nose; ventilations on the temples, which are about the end of the ear; ventilations on the ears, which are on the side of the head; ventilations on the ankles, which are two spans wide; and ventilations on the thighs, which are on both sides.
And do not extract the blood from the wound but from the small veins scattered in the flesh, and by this do not lose its virtue as with phlebotomy; nor should you believe that bleeding should be done by fire or several fires in any illness caused by excess within which the body is completely evacuated.
But if necessity causes bleeding for illness or continuously, we administer it at the beginning of the month and at its end, and in the middle of the month and at any time.
And when there are times for any of those causes, and properly if it is in the third or fourth day, then command ventilation to be made more than just passed after one or two hours.
The benefit of ventilation of the neck is when you apply gravity to the head and what is embedded in the heels; more effective is that this be close to evacuation of the entire body.
This ventilation is at the location of the cephalic phlebotomy.
And it is not advisable to use that which causes inflammation or in which there is a cold, as this gives great discomfort.
And for this reason, it is not advisable to use those that cause inflammation, especially in the heads where there are inflammatory conditions.
More advisable is to use that which, when applied continuously, causes forgetfulness; and for this reason, you should command the ventozer to place his hand a little on the ventosa at the affected parts, to prevent the generation of forgetfulness.
More vaporization of alkali is in the place of femoral and basilic vein flebotomy: and by this you will contribute to asthma, and to the constriction of veins and to the splitting of the vein's instrument, and to coughing, and to repletion.
And ensure that the alkali bulb is slightly heated, for if it is paused, it will generate weakness in the body and stomach.
And the alkali fumigation will cause headaches, eye problems, migraines, and toothache pain; and it is in place of basilic vein flebotomy.
And make sure you command the fumigator not to press his hand at the scarification site to prevent injuring the artery and disrupting the flow of blood.
And with the fumigation of the mouth, it will cause bad breath, gum decay, and appearance similar to the illnesses in the mouth, which are in place of anheric vein flebotomy located in the corners of the lips.
May the ventilation that is made over the two spoons be covered, which is done by replenishment of heat.
And the ventilation of the two internal parts of the flasks contributes to the benefit of the femoral, superficial, and cephalic vein operations, for those larger veins carry the blood from all those veins that are in the flesh, and those smaller veins between the larger veins allow the flow to reach the three veins.
And command the ventriloquist not to proceed with incision, for the area is stripped of flesh, and leave only the nerves and arteries.
And it is a ventilation upon the alshosses and contributes to the hemorrhoids of the buttocks and the ulcers, and leave them so.
And command the ventriloquist to use a strong ventilation, and make it of air, for the area needs strong drying; and after strong incisions, let it be incised.
More wind in the legs diminishes, through manifest diminution, which carries the scum of the whole body, and comforts old pains of the hips and the thigh, and of the bladder; and provokes menstruation, and comforts bothorrhea and ademilia; and are in place of a double femoral ligation, and halrocenion, and of double ankles.
But they thicken the whole body and cause syncope in many people.
And of the winds, halrocenion is proper to the winds of the hips.
And the quality of the position of the winds is that you place the wind at the beginning viewable and suck it up by slight suction, and do not prolong the position of the winds, but rather place them lightly, leaving them constantly, so that the humors come to the area by natural means. And do not cease to repeat this until you see the area already reddening and swelling, and the scum appears.
And then you incise and iterate the suction little by little, and place your consideration on the disposition of the bodies.
If a man has tender flesh due to cold, incise him only once and not more, so that the place does not become ulcerated.
And command the fan to increase the incision and apply a little, and facilitate the suction.
And if in the wound it swells, then you must incise twice, for in the first incision open the way of subtilization to the wound and its aqueous nature. More in the second incision for the acquired scrutiny of the extraction of the swollen blood.
And if the wound is mixed with foul matter, then the third incision should be made to achieve healing.
Finally, when we want to extract the blood little by little or just a little, suffice us one incision.
And if we want an extraction of thick blood, we perform a puncture at the same site; and if we know that the blood is thick, then we incise with a longer incision.
And the term scarification in which is the depth of the incision solely.
And if the incision is thick, hard, dark, and its pores are straight, then the areas for the suction cups should be gently lubricated, openly resolved; in summer, such as olive oil of aloes or olive oil of violet or balsam of copaiba or pine resin; and in winter, then olive oil of narcissus, or olive oil of marigold, or chamomile oil, or blood oil, and to those similar.
And if the excess is thick, apply a mustard oil, or balsam oil, or aloes oil, or anethole oil, and to those similar.
But if the suction cup is on flesh with wide pores, then it should be prohibited from oil, and instead should be washed with warm water or cold water of Solomon's seal, or water of copaiba, or walnut water, and those similar to them.
And for that of which the flux is from a humid nature, wash his bowels with warm water, or with water of myrtle and sumac and similar.
And for that of which the superfluities are large, wash his bowels with cold water, or with water of santisc (marjoram), or from decoction of artemisia, or chamomile, and similar to them.
And ensure that the bowel movement is retained before bathing; have it administered shortly after bathing for one or two hours, and ensure that he sleeps near the chamber pot.
What must be done that the patient who is to undergo bloodletting may have a bowel movement beforehand.
Ensure that you consider the beginning: when the patient who is to have his bowels moved or who is to undergo phlebotomy has a colerich temperament and his flux is acute and inflamed, ensure that he takes cooling causes, such as acetic milks, endive with warm water, laxatives, julep, and similar remedies.
And feed them thus like lentils, capons, and pigeons, seasoned with herbs, and similar to these.
And for that one in which the swelling is hard, let him take to drink essarop of almiva, or essarop of alsecanabin of seeds, and sumac, and vi mot odorant mixed between wine and water; and let it be commanded that he uses moderation in drinking and eating, and eats fewer lentils, beans, peas, and small pigeons and doves.
And let him drink more than he eats on the day of ventilation and venesection.
And let him be given to drink in some hours for some men tyriaca alpharac, or medicines of musk, such as muscardine or acellita before ventilation or before venesection or shortly after, so that the principal members may be comforted and the wound subtiled; and do not let them take any scabification.
More the ventilations that are scarifications should be performed over the liver, and on the melena, podagra, and the umbilicus, in the areas of the joints, and the axilla; for these principal members do not suffer scarification upon themselves.
And it is not sought by those rather than an attraction of pus from the limb, thus as we apply a suction cup on the breast in illness of flux of blood from the blood of the nostrils; and we use that so that there may be dissolved a superficial fatty substance of the limb, thus as we apply over the abdomen and the umbilicus; for which it rarifies the limb and warms it and relieves the pain which resolves the fatty substance.
And it is applied over the hemorrhoids when they occur in their prolapse or puffiness, for by virtue of strong attraction, the man's prolapse is weakened and the puffiness is removed from its place.
And similarly when it is applied over the liver and spleen, it dissolves fatty substance in those enclosed.
And these suction cups are applied solely with suction; and sometimes they are applied with fire.
And sometimes they are applied full of clear water in illnesses of the spleen.
And this is so that the suction cup may be filled and become larger, it should either be clear water or water in which suitable herbs have been boiled.
Form the suction cup with fire: let the diameter of the aperture be two fingers wide, as we have formed it; and the amount of oil be half a palm; and place it in the middle of it, at the midpoint in the circuit, draw it out small according to the quantity that an针灸师，这句话的意思是：“用火制成吸盘：让开口的直径为两指宽，正如我们所形成的那样；油量应为半掌之多；将其置于其中心位置，在电路的中点处，根据进入其中的数量使其略小一些。”请继续提供下一句吧。
Make it from glass or citrus, of large margins, equal and smooth so that the limb does not deviate from its position on it.
And let it be at the midpoint of the glass or iron, where the candle is placed in the fire.
And let this suction cup be much larger than the one we have described; and adjust the amount of oil according to the illness and the condition of the one who uses it.
And the suction cups for children and those in poor health are different from those for young and healthy individuals.
And the quality of placing this cautery on the limb is that it extends the fire mechanism from the cautery held in front by a small wax candle, and place that one over the middle of the transverse ligament in the middle location of the ventoza, so that the fire be ignited around the area left to prevent the body of the patient from being burned.
And then it is placed on the limb of the patient, and they are directed over the tract as we have said, so that when we have the ventozas and do not need to hold the direction and let the vapor vaporize over that tract, then the ventoza will soon be dissolved.
And then ignite the mechanism according to its manner, and repeat that if you need that one.
More in the ventosa that is administered in the disease of pleurisy, with water, in which there is no transverse ligament or tract, and it is not administered so much as filled with water, and it is placed on the limb only thus.
And this is the form of it: And this ventosa the larger it is, the better, so that it may receive a great quantity of water.
Capitol. xcix.
Sanguissuguas are not administered in major members but in the members in which the application of cups is not possible due to their small size, such as the palate and similar parts; or in a naked flesh member, such as the nose and ears and similar.
And the quality of using those that you have found to be sanguissuguas in the double waters of postpartum purification.
And then let them lie in the double water during the day and night until they soften, without any cause affecting their womb; and let the body be evacuated at the beginning either by venesection or by cups; and let the limb of the patient be fumigated until it becomes reddened; and let them be placed over it.
And when they are filled and the case is complete.
And if it is possible to suck the area with cups, it is more effective in treatment.
And otherwise, then wash the area with warm water and afterwards apply cold water; and it should be rubbed and squeezed.
And if the course of the blood prolongs to near the site of the sanguine vessels, and here it pools, then you insert a cloth into cold water, and place that over it so that the pooling is absorbed.
And if the blood is increased, then powder vitriol trissat, or small pieces resembling those of astringent causes, over it while the blood is being absorbed; or place bandages soaked in boiled fava beans over the area, and let them remain until the fava beans adhere to the area, and the blood has been absorbed.
And also, if necessary, iteration of the sanguine vessels, when possible replace those.
And if the sanguine vessels are prohibited from suspension, then wash the area with recent blood or place a needle in the areas where blood will soon appear; and afterwards apply bandages, which should be changed as soon as any blood is felt.
And when you want them to cough, powder a little of dragon's blood, or salt, or ashes over them, and do so soon.
Thus begin the procedures of the second part: on restoration. This chapter is necessary observations in the art of medicine; and it is on the restoration of fractures and dislocations in bones.
Oh, son, know that this chapter is taught by skilled doctors and common people, as well as those who for a long time have not studied the free works of the Ancients or read even one letter from them.
And for this reason, this method of the learned in our land is kept private; and I have not forgotten it after such a long time; and I have not accepted what follows, but only through much reading of the works of the Ancients and study over my understanding, from which I extracted the science.
And I direct this experiment and study throughout my lifetime.
And I have already described in this chapter all that concerns my science and about which my experience has passed; for here I abbreviate this to you others and deliver this from occupation to extension; and abbreviate this in the end of abbreviation; and show this in the end of declaration; and form in this the shapes of instruments that are administered there, as is done by addition of declaration, thus as I have done in two previous chapters.
First chapter.
Summarize and collect the information about fractures of bones, those for which a preliminary discussion is necessary, before we begin the recollection of the various parts of bone fractures and their diverse aspects. Let us therefore begin this chapter with a summary of the discourse; and those chapters to which understanding is necessary at the beginning, the craftsmen must study and remain grounded in the truth of those. It is you and those who are prompt to know or learn this noble art from others.
And thus say that when accidents occur such as a fracture or dislocation or twisting or immobilization, you must immediately proceed to the beginning with incision or reduce it, or both together, unless some cause prohibits it, such as weakness of virtue, or if it is the area where the accident occurred, or in decrepitude, or at a time of intense heat or intense inflammation.
And it should be content with food consisting of fresh herbs and of flesh of partridges and of crabs; and prohibit fatty meats and fullness from foods and all food that fills the veins with sanguine, until you are safe from abscess attack, and if you fear effusion of matter in the member.
And then return the patient to its primary position as per the usual custom for it.
And so, when the broken bone begins to be restored, then ensure that the patient eats nutritious foods rich in natural and fatty substances with viscosity, such as foods made from cooked wheat in water, rice, eggs, fish, cow's stomachs, nuts, fresh meats, and similar foods, and with this regimen coagulation of the fracture is facilitated slightly with honey.
And know that bones crack in those who are in the first vigour and in the decrepit, it is not possible for them to be cured and consolidated according to their nature due to the drying out of their limbs.
Moreover, nature adjusts and alleviates over the broken bone from any part due to a cause resembling glue in which it thickens and adheres to that, conjoining them together, within which comes the end of strength and firmness, thus like fire at the beginning, in which you do not prohibit that from its works.
And for this reason, it is necessary to restrict the patient's diet, a diet in which there is gravity, viscosity, and thickness, as we have said.
And know that the types of fracture are diverse according to the different parts of the body; for the fracture of the bone of the leg is different from the fracture of the skull bone; and the fracture of the foot bone is different from the fracture of the thigh bone; and similarly, all other bones are different from one another.
And I will recount in memory all kinds of fractures, distinguished in their separate chapter.
A variety of fractures within itself. And the species of fractures in bones are diverse; some are caused by arcuate fractures, others by those that occur at the joints. Sometimes fractures happen according to the length of the bone: such as those of the shaft and splinters, and additions both proceeding and not proceeding from them, just as when preparing to write a document, where there is a fracture by slice and disruption in the head, and a small fissure-like fracture.
And for each species, there is a specific method or torture in restoration according to the separate recounting of it in its own place.
A sign of a bone fracture. And by this, a bone fracture is known: the tortuosity of the bone, and the prominence and appearance of the bone upon touch, and its sensation when palpated with your hand.
And when there is no obvious deformity and you do not feel a fracture upon touching the bone with movement and the patient does not experience great pain, then it is not a break.
It is possible that it is a deformity or small fracture, so observe whether the patient wincing occurs when you touch it with your hand and apply compression to the entire area. Place your hand there for a moment over which you administer medicines from which you can see a reaction at that very spot; then proceed to stretch it gently due to subtle constriction.
And observe whether the area when arched does not split into two or another part that does not occur in the crack, as if the entire part of its continuity is remolated, then you should start your treatment to correct the condition that may lead to an abscess.
And if an abscess does occur, leave it alone for a few days until the abscess subsides; then proceed to treat it according to any method you can use to promote healing and drainage.
And observe that the restoration and piercing of the area are lighter than the condition in which you found it.
And then strengthen it according to the recall of the remedy that will follow.
And if in the bone there is fracture, when an extension of this broken member into two parts is necessary, or if with your hand if the member is small; or with two cords or one cord and your hand.
And place your position such that you support the member in a location equal according to its natural figure, while the parts of the broken member are extended, then forcefully make the additions return to their place and according to any manner you can in their locations.
And guard yourself according to your strength so that no harm occurs to the patient due to your operation causing pain or injury; and forcefully do so according to your power, applying one bone to its companion bone according to their best forms.
And ensure that at that opportune moment you touch with your hand that area, and if you see any other cause, correct it and equalize it according to the quantity of your virtue.
And avoid violent extension and compression, just as foolish doctors sometimes cause an abscess to occur through their operations or cause contraction in the limb, as we have seen through their foolish operations.
And the quality of the stricture of the tranquil limb is that which I recommend; so that you may know that broken limbs vary in their minutiae and in their size and in the form of those.
And of those that are small like the arm, and thus called easy and similar to those, then cover that envelopment with a fine thin cloth.
And those that are large like the thigh or chest, cover those with a firm envelopment, for the firm fabric connects the large and strong member from all sides tightly, ensuring that no stain enters.
And then begin, after your initial dressing, conveniently pause with three or four envelopments according to which part of the body needs it; and hold your hand a little firm on the pausing.
And then place it at the uppermost part of the fracture site, and ensure that your dressing is firm where you have tightened around the fracture area. And then extend the envelopment around the fracture site a little, gradually soften the tightness, as you take up more of the area with the dressing.
And then take another bandage and wrap the other layer around the wounded area with envelopment, and then place the envelopments at the uppermost part of the fracture; ensure your operation in the tightness of the envelopment and in its softening according to what we have said in the first envelopment above.
And then place something between the rotula of the thigh or a cloth equal to the tortuosity of the fracture, if there is any tortuosity; otherwise, do not pause at all.
And then place something on the other side, and then equalize over these sheathed coverings properly made as soon as possible, if there is no inflammation or abscess in that area; otherwise, place something on what is the abscess and that causes the inflammation; leave that for a few days; then strengthen over the sheathed coverings.
And let the sheathed coverings be made of tough cane, well formed; or of wood from a pine; or of palm ribs; and let the width of each sheathed covering be according to this form and this figure:
However, note that the sheathed covering placed over the fracture should be slightly thicker and a bit wider than the other sheathed coverings. The length of the sheath should be according to the size and magnitude of the member; then strengthen the sheaths on the other side according to your initial structure. Place a piece of cloth above decently, as we have said regarding the structure, and it should be your structure more at the location of the fracture, and the more elongated from the fracture, the less the structure.
And ensure that the threads are moist and fine in thickness, and that they are of linen; if the threads are thick, as I have seen in the operation of some fellows pressing the veins of a tortoise with their fingers, and it is a great error when closing the stricture to make it equal.
And such thin threads are not convenient, for you will not be able to achieve the closure at those places you want, and it is not wise that there be less than a finger's breadth between them.
And if the patient is led to the extremities of the straws near the closure in those places, then place those of linen or dyed wool between them so that it does not cause injury.
Sometimes fractures occur at the break, and accidents disrupt the chain, and I will recall this in the Capitol according to its singularity.
And know that for any broken member, straying with straws on the first day is not appropriate; this is because when the member is large, it is not wise to place straws directly over it but rather after a few days or seven or more, according to your safety in the advent of an abscess.
And this is the way of plasters that the Ancients used, which are applied over fractures and dislocations and sprains.
Method of plastering for the reduction of fractures, suitable for complex cases and especially for women and children, which is of that on which no heat or cold is applied: and you should take powder of molin, which is the marrow of the flour that comes from the movement of the mill in its walls.
And you should prepare it thus, but sift the white of egg, and make the preparation of it neither too thick nor too thin; and then use it.
Another method of plastering for the reduction of fractures and dislocations: recipe using asafetida, lapdanum, acacia, enula, and myrrh, which is derived from wild myrtle, all in drachms. x; myrrh and aloe in drachms. v; alochil in drachms. xx; all should be sifted and mixed with alcohol water or with the white of egg if the patient's condition is mild; then use this plaster, which is of good composition and restores broken bones gently, and it helps men recover.
Another method of plastering which helps with fracture and twist: take myrrh and white wax a drachm each; of acacia a drachm six; of Armenian bull's gall twenty.
All mixed in a mortar with quicklime, and strained, and sweetened with water or honey and administered.
Method of plastering for joints and bones separated from their places, and for alleviating accidental pain in those areas and for fissures and fractures: take pure wool and immerse it in vinegar and cooked oil and place it over the area.
More in this plaster, there is not virtue of restoration, but of excision by cautery and expelling pain properly.
Another method of plaster that restores broken bones: take leaves of fig tree and leaves of wild poppy; mix them together and make a plaster from them.
Method of a brief plaster to be administered for the restoration of bone fractures and when you want resolution of abscess: take parts of white wax, chamomile, flowers of violets, and flour of rye; mix them all together and strain them in wine, if the member is not scalded.
If it is scraped, then apply that which is wet with cumin water or use it.
Another method of applying a stronger plaster for resolution when an abscess occurs: for the restoration of the limb, use a recipe of horseradish juice, seed of lettuce, balloonflower, sweet clover, marjoram, flowers of violet, chamomile, all finely chopped and equal; all should be mixed with water from sorrel or two kinds of vinegar or with wine, according to the quality of the limb and the color thereof.
If I presume correctly, do not apply a sponge soaked in hippocratic wine for the restoration of the limb, but use a poultice made of wax and oil, and not for any other reason; and recommend that it be mixed between coarseness and fineness.
If it is for Gualia, it is seen that they should be applied on the broken limb for the restoration of it and the causes in which a small amount of heat, such as myrrh, frankincense, and similar to them, act similarly to the causes we have recommended.
Method of plaster that comforts injury and pain: take equal parts of ginger, of ox skin cut or rabbit hide, of aloes, and salt; boil them, strain and sieve them, then make the plaster.
If the swelling is such that you must grind the plaster and it should be well mixed, consider whether there has been no pain caused nor bruising nor bone broken, then you do not need to remove it for several days. And if pain intense or bruising or swelling occurs at the site, then you should incise or remove it immediately, and apply the plaster to the affected area.
And take a cloth and sea sponge soaked in wine, submerge that in vinegar, and wash the area with it until the bruising and pain are relieved; then place the member to rest for an hour; afterward cover it with woolen cloth submerged in oil or rubbed oil, and tie it overnight until you are sure of no abscess forming, and allow the swelling of the member to subside, and relieve the pain.
And then gradually dilate that subtle stricture and apply a small plaster without stiffening it with your first constriction, and keep the subtlety of that area to ensure it is healed.
And if you see that the abscess and the redness and the pain and the inflammation and all these accidents have already been treated with all, and you need neither plaster nor stricture, then gradually dilate it as you did at the beginning equally.
And if no other cause affects the limb from those we have said, then do not release it but keep it wrapped for three to four days or five to seven; sometimes all this is kept for twenty days according to how you see by the release of the limb, as we have said, until the fracture adheres and settles into the coagulation of the flesh in that area.
And then adjust the stricture more than in your first constriction, and adjust for the swelling of the patient's abdomen, according to the preceding recollection of it.
And if you see that the place of the fracture is already drying and weakening more than it should, then you know that the nourishment cannot reach there; therefore, wet that area with a strong black water throughout the day you were applying that; do this for three days; and gradually dilate the stricture a little, and through this operation, supply the limb with nourishment, and it will heal slightly.
More than what fol restorers do the second time when not restored to the beginning, according to its size, and is restored according to tortuosity, it is an error in their operation, and great fear arises, and if they were correct this would enlarge the Ancients in their books and warn about this work.
And I have not seen them do this, so it is more reasonable that this does not work.
Capitol segon: When a fracture occurs in the head.
The species of fractures are motas, and their figures are diverse, and the causes are distinct. For some fractures are caused by the impact of a blow, and the impact breaks all the bone into pieces within the skull, which leaves the bone, just as it is felled in a tree; and for this reason, this species is named ascial. Or the blow strikes some part of the bone, cutting its flesh but not passing through to the marrow; and this species of fracture is named levatio absoluta.
The pain of these fractures is great or small, and of the fracture that grates or rubs; its cause is percussion upon stone or pavement, and to their likeness.
This fracture is penetrating and nearly reaches the periosteum which covers the bone; or it is in the face of the bone, and the pain of these two fractures is great or small.
Of this fracture, the bone is weakened in its细小的骨髓部分，因此这种骨折被称为毛发状骨折。
And this fracture is caused by impact or percussion of stone, similar to which, it causes some lamina of the bone to enter the internal parts, and it occurs in the concave location, as happens with ear drums when they are struck, and it results from their entry into the internal parts.
And this is mostly caused in the bodies of humid bones, such as those of children.
And all these types of fractures are serious, like separate wounds. And I will come back to remind you of all this in its place.
And we know all these types of fractures by detection of them and by inquiry into their marks and signs of corrupted flesh that are upon them.
And the capillary type is known because it is discovered on the bone, is abraded, and appears black when marked.
More in the cure of fractures consider the beginning of the patient's fear, and if you see from the signs that it signifies manifest fear, such as vomiting of bile, extension, loss of understanding, absence of voice, fainting, acute fever, swelling of the limbs and redness of those areas, and signs similar to these in the more serious conditions, you should doubt whether it will heal.
And if you see unusual signs, you hope for recovery, and then you begin the cure.
This cause is that if the injured person comes to you in the beginning of the injury and it occurred on a winter day, then you should study the mark on the bone facing the fourteenth day according to all disposition.
And if it is in the days of summer, then cover what you leave of the bones on the seventh day, having that which is left of the bones be corrupted by putrefaction, and that accidents occur which we have recounted.
And if the fracture has already reached the marrow and is partly broken and bruised, then you must incise the broken part and rub it, as I will instruct you.
And if you incise the thigh of the patient, expose the bone according to custom and your method as possible based on the shape of the wound, and let it be light over the thigh.
And if you detect the bone, fluxes of blood or abscess during the operation, then stop immediately and do as seems appropriate. You should fill the wound with cloths soaked in vinegar and oil, and let the wound rest until the abscess is subdued, and ensure there are no further fluxes of blood; then proceed with the circumference of the bone and its excision.
And this should be according to one of two methods of operation.
And one way is to incise the tissue straight through, and this is its form: Then place another incisor here, a little more lateral than the first; and this is its form:
And place the incisor more laterally than the second.
And ensure that you have a number of different incisors, some of which are more lateral than others; and some of them are shorter than the others and should be at the rear of their extremities in acuity, and made of iron or steel.
And use them with ease in percussion on the incisors so that the head does not tremble and guide it.
And if the tissue is strong and hard, then ensure that you perforate in the circumference of it before placing the incisors at the travels, which you call shallow cuts.
And it is thus named so only because those that do not reach the end of the bone's crest are made at that place where the travel is round at its extremity or margin, over which a sharp head is left resembling a small margin or circle, which you must prevent from being submerged and passing the thickness of the bone.
And it is convenient that you take a great number of these travels, of which each suits the thickness of each bone, ensuring that at your presence in all parts of the skull, the extremity of which is sharp, the quantity in length and brevity be according to the quantity of thickness of this test.
And this is the form of three species of travels: The quality of perforating in the circuit of the broken bone is that you place the travel on the bone and turn it around with the heated instruments until you know that the bone has been penetrated; then, return the travel to another location, and pause where it thoroughly reaches the quantity of the size of the ray or around it.
And then incise with the scalpel where you cut through each part of the bone, and make that thread very fine which you place at the end of levity, as we have said, while you are excising the bone, or with your hand, or by some other cause using certain instruments which you will prepare for this, such as fine forceps.
And make sure that the scalpel does not touch any part of the incision.
And when you have circled the perforated bone and separated it from the tissue if it is continuous with it, and you have extracted that part, make sure to scrape and smooth that area with a roughness similar to the surface of the bone, but moreover make sure it is finer and more delicate than other scalpel blades.
And if any small part of the bones is removed and smoothed, then take that with ease using what you should use from the instruments; and then cure the wound with linseed oil and ointment, which we have mentioned.
And the other method of operation is lighter, far from fear, which Diossec Gualia and leaves it for great length; this is its saying: At the beginning, you must start by uncovering the part of the bone in the location where the fracture is most severe and most evident. When you have uncovered that part and laid down the extremity of this scalpel slowly and cheerfully, which is its form:
And this is because the lens-shaped part is lion and you do not cut any cause, and the acute part divides it into two strips lengthwise, as you see; that the lens-shaped part be adjusted to the cusp along its acute face incident on the bone.
And then strike on the incisor of a part with a small hammer where you cut through the bone as it is turned, and you be sure of the anesthetic that it does not occur in the accident that you fear in any manner, and if the physician were the most foolish of all men and the most ignorant of them; certainly, and if he were asleep.
And if any additional cause affects the bone of the anesthetic in some places of the bone, it will cut that part at the tip of the incisor lens, and release that part as it is released from its noxious effects and fears.
And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the anesthetic, and what is cut or remains from the bone is its surface, and it remains in it roughness and fine threads, then scrape that roughness and remove those fine threads with sharp instruments you have prepared in various quantities so that you can administer of them the most convenient parts of them and the right part according to where you direct your operation on that broken bone and its shape.
And ensure that you administer according to your reason, sharpening the blade of those razors at their beginning, and then use near the subtle fluid of it, and do not cease doing this continuously until you reach administering the thick pus and the subtle fluid of all.
In any other small fracture or subtle fracture, ensure that you administer care according to what is lost for the correction of it.
And this is because it does not apply to all who have studied that art. And place this on what we have written about great fractures.
And if the linen is cut when you remove the bone, then you should take a cloth according to the size of the wound, and immerse that in olive oil, and place that over the opening of the wound; then take another folded or tripled cloth, immerse it in wine and olive oil, and place that over the first cloth, and do this with light poultices that you can apply over that, without pressing on the wound; then administer a plaster to it, and do not press on it except by the amount that the wound has.
And leave that point for one or two days until you are sure of the abscess; then drain it and administer medicines to which excessive dryness is superfluous, such as linseed and wheat flour, powder of thyme and of arsenic, and similar.
And you make these medicines into a powder that is sprinkled over the wound, as it is dry; and generally, administer to it all medicine of a nature that will cleanse and not irritate.
And guard that according to your virtue that the wound in your cure be clean; and do not leave surdicia of ointment or any other in it; nor allow virulence to add to it; for when applied over the brain cloth, it corrupts that and spoils it, and brings harm close to that malign evil.
And it happens in the scull of the head, as from it the bone is changed and especially when the cure of it is neglected, and blackness appears on the surface of it; and therefore consider when accidents occur to the patient those that we have said, knowing that it is perilous indeed.
And if you encounter blackness only from the medicine that is applied above, and it is by virtue of that medicine that the blackness occurs, then take part of honey and three parts of rubbed oil, mix those lines on a cloth, and place it over the scab; and treat it with the species of cure that suits until it is healed.
Capitol. iii.
For the restoration of the nose when it is broken.
Know that the nose is not broken but only two parts are slightly displaced or one of those few fractures, for in it you have two bones. The part that is left is cartilaginous and not broken; therefore, you do not fracture it but treat with friction and tenderness.
But if one of the two parts is broken, then you must introduce the little finger into the nostril, and equalize that fracture inside with your thumb, and outside with your finger, until the nose returns to its natural figure. And do this for your own convenience, and make sure that you do not cause any pain to the patient during your operation on the painful side.
And if the fracture is in the upper part of the nose, and it does not reach there, then you should treat it at the end of the bone where there is a slight swelling.
And if the fracture is in two parts, then you make the appearance of this.
And apply this for the restoration of it on the first day of the fracture, if possible; otherwise, as soon as the seventh or eighth day, you should let the apostema rest.
And insert into the end of the nose a piece of linen cloth if the fracture is in one part, or two strips, if the fracture is in two parts, and ensure that the strip is swollen with as much material as to fill the nostril.
And some of the ancient restorers say that the strips should be soaked in honey and changed throughout the day, but this is not what I see; instead, you should soak the strip in clarified honey and powder of reduction; and leave it in place until the bone is firm and the cartilage is hardened.
And sometimes in the nose, instead of gout, due to pain wrapped in lion's skin; and you have already fractured the nose violently so that the patient is unable to breathe.
And this cause is not necessary for you; and if you wish, do this, and if you wish, do gout.
And if another boil occurs, apply a cautery, plug the nose with wool or with fresh mustard in vinegar and olive oil, or with diachylon.
But if no boil occurs, when you need to plug it externally, use sesame seed flour and powder of crushed cloves with honey; then place your hand over the nose to prevent any leakage.
But if the nose bones are fractured or reduced, when you need to split those areas, extract them with instruments suitable for those areas; then close the incision and cure it with what fleshes up and consolidates, and with plasters as appropriate.
If a plague occurs inside the nose, then cure that with cold water and administer lead canulas when they are completely healed.
Chapter IV.
For the restoration of the jaw when it is broken.
When the jaw is broken and the fracture is not displaced, consider whether the fracture is only on the surface and not fractured into two parts but bent inward. In this case, the pain is轻微的。
And consider, if the fracture is on the right side of the jaw, that you introduce the left index finger into the patient's mouth; and similarly, if the fracture is on the left jaw, then introduce the right index finger; and push the bone marrow of the fracture inward towards easier displacement to the outer parts with your other hand from above the bone; do this gently until it aligns properly.
And if the fracture of the jaw is already separated into two parts, then you must administer extension to both parts according to their proper alignment so that they can be properly realigned.
And if there occurs a fracture with dislocation, then strengthen those of which you fear will break along the edge of gold or silver or lead; then place a cerot on the broken jaw, and place another over the doubled cloth, and one over the large star-shaped linen well made, or a wedge of wood equal to the length of the jaw; then tie that above as it is convenient for you and the application, so long as it is not destroyed.
And command the patient to rest and be tranquil, and place a lion's liver and spleen on his food.
And if you think that the figure has already been altered in any way, then on the third day you should extract and remove it; then correct what has already been altered in him and plaster it with powder of flour, white of egg, or flour of cereals, after you have applied the cerot to him, and place a lion's wool over the plaster.
And when the plaster is applied and adjusted to him, and the position of the bone is not altered, leave it as it is, do not remove it until he is healed and strengthen the fracture; for most fractures heal in three weeks.
And if another time a boil occurs, then administer what we have said many times in the treatment of it until it is healed, and carefully remove that boil.
And if the fracture is displaced, consider whether it is a separation of the bone or displacement. Then you should carefully handle those displacements as needed in their removal.
And if the wounds are wide open, then you should enlarge them with the lancet according to the quantity of your need.
And when you have handled those displacements, and there will be no further need to remove them, then you close the wounds if they are large; otherwise, place one of the plasters that suit best over it and allow it to heal.
Chapter V.
On the restoration of the furcula when it is fractured.
Many times, when the furcula is fractured at the front part, the fracture is made in one of three ways.
If it is broken, or separated, or is separated into two parts rather than naturally healing; and if this happens naturally in the area, it is difficult to heal; or if the fracture is open.
And the operation in that case, when the fracture is open, is that you have two assistants present, so that one holds the aid and guides the broken fork, and the other extends the leg with that part.
Then adjust the fracture with the pins called entras so that it is set according to its form, and do not leave it in an area of depression or concavity.
And if more extension is needed, then place a pad or wool under the patient's leg to support it and adjust its size according to your need; extend and elevate the fork and hold the pad with your hand so that you can adjust the fracture as required.
And if you cannot pull the extremity of the fork to the outer parts because it is stuck at the joint, then place the patient on their side over their neck, and place a medium-sized cushion under the muscle.
And the surgeon presses the muscle of the patient at the parts left between that bone of the scapula when it is in the position, and then you realign the fracture and align it with the joints said.
But if you feel the ribs and they are soft, then cut there and remove those rib segments with ease.
And if it is retained in the bone, then you ingenious incise it with one of the instruments which you have brought for this, after placing the scapula on the table that serves as a stand; and this instrument is made of wood or iron, of which this is its form:
And it is similar to a spoon, of which this is its concavity; and its width should be according to what you have needed from it, according to the size of the bone or its smallness.
But its length should be according to what is possible for the operation; it should have two ends like you see, and one end broad and the other narrow.
And if the wound caused when you have extracted the tendon from the bone is wide and you are certain of an abscess forming, then you adjust the two edges of the wound with sutures.
And if the wound is small, or you fear an abscess forming, then you use the wound with cloths and powders according to the size of the incision.
And if an abscess forms, then soak a cloth in vinegar and rose oil, and apply it to the area.
And altogether, provided that the splint does not irritate the bone fracture; and so that you can see the patient every day, when the swelling has diminished or you see the splint already no longer causing irritation, then you adjust this and strengthen the ligament.
And then place the patient's head on its pillow, and put a small cushion under its neck; so that the support of the affected side is elevated, and therefore the fracture of the furcula is elevated to the elevation of the muscle; or attach the arm to the side of the affected area.
And do not remove the bandage unless there is an abscess or suppurated area within twelve days.
And then renew the plaster if you see the surface of it turn color, and adjust it to fit snugly and restore it, allowing the fracture of the furcula to heal and coagulate.
And it is strengthened and comforts according to the month in twenty-eight days, and in some cases, it is done in less time than that.
Capitol. vi.
For the restoration of a shoulder fracture.
The shoulder blade is broken at the site of the injury and not the bone itself, but the margins.
And therefore, when the site of the injury is broken — and it is broken in the middle of the site — and can only be known by touch, then according to the shape of the fracture, you should prepare the area and reduce it according to the natural figure in every manner possible that is within your means.
And then place powder of ground alum from ox hooves and stoper lion on the area; and then place a dust of doubled cloth; and then place over the splint a thin strip of table according to the quantity of the spoon entirely or somewhat more.
And if you place the splint with its concavity at any part of the spoon, then equalize that concavity with stoper lion, and then fit the splint according to equality.
And then strongly stretch the affected limb from above using a constriction belt properly and firmly so that it is not displaced from its place.
And consider the ligament on each day; and every time that it is softened, treat it again and strongly and equally stretch the belt if it is displaced from its place.
And apply the patient's leg in such a way.
And the spatula is restored in xx days or in .xxv.
And when this number is completed, then you relax the ligament, and know for sure that it belongs to which bones their beginning was not feared nor their dissolution.
And if you proceed from the location of the bone's end and place a clamp there, then cut over it, and hold it, and do as we have said in the section on the fracture of the furcula with an apostema caut if this happens here.
Capitol .vii.
Of the restoration of the fracture of the foot.
The foot is sometimes broken in the middle of its length; more often, the ends are fractured and comminuted.
And of the accidents when the foot is broken in the middle, it leans towards the inner parts and causes great pain, difficulty in walking, coughing, swelling, and nausea; these are evident in the cavity of the broken bone and are not hidden from sensation.
And the restoration of the foot is to lay the patient supine on their back, and place a cushion between the shoulders; then press on the muscles, adjust the spine against the ribs, and perform the operation with subtlety, adjusting it in every way possible that is suitable and convenient, so that the figure of the bone returns as much as possible.
And then place something for padding and support above the plaster and on top of a thin wooden board of willow or similar in lightness, wrapping that in cloth; then perform the binding gently around the broken bone to avoid tightening too much; and continuously consider the binding at all times, strengthening it when it becomes soft.
And if necessity provokes the decomposition of that due to corrosion or pruritus, or pain, or abscess that occurs in the area, then you incise and divide that and eradicate the ointment and correct what has occurred by this method of cure; then return the ointment, if times allow; and adjust the tension between them until it is healed.
Capitol VIII.
For the restoration of the ribs when they are fractured.
Know that a fracture of the ribs occurs only in large areas where they meet; and at the ends of their front part, no such contact causes fractures since they are cartilaginous. And the knowledge of this is not concealed from the feeling of the inquiry into it by the fingers.
And the restoration should be done such that you equalize the fracture with your fingers according to the possible method, while it is realigned as it fits, and then apply an ointment and strengthen the broken bone with a splint, if needed.
And if the fracture of the ribs is declining towards the internal divisions, then it happens to the patient violent pain and puncture, just as pain occurs in one who has suffered a pleurisy, and for this the bone is covered with a veil; and there comes difficulty in breathing, coughing, and vomiting of blood; and this is of difficult cure.
And already the Antixs are ingeniously made with that same wire winding them.
And by them we say: place the patient on foods of the foot that cause inflation and swelling, so that the abdomen becomes inflated and extended, and the fracture is pushed towards the external parts.
But we must consider this so that it is not a trivial cause to generate an abscess suddenly; if it does occur, then help is needed for this.
And some say that it should be placed above the abdomen and near where it is strong; this seems like reasoning, but nevertheless it is feared that the abdomen might carry the superfluities to that place due to its weakness.
And some of them would say: cover the area with wool that is already submerged in caut oil, and place powders between the ribs until it is full, making the wound equal when you wrap it according to roundness; and treat the patient with a cure of food and medicine.
And if the pain is intense and overwhelming for the patient, and the bone cannot be punctured with a needle due to the wound, be cautious about the patient, then cut over the area, expose the broken rib, and place your hand over that instrument which contains the ciphac, the memory of which precedes, and cut the bone with ease, and extract it.
And when we adjust the two edges of the wound, if it is large, with suturing, and treat it with plasters until it heals.
And if an abscess occurs inside, then incise and insert powders in diluted oil, place your hand over the area, and treat the patient with what is appropriate for the abscess inside.
And may he be placed on his back on the mattress on which he sleeps, until he is cured.
Chapter IX.
On the restoration of fractures of the spine and the neck.
In some cases of fracture of the bones of the neck, and then apply traction, similar to that used for spinal fractures. And when this happens to someone and you want to know if they will be cured or not, then consider whether their muscles are already softened, numbed, and dead, unable to grow, extend, or strengthen. When you stretch them or prick them with a needle and they do not feel pain, you can see that they are not recovering, and in such cases, the condition is fatal.
And if they feel pain in this constriction when you stretch their hands and prick them, then you can see that the spine of the bone is saved and that the patient will recover with treatment.
And if you see the spine of the neck in this state and want to know if it will be cured or not, then consider the feet of the patient.
When you see that it has already softened, proceed with what is done in the hands, and when he lies on his back, apply ventilation and evacuation as he desires, and sometimes he will try to urinate and cannot, then you should know it is fatal, and then do not trouble with his cure.
But if no cause of those occurs, the cause is better and milder.
And the cure for him is that you apply cold to the abscess caut where you place it on the spinous or shaved spine, or with bunches of wet herbs; place it over that area for some time during the day until the abscess caut is numbed.
And then place one of the comforting and existing plasters, and strengthen it with honey; command the patient to rest and be tranquil and not sleep on the part where he feels pain until he is healed.
And if you need to incise the bone satagias or any cause that is separated from him, then you should cauterize over the cord and hold that bone; and adjust the two edges of the wound,缝合如果伤口较大；然后治愈那块用肉色膏药，直到他痊愈。请注意，这里的翻译可能需要根据上下文进一步调整以确保准确性。
If the hip bone is broken and it is the end of the femur, then insert your left hand's thumb into the buttock, and equalize the broken bone with your other hand as much as possible through the second equation; then place a compress and bandage there if you need those, and strengthen that.
And if you feel broken fragments in it, then move those fragments aside and treat the wound with the cure that follows until it is healed.
Capitol.
For the restoration of the hip.
The bones of the hips are broken, and if they break, then the fracture is merely communication at the extremities of those bones and are split in length and decline towards the inner parts; and pain occurs in the area and punctures it, and the leg is paralyzed when it fractures.
And the restoration of the hip is that you place your hand over it, maintaining it above the fracture which has the figure of the bone.
And if the fracture is only in the extremity of the limb, then you align it according to what appears proper by equalization until it resembles its natural figure.
And if the fracture is in the length or what has already declined towards the parts, then you lay the patient on his side and prepare for the restoration of that fracture. And when you have aligned it, apply a plaster over it, and place the wooden or copper splint over it, and secure with bandaging without fearing the puncture of the fracture or removal of the splint.
And align the concavity with what fills it, so that as it swells it takes the bandaging according to alignment, and order the patient to sleep on his back or on his side.
And if an abscess forms, then you stop the extension of it and its restoration until the abscess is sedated, and apply what soaks it according to what is preceded; and then return to its restoration, and secure it thusly as appropriate.
And if accidents occur in the joints or are comminuted, then treat them.
Capitol. xi.
For the restoration of the fracture of theadjouteri.
Adjutori is that which is between the codia (a bone in the upper arm) and the head of the shoulder.
And if it is broken, then the restoration of it is in one of two ways, of which the first is that you take a rod of rough wood according to this form:
And insert two pins at the ends, and then hang it from the elevated location.
And place the patient on a bench; then put his broken arm over the rod until it reaches the nodal point of which the curvature of the rod is attached.
And suspend it above that with some heavy weight, or the attendant extend it to the parts left; then the physician place his hands on the fracture at the same time, until the fracture returns according to its natural course.
And the other method is that the patient be laid on his side with his neck supported and his head suspended by the hand from his collarbone with flax; then command two ministers that one of them hold what is above the fracture with his hands; and the other hold the rest of him; and each of them extend to their part.
And if you want the extension to be stronger, then strengthen the support of the fracture with flax and that of another with another piece of flax, and each of the two ministers extend to their parts.
And if the fracture is near the end of the muscle, then place the middle of the flax over the tendon and let the other end be held at the fracture to secure it.
And similarly, if the fracture is near the joint, then place the flax over that location and the joint.
Equalize that with ease and your work, and when it is equalized according to what is needed and applied properly, then strengthen it if no abscess occurs.
If an abscess occurs on the seventh day, then leave the string in place, and place a woolen pad soaked in vinegar and oil under it. Then strengthen the abscess.
The method to strengthen it is to place a poultice over the fracture, and then wrap a cloth around the poultice; then adjust the arm over this support, and place your hand open over its muscle.
And place the cloth and strengthen the arm over this support so that the arm is in a stable position, unless some cause of the broken bone prohibits this.
And then use splints.
And you place that splint over the fracture which is longer and stronger than the other splints; and between each splint, you leave the width of a finger, and the length of the splints according to the breakage plus the width of three fingers in total.
And then strengthen the splints with the bandage which I mentioned at the beginning of this chapter.
And let your grip on the place of the fracture be rather strong. And when the fracture is more elongated, let the grip be lesser.
And so, if you adjust the position of the bones and apply the grip as we said when restoring the limb to its position, then you do this.
And if you fear an abscess, cauterize, then let the grip and bones remain for seven days as we said.
And then consider the ligament in all parts for three days so that no infection or inflammation occurs; or is forbidden food to reach the limb due to the excess of grip; and so correct all this as we said.
But if you are confident that no cause of this will occur, then do not remove the bandage for at least three days or more.
And let the patient lie on their back, and their hands be over their stomach.
And place yourself over the assistant holding a basket full of wool equally, and consider at all times during the night or day that the figure of the broken limb is not distorted, or that the ligament is softened, therefore correct this entirely with your virtue.
And place the food for the patient according to the order we have mentioned, ensuring that the food starts subtle and gradually becomes stronger; then observe as the food thickens.
Four days after the assistant and the belt are strengthened for four days; then observe as they become looser, and a bath is given, along with ointments that correct this.
And if the fracture has been irritated, then do not loosen the ligament or the splints for four days or up to two months.
Chapter XII.
On the Restoration of Fractures of the Arm.
The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the humerus and the ulna. The former is smaller and is that which connects to the shoulder, while the latter is larger and is placed below the smaller one.
And if the large or small firebrand is broken forcefully, and you must break them both together.
And when the small firebrand is broken above, then the restoration of it is slight, and the healing of it is even more slight.
And when the firebrand is broken, if you leave its fracture bad, then the healing of it is difficult.
And worse than that is when two long bones are broken together.
And so, if the bone that is broken is the small firebrand above, then it is convenient for the doctor to perform the restoration of it, allowing a slight extension in order to facilitate its alignment.
But if the large firebrand is what is broken, then you must allow more significant extension.
And if both firebrands are broken together, then you must allow greater force in the extension.
And you must place your hand figure for the restoration and extension of it, spreading the hand on a cushion, with the wrist above the parts above, more so than all others, and the little finger be lower than the other fingers, and the patient's thigh be placed over a sloped board.
And place a cushion in front of them at their head or side, so that the patient does not further strain.
And then the minister extends the arm of the affected side and places it either on his own hand or on a cushion, and another minister extends it similarly above.
And then the doctor equalizes the bone inside, setting it according to the best shape possible.
And if there are fragments in the fracture of the bone, then you must force to reduce all pieces to their proper place with your virtue.
And if in it there appear fragments separated that pierce the tendon and are not to your satisfaction in the restoration of it, then you proceed upon it and set those according to the manner which we have said above.
More if the fracture is external, I have already dealt with that in a separate chapter, and therefore take up the treatment of it.
And if an abscess occurs at the beginning of your restoration, then you apply a cloth made of woolen thread soaked in olive oil and white wax, making it medium in thickness and fineness, and strongly wrap the cloth over that with a fine string so that the abscess is compressed; then remove the wax and apply a prepared plaster of powdered mulet wrapped in flax; and place the flax above that fracture on the side and more firmly.
And know that the number of ribs in the arm I see in the major dispositions, or said differently, the fracture in one bone or two bones together.
And then place your compression firmly on the location of the fracture more strongly and vehemently. When the compression is applied to the parts above or below the fracture, apply it a little more mild according to how the memory of it is recalled at the beginning of the chapter.
And the cloths that you wrap around the fracture should be moistened cloths, neither hard nor rough. The thick material used for the bandage should be strong and made from properly mixed fine and coarse fabrics, as we have recommended.
And consider the limb and the ligament for several days. And if any cause arises for which correction is necessary, as was previously mentioned for what occurs to the limb, then immerse the limb in water until that disturbance ceases.
And keep the limb from being restrained until it rests, and then remove the compression.
And if the constriction is already softened and the bone is already restored and appears like those, then correct all this with your virtue.
And consider more if the nourishment is prohibited from reaching the member due to excessive constriction, for then you must soften that slightly and leave it for a few days until the nourishment flows to that, and strengthen it accordingly.
And if to the patient none of the causes we have mentioned occur, then you must not let it slip for about 20 days or around those.
And place the patient's hand for its virtue of movement agitation, and let it sleep on its side.
And know that this fracture is restored in 30 days or in 32 days, or more gently restored in 28 days, and all this is according to the complexity and disposition of the virtues.
Chapter XIII.
On the restoration of fractures of the finger and the toes.
Know that at the wrist of the hand and the knuckles of the fingers when a fracture occurs, do not hurt them but rub them gently.
And when a fracture or sprain occurs in the hand, ensure that the patient remains lying down and hold the limb for about a hundred seconds to ensure equality, then place your hand over the extended one.
And then extend the broken bones and the doctor realign them where they should be with good alignment.
And then apply a plaster and bandage, if no abscess forms use a cautery instead; then place a slice of it over the area according to its size, and you have now wrapped that in cloth.
More so if the tear is inside the palm, then make a makeshift pad of cloth, and command the patient to hold it tightly with their torn palm; then have them keep it tightly wrapped in long cloth.
And let the slice of cloth be light, so that the palm can press against it; and hold it tightly as needed.
If the fracture is on the outer parts, then you should place another strip above the bone and another strip on the part below in your palm, so that your hand is open and straight; then place the splint, as if you were turning your hand at a right angle between the fingers with grains of wheat.
If you happen to fracture one of the bones in the fingers, then if it is the base of the finger, equalize according to the extent and then strengthen on the palm. If you wish, place a small strip straight so that the fracture is elevated and not weakened.
If the fracture is in the other fingers, as in the middle finger, or the index, or the ring, or the little finger, then equalize and ligate on the finger where that bone is; or ligate all according to continuity, which is better; or place a small strip above that bone, as we said for the base of the finger.
And consider, in your restoration, and that, the disposition of applying a cautery and opposing it — in your operation — according to what is customary when such a cause occurs, as per the repeated narrative of it.
Chapter XIV.
For the restoration of fracture of the hip bone.
The hip bone, when fractured, is felt according to how it is displaced forward or backward.
And the restoration is done by strengthening the ligaments over the fracture and placing another ligament below the fracture, with the patient lying on their belly and facing down.
And then the surgeon extends the ligament to its proper place according to the quality of the fracture, when it is in the middle of the bone.
But if it is applied to the back of the hip, then the ligament is placed at the outer side of the thigh, so that the extension reaches there, and another ligament is placed below the fracture.
And similarly, if the fracture is applied to the outer side of the thigh, then the ligament is placed at the outer side of the thigh, and the extension is made to the parts below.
And then the doctor aligns the bone by bringing his hands close to where you reduced it according to the natural form; the bone is joined by good conjunction; then apply a plaster and bandage, so as not to cause an abscess in the member. But if an abscess does occur, then you let it alone for a few days until the abscess can be cauterized, and then return to your treatment.
The bandaging should be done as follows: first, wrap a hard bandage around the fracture, fold it two or three times, and secure it to prevent any excess; then wrap the bandage until it reaches the ankle and the heel of the foot.
Insert a long piece of flax between the thigh and the inner side of the leg at the fracture site, ensuring that the ends of the flax extend well above both parts, then wrap this area with the bandage.
Then place astilbes (medicinal herbs) on the thigh at the fracture site, and place a stick over the bone of the leg.
And then fill the space between the waist and the thigh with soft cloths, so that the contraction is constricted.
And then begin a strong bandage around the middle over the place of the fracture with three or four layers, and the farther you are from the site of the fracture, the lesser, lighter, and more flexible your bandage should be.
And then extend the two ends of the bandage to the sides where it reaches the foot's cavity, and strengthen both ends of the stars on the other side so that the plaster does not shift from its place.
And then place the bandage over it so that it does not irritate the limb with corrosion, abscess, or inflammation; and if any of these conditions occur, you should treat them accordingly, and immediately correct whatever happens, as we have said before.
If the bone is badly damaged, then try to align it as much as possible; if you cannot, set it and immobilize it, and treat the area from which the memory was recalled until it is healed.
And sometimes this fracture of the hip is strengthened by another that is adjusted to it with stays, as we have said in the assistant and·on the arm.
But more so in the restoration of the limb in such a manner, no limp occurs in the patient; and if it is restored alone, or another other leg is applied, then it is necessary that the corresponding one limp.
And you should know that the hip is strengthened within 10 days or a few more months, and all this depends on the diversity of the complexities and other arrangements.
Chapter XV.
On the restoration of the fracture of the tibia.
You should know that fractures of the tibia occur more frequently, and often result in multiple days of atrophy.
But if the fracture occurs, then it is merely a fissure or a slight crack in its parts, and about this, everything depends on the sensation.
And the restoration of it is attempted to be made equal what is broken from the parts of it among the fingers according to which is possible by equilibrium and facilitation and fabrication.
And place a plaster there over the round stencil, if you need that; and strengthen it above at the stricture to what is suitable.
And consider all the dispositions which we have recommended in other fractures, thus as for abscess and appearance to those that arise when opposing all accidents at what is suitable until it is healed.
Capitol. XVI.
Of the restoration of the fracture of the flank.
Know that in the flank there are two bones, of which one is thick and is named after the flank; and the other is thin and is named floppy.
And accidents of the species of fracture occur to the spaces of the bones of the arm, and for this, the restoration of it is made just as the restoration of the arm, and its operation is one.
And if you need to break two bones together, the joint is dislocated in all directions.
And if the finer bone is broken, the joint is dislocated向前。
And if the larger bone is broken, you find the fracture, and it is one of those causes that are beyond your control.
And then administer extension, equilibrium, and ligature of the tendons according to this equalment.
However, more importantly, if the joint fracture is located having marks stable, let the extension be milder and more gentle, and rely on your virtue to alleviate it.
And in the joint, if there is any cause for operation on the arm, and when you equalize the stars and complete your entire surgical operation, then you will take pieces of wood from the thigh which are placed under the causes that are stopped in soles, and make them accordingly from palm branches; select those with little coarseness, not too large like hand-sized ones, and let their length be according to the length of the joint, and the depth within the flesh.
And then wrap each one in two layers of cloth according to the length of it, and place one layer over the point of the leg on one side and the other layer on the other side, and let them be placed inside directly under the foot.
And then place the two stakes in three locations of both extremities and at the middle location, for at this structure the leg is prohibited from tilting to the right or left, and must be in good alignment.
And then a brace of wood is administered according to the length of the leg; and place the leg in this position so that it maintains its movement.
And especially make sure you do this in a fracture, for when there is a fracture, it is properly called.
And then consider each day the leg and study it carefully, and keep it free from abscesses and inflammation or other similar causes; and if any of these causes occur, then stop what you are doing until it is healed.
Chapter XVII.
Of the fracture of the tarsus and the bones of the foot and toes.
Fractures do not occur in the tarsus as a whole; more often fractures affect the bones of the foot; and fractures of the toes of the foot are rare, and when they do occur, they are not treated with traction but are handled according to the appropriate method.
And if fractures occur in the bones of the foot and sometimes those bones need to be elevated above each other, then place the patient's foot on a prepared platform as described.
Then place the other foot on what is elevated under those bones, and compress, press, and align those bones back into their proper places.
Then apply a plaster and cover it with a cloth, and place the patient's foot on a small table with two supports.
Then firmly hold the foot in proper alignment, after you have wrapped it with cloths and other materials as needed.
And when three or four days have passed, then you untie the bandage, for you will find that the bones are broken or are dislocated, and the operation in those cases is as you know.
And if some say they are broken, then restore those, and set them as I and have taught you in the restoration of the fingers of the hand. And then place the broken finger straight according to the length of the finger, and slightly to the side of it; and place the hand on this table which you have been taught, and tightly bind it with a bandage.
And if what is broken of the bones are two or three or more, then you place each broken finger straight according to its quantity wrapped in a linen cloth, and strengthen the table under the base of the hand, and standing over one of the ends of the table poke a hole in the sole of the hand so that it has good retention.
And it is important for you not to forget that you should not consider all the causes which we have mentioned to you in other fractures of the accidents that we have discussed; and pause your treatment where it applies.
Chapter XVIII.
On the fracture of the thigh bone and the shinbone, and the groin of a man.
When the thigh bone is fractured, place the limb in a horizontal position, and slightly incline it towards the affected side by a little, and keep it supported behind.
And the midwife fills the thigh with cloth, and it is done in the thigh as hoped; and the woman is supported, and her leg is slowly elevated little by little, for all this must be carried out so that it is in front of the affected thigh as hoped and the fractured bone returns.
And place powder on the leg, and when she wants to urinate, moisten the cloth to facilitate it; then she urinates, return to her original position, and put back the powder as it was at the beginning.
And do this for seven days or so, for it will be restored.
And if you wish, take a bladder of sheep and strengthen it by placing a cannula of reed over the urethra; then insert the entire bladder into his cavity, and proceed to blow into the cannula with virtue until the bladder inflates inside the cavity, that the fracture may return.
And it should be filled with honey and left for some days according to our reckoning, until it is healed.
And when the bone of the thigh of a man or woman is broken, then administer in the restoration and needle therapy for it what we have prescribed for the bone of the hip.
And what is right is not hidden in these nearby fractures that occur rarely, but especially to those who have some study and use and understand this my free will; for that fracture means to you through the major dispositional directions in the restoration and stricture of it, and therefore understand well.
In the case of the thigh of a man when it is broken, protect it from injury, and place the thigh in it; then cover it with a bandage, wrap it up, and leave it for three days or about that time, until it is healed.
Chapter XIX.
For the restoration of bone fractures when they are displaced.
It is convenient for you to treat those upon whom a displaced fracture occurs, especially if the bone is large, such as the thigh bone or the fibula, or similar. You should set and bloodlet that area frequently, provided the conditions for bloodletting are favorable, as we have previously described.
And if the displacement exudes pus, then you should ensure that you set the wound in retention and sprinkle it with saffron powder, unless another cause is present.
And then begin to restore the fracture on that same day, and do not delay this, unless an abscess occurs.
But if an abscess does occur, then you should allow the restoration to continue for nine days until the abscess is resolved, and do not approach it on the seventh or tenth day, for then you will likely cause worse accidents.
But if the broken bone is prominent over the unprotected knee, then you must probe to reduce it and equalize it with your hands with ease and little extension.
But if the extension is not at your readiness and the alignment with your hands is not easy, then you reduce it with your hands using this instrument; and this instrument is made of iron, its length being about seven or eight inches and its width according to the quantity of the wound; and for this, the doctor must take three or four of them according to the quantity needed in the treatment for any type of fracture.
And it should be round, and of small thickness so that it does not bend during the operation.
And it should have sharp ends, with edges at the outer ends; and be thick at the bottom, and thin within the parts.
And this is the shape of the instrument:
And it is named in Greek as "labre volentz atelarem," so it is a small palette.
In order that the limb may be rested, elevate it above the end of the bone.
Lay that [the limb] in one movement into a position where the bone returns and is aligned with some standard.
Therefore, effort must be made to align the ends of the fracture with each other. If the broken end is fine and does not take the instrument due to a good exception, then you must insert the end of that bone into where the instrument has the power to do so.
But if you cannot reduce the bone completely as we have advised, then incise that part with those knives which we have mentioned; it will be that part using one of the blades in any manner that is possible for you.
And then cleanse the bone of roughness and small scars.
And when the bone is reduced, and after the reduction, if the patient experiences intense pain in the bone, then you should know that the bone has not returned to its natural place; then do what you have been taught to give the patient great relief.
When your restoration of the mouth is completed, and then immerse a cloth in vinegar tightly wrung out, and precisely in summer, and do not stay over the wound with caustic or any other cause involving oil, so that no burning or corruption occur.
And then administer steams at the hour of the full moon when the restoration of the bone is completed, and leave the wound uncovered to see if it heals naturally, using flax and applying dressings according to the size of the wound.
And guard yourself with all caution that you do not irritate the wound near the fracture, for once mistakes are made by the doctors, they can cause death or severe illness in their patients, to their harm. And if the moon's phase is weak, moist, different from the phase of other fractures.
And if the wound is large or a bad wound, and you fear certain harmful accidents which we have mentioned, and you find pain in that area, then do not stay over those points, but instead apply steams with hard cloths instead of steams and strengthen it with those.
And when about one or two days after the wound begins to heal, where there is a sprain, then you lift up the cloth which you had placed over that limb, and then administer calks, ointments of which according to our custom we medicate wounds, thus with tetrafarmcon ointment and similar to it.
And you should remove the bandage and examine the wound at midday and in the evening while it is consolidating and closed, and ensure that the limb is prepared in such a manner that the suppuration drains from it to the parts where it is facilitated.
If the wound passes many days and is not consolidated, or the sprain is not abscised from it, then you should know that here you are dealing with the smaller issues, so examine the wound by palpation. And of those issues that are separated and extracted, and those from which the limb is not separated and cause pain, forcefully you must abscise those according to what is possible for you.
And if it happens to the swelling of the leg or arm, so is phlegm or another species of corruption and putrefaction, then you must place something where it is convenient for the cure of which there is a preceding narration in its own chapter.
And of that in which you must remain most silent and you make present your presence: when the bone is broken, you must appear over the limb as the bones of the thigh and the helper and resemble those of the great members, and do not presume entry to it, nor its extraction for which spots visible occur by this death; having left it there that it may heal, for strong bones will fall in about 20 days or 30; and then cure the swelling if you can see it, and if not leave it there.
Chapter .xx.
For the cure of swelling that occurs in the area of any fracture.
Spots visible occur in this swelling in the area of the healing of the fracture, and especially as it is near the joints, and they change the shape of the limb; and strongly you prohibit the limb from its natural movement.
Then consider if the swelling is recent and administer those medicines that have astringent properties such as aloes, saffron, and observe, search closely, and touch; try to use some or all of them, and confirm whether they are astringent or made from white oak bark or vinegar, and place one over the swelling in a cloth, and apply pressure on it with good constriction.
And let the constriction remain without loosening it for many days; and then loosen it and apply another, while the swelling is reduced; or strengthen over that lead strip, as lead has the property of reducing all that is swollen in the limbs.
Mais if the swelling has already turned into a hard lump and is strengthened, and if necessity demands to open it frequently, then cut through it at its weakest part, and incise the excess and prominent part, or let that hang with astringent herbs until it is reduced; and care for it until it is healed.
Chapter XXI.
For the restoration of a fracture when it has been restored, then approximate that limb according to its natural nature.
When a bone fracture is restored, then approximate that subtle limb and joint, but this is not done except for certain causes: of which one is the abundance of solution of the ligament and its joining is not done according to what is due; or by excess of tightening of the ligaments among which nutrition may be prohibited from flowing to the limb; or by excess of ointment application; or by excessive unnecessary movement; or by lack of strength in the body of the patient and weakness of it.
And the treatment for this is to weaken the patient and make his heart gentle while blood is multiplied in him; give him baths; and insert hope and joy into him.
Then place your hand on the limb, so that the hand draws nourishment to it, or continue the application of the wet ointment, while the nourishment flows and returns to its natural shape.
Chapter XXII.
For the treatment of broken bones when they are restored tortuously, and prohibit the operation on them.
When the limb is restored near the healing of tortuosity and prominence in the broken bone and its setting, and this is due to the form of the limb itself, yet more so the limb is not prohibited from its natural operation, then you should not receive the word of one who thinks that limb is newly broken.
Yet there are many foolish and unskilled doctors and restorers who have done this in our land; and this operation is greatly reproachable, leading to great fear from the sign of which is fatal.
Yet if claudication and setting are recent, then it should be soaked in clear water in which herbs softening it are placed, such as hyssop, thyme, clover, and similar; and it should be dressed with a soft plaster likewise well made; or what is pressed with mucilage of thyme and is sprinkled with powder of linen or oil of rosemary, and is plastered with that; or what is pressed with fat figs and is stitched with goose feathers, and similar to those in the medicines named as consolidators.
And sometimes it is dissolved by frequent gentle friction with the more humid ones, and movement of the limb should be administered at all times in all hours.
And if tortuosity has already gone on before and is strong and converted into a stone and provoked, it is necessary to cure it, so that the pus above the cecum and the continuity of the os be dissolved and incised, and what is superfluous of the nodation of that metey be administered to the bone with sharp incisors, and facilitation should be administered in that which is solicited and studied.
Chapter XXIII.
On the Speech about Dislocation.
Dislocation is the displacement of one of the joints of that region, making movement prohibited and altering the figure of the limb, causing severe pain and injuries in the patient.
Therefore, when a dislocation occurs, it is necessary to act quickly to reduce it. Do not delay the reduction, for if delayed, the area can become gangrenous, and the dislocation will be more difficult to reduce.
And therefore it should not be cut nor stretched at the time of the abscess, for minutes ago have caused spasm and tooth pains.
When this happens, you should perform a perineal incision on the thigh, and allow the abscess to rest within; then apply cold water and oil to the area, and reduce it with ease.
And each member should be treated with water, of which the remembrance will come to its place.
And you have already ordered the chapters on dislocation according to what follows in fracture; from the division of the body above, then proceed.
Chapter XXIV.
On the treatment of dislocation of the jaw, proceed.
When both jaws are dislocated without injury; and the dislocation of both occurs in one of two ways: either they are slightly removed from their places with little movement and somewhat softened; or they are completely dislocated, at which point they should be softened at the joint where saliva flows from the thigh, so that it cannot hold that position nor close its mouth, and the tongue of the patient should be wrapped in a cloth.
When the dislocation is minor, then in major arrangements it returns by itself for little cause.
But if the dislocation is complete and thorough, then you must administer a reduction of it lightly, and not delay it entirely.
And the minister should hold the patient's head, and the doctor insert his thumb from one side of the patient's mouth into the region of the dislocation inside the mouth if the dislocation is on one side; or he should insert both thumbs at the same time if the dislocation affects both sides, with the other fingers supporting outside to balance. And command the patient to stop moving their jaw and allow those that are out of place to return to their proper positions; and the doctor should align the jaw and push it back into its correct position.
And if the reduction is difficult, especially if both jaws are completely dislocated, then apply evaporation with water and oil. Lightly administer the reduction of both, and do not delay the reduction of both entirely, as we have said before.
And when we have returned them and equalized them, and closed the mouth of the patient without softening it, then place over those powders of cloth soaked in cerote, and made of wax and rubbed oil; and soon let it be moistened with many cloths.
And let the patient lie on his side, with his head standing between two pillows, so that it does not turn to the right or left; and do not force him to spit for any cause; having his food ready, after which when the pains are relieved and the jaws are relaxed, then allow him what he wants.
And let this be administered easily, and do not trouble with the opening of the mouth for eating, drinking, and spitting, until the jaw is relaxed and healed.
And if the reduction of two jaws when dislocated at any time and cannot be returned to their places, then movements or kneading accidents may cause fevers and constant swelling. And a strong wind is felt in the abdomen of the patient, with strong pain and vomiting of pure bile.
And when you see this, know that it is dangerous; often such cases result in death for the one who suffers this within a few days.
Capitol.xxv.
Of the reduction of the dislocation of the furcula and the extremity of the muscle.
The furcula is not dislocated within the sternum by its continuity with the feet; sometimes it is dislocated at the outer part, and this is declared by sensation.
And the restoration of it is that the patient lies on his back and extends his arms. And then press the area with your palm firmly, for it will return.
And then place your hand over the area, apply the plaster and powders, and strengthen it.
More often, the extremity of that which is connected to the thigh is not dislocated in any day; therefore, it should be reduced and aligned as we have said, according to what you are equipped with.
And then place yourself over the plaster, powder, extract, and command the patient to adhere to tranquility and rest until it is healed.
And this method of cure is to reduce the extremity of the muscle when it is separated from its place.
Chapter XXVI.
On the reduction of the dislocation of the muscle.
Know that the muscle is not dislocated in any of three ways, one of which is when it is dislocated from the tendon to the bone.
And the second is when it is dislocated above the muscle, which is called tartr; and it is not dislocated at the back parts through the shoulder; and it is not dislocated at the front parts through the nerves.
And it is more dislocated and outward at the back parts of the tendon where the muscles attach. It is easily dislocated in those areas where there are few muscles, but with many muscle tissues, it is more difficult to dislocate.
And often accidents occur to some men through percussion or blow, and the muscle of him is abscessed due to a boil, and is pierced by this that it has been dislocated.
Then probe where you were particularly over him, and then proceed with his cure.
And the dislocation is known when it is in the joint areas; you must feel for bumps; so that you can distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the normal muscle, which shows a clear difference; and you find a concavity at the head of the muscle. When feeling with your fingers at the head of the muscle, it should be like touching a hollow, and the patient cannot bring his hand to his ear nor move it for all movements.
If it is dislocated, you must feel the foot or above it, and then you will find a clear touch, and it is not hidden.
And for this dislocation, a gentle reduction is made when it is fresh and the patient is still in pain.
And the reduction is that the minister raises his hand to the parts above; then places the tight bandage, and raises the joint with strength at its place, and the minister raises his hand and extends it there; then places it so that it returns lightly.
And if for what we have said it does not return, and only from the beginning that caused the dislocation, after several days, then it should be bathed in warm water and a moistening poultice applied, as if of rue, fenugreek, and melilot in water, and administered.
And then the foot should be placed on its sole and pressed with the bandage until it is warm enough to relax and avoid stiffness. Then the doctor places his hand on the sole, raises the head of the muscle with virtue, and pulls the foot of the patient so that it is not disturbed by the parts below. Another minister holds the foot of the patient, ensuring it is not overstretched, for it returns quickly to its place.
And if you wish, return the other in this manner: and it is that you make present a man who be longer than the patient, and stand on the side of that limb, and interpose his muscle placing the shivering of the patient under his own, elevate the shivering of him into parts above between that patient's limb being suspended in air, and another minister pull the hand of the patient from the sides away from his own abdomen. But if the patient is light, then you have to make sure that another cause is suspended, for fear that the serious one returns quickly.
And it is returned by another method: and it is that a long stake be placed in the ground with its head of round figure, as of mortar cloth, neither thick nor thin, and then placed under the patient; so that you lay cloths on the head of the stake, and the patient stands according to the length of the stake, and then extend his hand to the sides of the other part; and the body of him is extended from the other side with strength, for the joint returns to its place with speed.
And if the reduction is difficult due to all the causes we have said, then use this cure: you should take a staff whose length is two cubits, and its width is four fingers, and its thickness be enlarged at the top according to this form:
And then place a round cloth over the staff for the staff not to slip on the patient.
And then place the staff under the patient, and extend your hand or arm over the staff between the parts you have placed, and tie the staff to the helper and the arm, and the extremity of the hand.
And then place your arm on a step of the ladder according to its width, and your hand extended over the parts you have placed, and the other part be suspended from the other side, that the joint may remain steady.
And when the staff is completed in any manner that is possible for you, then place a woollen rope of equal thickness; and then apply a plaster prepared from powder of molybdaenum and honey over all the muscle, so as to be thoroughly mixed on top, and then tightly bind the staff with decent bandaging; the staff should be rotated over the plaster, and your hand should be attached to the end of the staff, and let it be, without moving your hand for seven days.
And ensure that the patient is comfortable after the member is rested, for this is more conducive to his recovery.
And the food should be given in larger quantities about seven or five times, and exercise should be performed; therefore, if it is closed and not softened, then it is already healed.
If the joint is dislocated due to small movements caused by humidity that affects it or for another reason, then you should apply a cautery to it three times, as previously mentioned in the chapter on cautery.
And if all this is done and after seven days the ligament is released but the joint is not closed, and the poultice and stricture are reduced several times over it, yet it is not closed and it cannot elevate that arm above its parts, then you should know that the nerves of the muscle, which are at the head of the muscle, are either incised or extended or softened, and you should know that the joint will never be fixed in its proper place.
For the dislocation of that which is caused, you should move the foot and the calf or the parts behind, reducing it with impulse and extension by the hands, while it returns.
And let it be applied in the other stricture, and care that within it be healed.
And if there happens a delay in the healing and a tardiness in the movement of the limb, then the patient uses baths with warm waters until that delay is alleviated and returns to its natural state.
Chapter XXVII.
On the cure of dislocation of the shoulder.
Know that the joint of the shoulder is dislocated with difficulty and seems to return with difficulty; it can be dislocated in all directions, but most commonly in front and behind. The dislocation is not hidden; whether you quickly observe it or touch it according to the shape it is dislocated, when you set the dislocated shoulder in place, this is clearly manifest, for the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm or reach its own muscle.
And mark the marks on the skin, and reduce the dislocation as soon as possible before it comes to an abscess. For if it reaches an abscess, reduction is difficult, and even with great effort, it may not be fully cured; especially when it is in the rear parts, for it is worse than all other types of dislocation, causing more pain and often leading to death.
And the restoration of it, when that is possible to reduce, is that his hand be stretched out with two more, and his arm be extended, and the doctor's hands be on his knee and let him, and press the joint with the heels of his hands or with the edge of his palm as it returns to its place.
If the dislocation is in the front parts, then return it thus by bending his hand towards his own hand, striking the knee with the edge of his palm.
And if the dislocation does not yield to reduction, then administer violent extension and strong force.
And let two ministers extend the arm, and hold that attempt with two ministers so that it is not resisted during the extension.
And then rotate the arm completely around, as it is wrapped with a long folded cloth around the patient's hand, or bandage.
And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, anoint that area with some oil so that it helps in the lubrication of the joint and facilitates its movement; then press the joint with strong pressure as it returns.
And after the reduction of the cavity let it be placed on that cushion in which there is astringency and excretion of white from the oak, and it should be extended by traction, and the arm should be suspended from the neck, and let it be left for some days.
And then let it be released; and therefore if the joint is formed in that location, then you release the ligament and leave it there.
And if you see the joint not well strengthened, then repeat the application of the plaster and the ligament, and leave it there for some days until it is extended; and then release it.
But if accidents happen to it gravitate near the reduction of the joint, and its position is in motion, then administer moistening in bath and subtle friction and compression, until it is relieved; or pause over the joint occasionally, so it is a matter of rapid movement; and then bind it, and leave it over the bone day and night. And then expose that, and put it in bath; and when soaked, then friction the joint with gentle friction, and then repeat over it occasionally, so it is a matter of rapid movement, one time, and the second, and the third. am intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.
And if you wish, place your hand over that wet and flaccid opening on the side and strongly press upon it; do this several times, for that is wet and will bring it to its proper state.
Capitol.xxviii.
For the treatment of dislocation of the shoulder, it is of the joint where the arm meets the hand.
Shoulder of the hand is sometimes dislocated, and the reduction of this dislocation is easy. The opposite is true for other joints; however, more importantly, it is that there should be speed in the reduction when it is dislocated, before the area becomes swollen or an abscess occurs.
And the reduction of the shoulder dislocation is that you place the hand joint of the patient on a table and instruct them to extend their arm. The doctor then places his hand or palm over the vicinity of the joint, and gently push it back into its proper position.
More importantly, consider whether the palm is already placed on the patient's abdomen. Then, the patient should place both hands on a table to extend and reduce; if the dislocation preceded, place both hands of the patient, then position the patient's hand intricately on the table, so that the doctor's hand falls over that potential of the joint.
And so, if it returns quickly, that is good; otherwise, strengthen that and apply an ointment yielding to the abscess and leave it as it is; do not repeat this, for if you do, you will neither tolerate nor be able to proceed with the reduction of it any more than what has passed a day.
More importantly, assess the joint according to its tortuosity; and do not note any cause to the patient, but rather that your hand is softened and cannot strengthen any cause; then know that the nerves are torn or split, and thus it is not a matter of strengthening it with a cautery near the site and fortifying it thereby you confer some cause.
And since the gout has returned, then pause over the ointment which we have recommended, and let it be applied and strengthened for five days; then, return it to its position and leave it there, and exercise the patient's hand.
But if the movement in it has been sustained and occurred with some gravity, then apply that which is cooled water and some friction several times, until it is alleviated.
Capitol.xxix.
Of the cure of dislocation of the fingers.
In some cases, completely dislocate the fingers all at once.
And when one of those fingers is dislocated at the base of the palm or in its middle part, then hold the finger and push the dislocation back with your thumbs, until it returns to place.
Then hold the base of the finger, and suspend that part which is dislocated, leaving it for two days.
Then suspend that part and extend it until the finger is straight in its own day.
And when it is night, bind it according to that narration, and do not cease to loosen it during the day and exercise with movement, and bind it at night; and do this for several days until it straightens.
And make it seem as if you are doing this, even if it is dislocated in the hand, and hold that part closely and do your first operation on this, until it is healed.
And make it seem as if you are doing this when it is dislocated in other parts.
Capitol.
For the cure of dislocation of the spine in the second.
When a complete dislocation occurs in any of the spine or neck vertebrae, and multiple vertebrae are displaced from their places, then there is no cure for that, and death ensues.
And the sign of this is that the patient's excretion is forced out against their will, and they cannot retain it; often, several members of the body, or both hips, or two shoulders, or one of those, are softened. Or a vertebra is displaced from its place, because multiple times a vertebra is displaced and multiple times removal of those is done into four parts.
Then that is relieved at the rear parts and is named yellowness.
May the cure of that be such that when you consider if the yellowness arises from pus, then in that case there is neither cure nor recovery from it.
May it be such that when it arises from congelation or percussion or resemblance to those, the Ancients have already detailed the methods of cure in great length, of which the most returns to prophecy; but I shall now abbreviate that of which the few defects are due to the excess of the trope, by my proximity to the clarity of my exposition, with which I have here expanded and formed from various instruments of that from which I will show and expand it.
And of those, only the one that arises in two places properly is cured as I recommend.
And thus the patient is extended on his back close to the wall, and laid out with a wet cloth to prevent his feet from being chilled.
And place a straight stick, set in the ground at the end of the back near its head, and another stick across its feet at the other end of the stick.
The minister hold the stick, and it is not fixed in the ground; another minister hold the other according to that form.
And wrap around the patient's head and tie tightly with a leather thong; extend the end of the thong to the stick which is placed at the head, and fasten it there; and tie the other thongs strongly around the patient's hips, holding his legs; and adjust all the thongs and fasten them to the other stick which supports his feet.
And the minister should extend the thong to the part of the stick, and do not move both sticks and the thongs in which they are placed, but do not fix them as we have said.
And the doctor places his palms on the spine with strength so that it returns, or he places one hand on a table and adjusts his feet on the table as it returns.
And if it does not return in this way, then take a table of which the width or length is about three braccia, and dig into the wall where we said was near the hernia a place at the edge of the table. And place the majority of the table on the spine, and the doctor places his feet on the other edge, and presses well so that the spine is compressed and returns to its place.
And if you wish, open the wound which is turned in your hand; and when you are on the ground, place the patient's hernia at the heel of two sticks, the length of which is one braccio, and place his head at the heel of two sticks similarly positioned; ensure the distance between each stick is a palm. And make sure each stick is firmly fixed to the ground so it does not move.
And there is a round stick for the hole, and it is turned in the two slots of the two sticks.
And at the end of it is a slot in which the stick is fixed, the length of which is one palm's breadth as it is turned; and in the other two sticks it is similar to that.
And then strengthen the ligaments you have stretched in the feet of the patient in the slot where you place its head, and the ligaments you have stretched in the thighs of the patient in the hole where you place its feet.
And then you should place each hole with a minister who turns the hole with his hand, and the doctor straightens the spine as we have said.
And when the spine is returned and the area is straightened, then cover it with a paste of honey, and some wool; place a slice of table about three fingers wide or slightly more, and the length that can fit the area of jaundice, over the part of the spine.
And then apply the honey which we have said, and use the patient of subtle nutrition under where it is healed.
And if there is any danger in the area at the end of the healing, then ensure that medicines that mollify and relieve are administered through long-term use as we have recommended; and already a layer of lead is applied in that area.
And sometimes accidents occur at the end of the spinal vertebrae, and they are caused by that dislocation; and it is that bone for which you should beware so that no suspicion arises about it with this medicine, because it will be very harmful to you if it occurs.
Capitol.xxxxi.
On the treatment of dislocated hip.
Know that the joint of the hip and the joint of the muscle should occur only due to dislocation, and do not occur with those that happen in other joints with slight movement and concavity.
And the joint of the wrist is dislocated according to four manners, which is dislocated to the inner parts, or to the outer parts, or to the front parts, or to the back parts.
And mostly it is dislocated to the inner parts, and little to the front or back parts.
And the sign of dislocation to the inner parts is that when you adjust the brace of the healthy side against the injured side, the one without the bump appears higher than the other, and the injured side cannot bend its foot; this is the area where one should cautery the apostema, so that the head of the swelling is already reached here.
And the sign of one who experiences dislocation to the outer parts is that the symptoms of this condition are contrary to this dislocation.
And the sign of one who experiences dislocation to the front parts is that stretching the brace according to complement does not bend the foot that is in pain; if forced to go further and cannot do so at the front parts; his urine is retained, and his swelling is an apostema; you should treat his condition on the tibia.
And a sign of dislocation in the parts behind is that the shin does not expand, nor can it bend what is bent in front to be straightened, and the calf is shorter than the other, and the knee is softened, and the head of the thigh is deviated from that place.
The main sign of this dislocation is that you consider whether the dislocation is old, and if it is an old one, you already have it nearly reduced according to its position when you administer reduction by Roman method; then this is not part of the entire treatment. Therefore, you should not guess or make assumptions about it in that process.
For the case where the dislocation is recent and one of the four types of dislocation, you should turn the joint back and extend it to the internal and external parts, and manipulate it to the right and left sides, as it will naturally return to place without needing further treatment.
Moreover, if it does not return in this manner, you should prepare a strong application and extend the calf of the foot from the part below, or over its hands, or spread lian on the shin above the tibia; another person should stretch the hand from above trying to place the hands under the titillics of the foot; then firmly spread lion's grease on the sole of the foot, and have another person hold the end of the lian.
And it is the extension from his arm or from the inner part to the armpit, or from the back part to the waist.
And it is the extension of all these in one go, lifting the patient's body from the ground and allowing it to hang pendulously.
And this type of extension is special for all four.
And so if the dislocation returns as we have said, it will be good; otherwise, for every type, what I say about its own treatment is necessary.
In the reduction of its own, when dislocated, and the dislocation is in the inner parts, make sure the patient's leg is raised over his side; then place the bandages around the thigh in that location where between the head of the thigh bone and the location where the armpit is placed. And extend the bandage above the part of the armpit to the next inner part of the furcula.
And have another minister firmly take hold of the leg, and compress the large part of the thigh, then extend to the outer parts by strong extension, for thereby it returns to its proper place.
And this species is of a lighter cure for which this member is reduced as other species.
And if it is excused for you and you do not follow the training on this species of cure, then cover that both feet of the patient together with strong but gentle bandaging, over both the soles and both the insteps.
And let the length of each be by the quantity of four fingers, and let the patient's leg extended be more than the other by the quantity of two fingers.
And place the patient's leg over the head of the stake, and let it be on the side. And let the length of the rope from the ground be the quantity of two braces.
And command a strong young man to hold down the patient's thigh, and let another strong youth suspend the leg, while the other youth holds down the thigh with great force, so that the joint returns to its place quickly.
And in the reduction, when dislocation is at the part outward, cover the patient's leg with a blanket as we recommended when he was unconscious; and strongly bind the bandage around the injured leg and over its ankle.
And then place two stakes, one on the foot and the other on the head; and place adjusted stakes in the middle of the stake placed over which wet cloth is wrapped, so that the patient is not injured because the stake is between their thighs, for you should allow the extension from the parts left undone to be felt.
And each minister extend to his part, and the doctor with his hand equalize the reduction according to the art.
And when the dislocation is in the front parts, then it should be that the cushion is slightly extended, and this is according to this narrative method about the foot; and the doctor places the palm of his right hand on the heel of the gouty foot, and then draws it with the other hand, and at that draw, he extends the part left behind towards the front part.
If the dislocation is behind the parts, then do not allow the patient to lie on those parts, and elevate them above the ground; you should place him on a hard surface, as we have said when the width was displaced outward, according to what we said about lying on two widths; and his face and limbs should be extended, as we have said, with little change.
A compression should be applied on the area where the joint is displaced.
So, when the reduction is completed as it should — and you notice the sign of the joint's reduction, which is that you extend two limbs from the patient, and when you see them equal and the limb returns to its normal position and expands the surrounding tissues — then you know that the member has been returned according to what is right. Then you place two cushions and pad well with bandages so that the width is not disturbed in any of the parts; and you adhere the joint to rest for three days or four.
Then remove the bandage and padding, and compare one limb to the other.
When you see the equal signs in the incision, then know that the dislocation is already closed, and then let the patient go.
And if you see any cause of swelling, then return and apply a plaster to that area, and restructure it according to your first structure, and let it rest for three days.
Then release that area, and allow it to gradually heal over each part for some days until it is comfortable.
Capitol.xxxii.
On the treatment of dislocation of the shoulder.
The shoulder is dislocated in three ways: it can be dislocated to the outward parts, to the inward parts, and more to the front parts than to the back parts; it is not dislocated to the front parts.
And the sign of shoulder dislocation is that when you command the patient to apply their hand to their hip; then you know that the shoulder is dislocated.
And the restoration of all manners of it is that you make cease the labor straight, essay that it already extends its leg over this; attach your two knees to the face of it, and place his foot between your knees; then make attach the sole of it to your palms, hold those between your fingers on the sole of it with strength, and another minister extend his leg so that the sole returns to its place.
And the sign of its submission is that its leg adheres to the thigh with light, effortless movement.
And then apply this and make the leg adhere to the thigh, and afterward bind those repeatedly with a bandage for three or four days, and then remove those.
And do not use the labor of ambulation for some days until it is healed and comforted.
If the reduction of it is excused to you, then administer strong extension to the limbs of which in the cure of the hip, the preceding narration was given.
Chapter XXXIII.
Of the treatment of dislocation of the ankle.
The ankle is sometimes reduced by slight movement, and sometimes dislocated according to the injury, and the dislocation of the ankle is done either from the internal parts or from the external parts.
And the sign of the ankle dislocation is that you see the ankle swollen coming from the part to which it is dislocated.
More the treatment of the reduction of the ankle is by gentle return, and it should be stretched with ease and brought back into place.
More in the treatment of the ankle when it is dislocated according to injury, make sure you straighten the leg properly, and have a strong and brave assistant at the back of the injured leg in the middle of the location.
And then place your right hand on the top part of the foot, and with your left hand from below, place it on the location of the heel.
And then draw the foot toward your right hand, and towards the left side twice, and extend the left side; and push the foot on the right with the thigh bend it.
And do this twice according to how we have counted.
And then push the foot toward the thigh for the third time, and you are at the hip.
So if it returns in one or two pushes using this method, and if you can grasp the foot evenly, that is good; otherwise, then repeat the operation, for it may not have returned.
But if the reduction is forbidden to you as we have prescribed, then let the patient lie on his side on the ground, and place a firm cushion between the thighs, and you have already wrapped it with a cloth to prevent the wound from opening.
And then the minister holds their thighs, and another minister extends the foot with their hands or the cloth tied around the ankle of the foot; and each minister extends against the extension of their side, and the cushion is placed between the thighs of the patient, holding it there, so that the body of the patient is not drawn to the sides as you extend its length.
And then the doctor equalizes the dislocation with his hands, while another assistant holds the healthy thigh at the parts left behind, so that the dislocation returns with ease.
And then, as the dislocation returns and its reduction is declared to be sound, then apply a strong paste externally to that area, and bind the foot with lint to the leg.
And be careful not to press on or protect the nerves behind the ankle, as the lint over that area should not be too strong and severely irritate it.
And then leave that area for two or three days; and if the lint is moist, apply it externally.
And then remove the lint on the third day or the fourth, and prohibit the patient from walking for forty days. But if it is necessary to walk in that area, be sure that the dislocation is not dissolved and corrupted, and that it does not receive healing.
And if an abscess occurs, then make sure that you administer in the evacuation of it what we have described in our narrative in another place for treatment and fomentation, until it is relieved.
Capitol XXXIV.
For the treatment of dislocation of the toes of the feet.
Make sure that the one which is dislocated is gently reduced within a small extent; and what is not difficult, beforehand is easy.
But if the dislocation is in several toes of the foot, then make the patient lie on his side over a spot where he can be reduced, or on a table, and let him remain thus as if sleeping.
Then stand behind the foot, and place your hand over what you suspect to be the joint, and gently press that area with your hand to help it return to place, and observe that it is reduced and does not appear as a prominence in that spot.
Then place the patient's foot on a table that holds the entire foot, which has two ends, and firmly strengthen that area with good structure for three days; then remove it and allow the foot to rest by ambulation for several days, until it is strengthened and its recovery is assured.
Chapter XXXV.
Of the species of dislocation that occur from trauma or fracture or any other cause.
When any of these causes occur, and you undertake the cure of it and the restoration thereof, misfortunes may ensue.
And for this reason, you must not presume in the cure of it, but rather one who is wise in the art, long accustomed, merciful and pious; who delays, neither rash nor presumptuous; and who uses at the beginning of medicines that lead to the healing of abscesses only with a cautery, leaving the disease to divine judgment, but to him to whom you hope for salvation from perdition, for alleviation of the illness, in which you show some hope. And then strive to perform the reduction at the beginning of the cause, before it develops into an abscess.
And then, if the limb returns as we want, proceed to administer treatment that leads to the healing of the abscess with a cautery and heals the trauma according to what suits it from drying ointments.
And if dislocation is associated with fracture and accidents in the bones separated, then you force their joints, and do so as we have said in simple ailments that precede these in the places of those.
And guard and avoid according to your virtue that of the instrument in the ways of fear according to which my preaching precedes you; for this is better to you from your Creator, and more permanent to your glory, and more greetings to your true things in your time. Thus you finish the words of Albucasim perfectly of which may God bless. Amen.
