Oh, my children, now that I have completed this book, which is the last of medical science, through its completion you may find its end within it, and by its explanations and declarations, it is evident to me that I have composed this treatise for you, which is part of my surgical operations.
Since the surgical operation of the hand is practiced in our region and in our time almost entirely privately, despite the importance of its science and the difficulty of acquiring it; and there have been only occasional brief descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which have corrected many errors and hesitations but have closed off understanding of it and lengthened its study and art.
And it is clear to me that I should enliven that order in this treatise according to the way of explanation and declaration and abbreviation; and for the forms of the cautery tools and other instruments of the work to be added through the declaration and preparation, which cause is necessary.
More so, the reason why a good craftsman does not use his hand well in this our time is that the art of medicine is long and drawn out, and one must be trained beforehand to understand anatomy, which Galen knew well, recognizing the youthfulness of the members and their forms, as well as their joints and separations; and he had knowledge of the bones, nerves, and sinews, their number and their diseases; and of the pulsating veins and quiet ones, and the places of their effusion.
And for this, Hippocrates is said to be silent in the short work, but more so in the art of the hand.
More so, we have already spoken of this in the introduction to this book; for those who do not know what we said about anatomy, will surely fall into error because of it, and many people have died as a result, as I have seen too many such cases. For some are formed in this science but throw themselves into that other science and its experiments.
For I have seen a foolish and inexperienced doctor who, by mistake, caused an apostematosis scrophulosa in the neck of a woman, and damaged some arteries so that great blood loss occurred; the woman died among her many sufferings.
And there is another doctor who nearly removed a stone from a man who had suffered in his condition, and the stone was large, and it came to him, and he dried that stone with a piece of the bladder.
And I have already called for it to be extracted, and I saw that due to the size of the stone and the position of the patient, he would die.
And there was another doctor who took a stipend from a duke of our land for surgery, and arrived at a blacksmith named Negro who had suffered a fracture in his thigh; and because of the doctor's ignorance, he extracted the fracture, over the wound, with pillows and stakes of strong structure, and did not allow the wound to breathe.
And then let it slip according to his desires, and then reattach, and then leave it alone for a few days as commanded that we release the bandage; and thus remain until the thigh and foot recover, and proceed to heal.
And I was called to him, and prepared to untie the ligament, and tranquility and an attempt to relieve his pains was achieved.
But still, since corruption was confirmed in the member, I could not contain that, and did not cease to walk the corruption through the member while the illness persisted.
And I saw another doctor who incised a cancerous abscess, and it became ulcerated for several days, during which the malignancy of the lesion increased in the lord.
The cause is that the pain is purely due to melancholic humors, and does not affect the entire body, but rather affects a member that suffers from being attacked by all.
And for this reason, my son, it is necessary for you that the operation be devised in two ways: one where the operation is associated with health, and another where the work is perilous in its major considerations.
And I have already existed in this entire treatise where the operation is associated with error and fear; therefore, it is necessary for you to keep this and leave that, so that the leaves do not find a way to speak ill of you.
And therefore take your arms with diligence and protection of God, and your patients with happiness and firmness.
And use the best way by the grace of God seeking salvation and the praiseworthy success, and lay aside the terrible illnesses difficult to cure, and place your arms in that which fears you, so that sitting in your faith and in your name you do not fail: for more remains to your glory, and less elsewhere in the world and beyond in your sanctity.
Gualia already dissected in some monastic sources: Do not treat evil illness, lest bad doctors be named.
And I have already devoted this libel according to three chapters.
Begin the division of the book, and first of the first part. The first chapter ordered of the foot, in the forms of the instruments and in the tools of the cautery, and of what is necessary in the operation.
The division of the second part. The second chapter, on drying and perforation, and on cups, and on plaigs, and on extraction of arrows and similar, all categorized and ordered by the forms of the instruments.
The third chapter, on restoration and dislocation, and on the cure of tortoises and similar; a chapter ordered by the head between the feet, and by the forms of the instruments.
First, I will describe the quality of the coals for the cautery and their effects, and in which condition cautery is prohibited.
Therefore, I say that the discourse on the quality of the cautery coal and its effects is long and tedious, subtle through science, and a hidden secret; many wise men have spoken much about it, and they are in disagreement. For me, a little from their sermons suffices, as I fear the length.
And therefore it is said that a cautery is applied to the entire complexity universally which is of flesh or sinew, except for two complexities, which are complexities of sinew.
In the complexity of sinew and dry flesh, they will desiccate; for some said that a cautery is beneficial for this, while others said the opposite, that a cautery is not suitable in illness which is due to quality and dryness, for the nature of fire is quality and dryness, and it is inconvenient that an illness of sinew and dry flesh be healed by what is cautery and dry.
And say that those who say the opposite, that by cautery healing is done in all sinew and dry illness that comes in men's bodies, for when you compare the body of man to the elements of his body to the complexity of fire, you find the body is dry.
And I say according to his speech, for I have experienced this myself several times to confirm it.
But I do not consider that it comes to me who is already experienced in the practice of cautery through recent exercise, and who has known the diversity of human complexity and the disposition of illnesses in their manifestations, and the causes of those, and the accidents related to them, and the duration of those.
In other complications, it is not about your fear, and especially in wet and cold diseases, for all doctors are agreed on those, and they do not differ in applying cautery to them in youth.
Know, sons, that concerning the secret of curing by cautery with fire and its goodness, on the burning cautery medicine, it is because the fire is simple, its action reaching only the member being cauterized and not affecting other members only to a small harm.
But the action of the burning medicine reaches that part in the members where it touches, and strongly causes illness in the member that is difficult to heal and rapidly exacerbates it.
But fire, by its subtlety and the goodness of its substance, does not cause anything other than to superfluously burn. We have known this through experience and long service studying the art on the true causes; and for this reason, I am excused for the length of my discourse. If it were not that this is not written at my leisure in this pause, and if I did not reveal to you your secret about fire, its quality in operations and the way it expels diseases, I would use a philosophical demonstration, which would be acute in your ears.
And be wise, sons, that they do not disagree about the time when it is convenient to make a cautery and pause the best season of spring.
And I say that a cautery is convenient at all times, because the damage from the accidental season is submerged in the youth of what is burned by the cautery, and especially if the cautery is for pains or necessary pains, strong sores, which do not suffer delay because it is feared that those caused by malice are greater than small damage entering through time.
And this is not done on your parts, or, sons, those who do not esteem it but the common people and the foolish doctors, since for that illness which is cured by cautery it is not always ready, and they pause that consequence.
And the cause is not thus because they care for this, for a cautery is not other than in place of medicine which alters the composition and dries the humors which are the cause that wind brings pain.
Yet, however, excessive cautery over medicine for the expediency of its efficacy and virtue of its operation and greatness of its lord.
And it is possible that the patient's illness returns at some point in time, according to the complexity of the illness and the location of the illness, and its virtue, and what is prepared in the body from the aggregation of superfluities within it, and what is acquired in the body through food and semblance of those causes; but the illness where a cautery is administered is a subtle illness in a member with few superfluities and humidities, just as a dental cautery for pain and similar to that, it is possible that that pain does not return in it, but this is done in small amounts.
And more common speech is that the cautery is the last remedy of medicine, and it is a term used by those who do not understand it, for I believe it is not a cure that helps either from medicine or any other cause except the cautery.
And the cause is contrary to this; and the understanding that the cautery is the last remedy of medicine is only when one administers the methods of cure in some illnesses, and those medicines are not effective, and at the end of the illness, one administers the cautery, which helps then. And at this point from here, the last remedy of medicine is a cautery, not according to the understanding which I understand the vulgar and most of the foolish doctors.
And the ancients said that a cautery of gold is better than one made of iron, and they did not say this only because of the equality of gold and its sublime nature.
And they said that the place for cautery does not burn, since it is not absolutely charred; for I have already examined this and have observed that it does not do so in all bodies as in others, and a gold cautery is good and better than iron as they say; yet when you make a cautery with fire of gold, it has not been declared to you, for it ignites according to the quantity you want due to the reactivity of gold, and prepares to receive flame; if you adjust over the ignition, the gold melts by the fire, and it settles in the fire on some sheets so that the craftsman can cut through its occupation.
And for this, you should make the cautery of iron lighter and more precisely to the right position during the operation.
And I have already ordered this chapter concerning the cautery according to chapters, and I have ordered those of the leg within the foot, so that I delay the requester what he wants from me.
The first chapter.
This cautery addresses the cold and humidity over the servel accident of which there are two causes, these being the cause of soda and much trauma from a traumatic flow, called corissa, in the head, to the branches of the neck and to the ears leaking, and much sleepiness, and toothache, and the jaw, and universally all illness that comes from cold, such as paralytically, soda and apoplexy, and semblanz in those illnesses.
The form of this cautery is as follows: Primarily, you command the patient to be evacuated with a purgative medicine for three or four nights, according to the virtue needed by the patient, the age of the patient, and the patient's habits.
And then command those who shave his head to do so with scissors, and place that sezer between your hands on a lowered bench and have their hands rest on their own foot.
And then place the edge of your palm razor near his foot between his toes. More over, since the true location is found, mark that location with a pinch, and then heat the olive cautery of which this is the form:
And then place that cautery over the marked location with a pinch, in such a way that it descends gradually, and your hand is gradually constrained, while you rotate it.
And then lift your hand slightly and look at the location. If you see any part of the bone being revealed, as much as the amount of error, then lift your hand. If not, return your hand to that iron or another, if it is cooled, so that what I have said about it can be seen from the bone.
And then take a little of salt and dissolve it over the area and leave it for three days.
And then place your hand over the inguinal wound and leave it there until the scar of the fire is destroyed. And then treat the area with an ointment of tetrafarmakon until it is healed.
And we have said that when the wound is opened wide, it heals better, for it is better and more beneficial.
And some of them say that the condyle should be cauterized inside the bone, and that the cautery should remain until it has fused with a part of the bone.
And then scrape what is attached to the bone, and then treat it.
And others say that the cautery should reach the marrow, pressing strongly on the bone until the bone cools, and this is the method of Alphécatii petit. And they estimate from that place exhale the vapors of the head.
And let the wound be kept open for a long time, and then cure it once it is consolidated.
But I have not seen these two types of cautery for all cases, only in some men out of fear; and leave that one, I advise you, it is better to be salted when it is, because the head is heated by solution of continuity of the sun as we have testified in other members, especially when the head of the patient is of cold nature.
And the first type of cautery is safer and better, I advise you; use that one and perform that operation with salt.
Capitulate second.
On the cautery for the head.
When throughout the head there occurs chronic and long-lasting pain that has been prolonged in the patient, and they use cloths, beans, head poultices, plaisters, ointments, hens' combs, cotton, and linens, and especially if the head has already been cauterized with a cautery which does not improve from any of these causes, then consider whether the head of the patient is of strong constitution in its nature; and there is no great cold or heat, then that cautery should be replaced by another. And then cauterize that on the top of his head between where the vein is divided. Incise the vein and expose the quantity which we have counted, and cauterize that with a cautery at the back of the head in the place where it is called vas, — and this is the place where suction is applied. And lift your hand here, and do not expose the bone, for the gout by this finds great pain different from the pain of all other cautery marks on the head.
And I will say this cautery in its place, for I know that the cautery on which one cauterizes the horns of the head and the occiput is a finer cautery than that on which the middle part of the head is cauterized; and this is the form of it.
Capitulum terminatum.
On the cautery treatment for new migraines.
When there is a sharp pain in the back of the head, or a stabbing pain inside the ear, the head should be treated with medicines that purify the brain, and the other treatment, which I have described for diseases, should be administered; and if this does not help, then cauterization can be performed in two ways: either with a sharp burning medicine, or with iron.
May a cautery that burns in medicine be that you take a hot coal, hold it there, and abrade the extremities of it from both ends. Then apply the place of the pain in the temple with a lancet laid between it, make the cut there, and let the needle be concealed.
Then strengthen over the place stopped by descent compression, and leave it for the space of three hours; then remove the bandage, and leave the wound for two or three days, and then place over the cut submerge in a border until the place dries up.
Then cure that with ointment while it is healing.
And if you wish, do what some burning medicines allow, which I have written in the second treatise of burning medicines.
May the cautery be done according to this manner: heat by cautery of which this is the form:
and it is called clavicle, for its head has the form of a small blade and in the middle location there is a slight prominence.
Then place your hand over the location of the pain, and hold it back—so that the artery which is left is not burned—and slowly rotate the small iron tool.
And if the quantity that is burned due to the depth of the wound is significant, lift your hand so that the artery which is left is not burned, to prevent bleeding.
Then soak it in salt water and place it over the area, leaving it for three days. Then place it like a warm bandage, and keep it treated with ointment until it heals.
And if you do, cauterize at the end of the surgical blade according to the cautery, and be careful to avoid cutting the artery in this new migrainous condition.
Capitulum quartum.
Of the cautery for ancient headache.
When you cure a headache as we have said in the previous cure, and as we have said in the divisions of diseases, and if the cure is not effective for the disease that does not suffice the above-said first cautery with medicine or the fire cautery, then you must heat the surgical cautery until it is white-hot. Place the line where you feel the pain along its length, or approximately there; then hold your hand firmly for a moment and incise the artery and pierce through to the bone.
However, you must be careful of the continuity of the jaw, which is weakened by mastication, and ensure that the ligament is not adhered and the nerves which supply it are intact, and that no spasm occurs.
And if it concerns the care and precaution of the flow of blood from the artery that is severed, for in its severing there is fear, especially for one who ignores what he does and is not studious or careful; and leaves the operation at the beginning.
And I will bring to memory the regulation of the flow of blood in relation to the artery according to its manner, in this place of this livre.
And if you see this illness in someone who cannot bear this cautery and you see the condition of the patient tolerable, apply the cautery in the middle of the foot as we have recounted, and treat the wound until it is healed.
And if you see, apply the cautery which we have said in the chapter on the strengthening of the artery with two knives, and this is a better and more effective cautery.
Chapter V.
On the cautery for headaches.
When there is pain in the ear due to cold and it is treated with conservative causes and another treatment as mentioned in the division, and the pain does not subside, then apply the cautery, which is called the puncta. This is its form:
And then puncture near the beginning, and be led to the outer ear as if a wheel is rotated, or in the circuit of each place if the pain is in any part. Lengthen the cautery from the root of the ear gradually until you have found the location and tested it.
And if the cautery touches all points in the ear, and you stop there, then thoroughly cure the areas between until they are healed.
Chapter VI.
On the cautery for the ear.
The ear condition, which is cured and treated with a cautery, is only due to substances carried by phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of diseases.
Avoid using a cautery for the substance that causes dryness or spasms of the nerve.
When you cure that type of ear condition with jerris, capipurgi, and guaragismes, and your treatment does not show results, then you must use three cauteries: the first on the root of the ear, the second a small mark on its temple, and the third on the junction of two lips.
And place your cautery on the opposite side of the affected area, for relief only occurs in the part that is healthy.
The method of cautery is to apply the cautery to the outer part of the ear near the tip, placing a small piece over the corner of the head, and on the temple, the length of which should be according to the length of the hand's breadth, and then place your hand over the cautery until the quantity of the substance of the conifer has been burned.
This is the method of the cautery, and it is specific to the barber-surgeon, whose form is described below. But more subtly, you should see just a little bit less than what you can perceive; and cut away just a little to avoid excess.
And then treat the area with what is described until it is healed.
Capitol. vii.
On the cautery treatment for ancient apoplexy.
When apoplexy is old and you have treated it as we said and there is no fever in the patient, then cauterize that with four cauteries: over all the horns of its head; and with a cautery and the middle part of the head, as we said; and with a cautery on the scrotum. The method of cauterization is performed as described above.
And it has already been cauterized on the mouth of the stomach; and it is more towards the rear; and then proceed with what you have treated.
Capitol. viii.
Of the cauterization for oblivion by flame.
Cover what is given to the patient at the beginning with large stones and pills of the servant purgative.
And then cover the head of the patient entirely and place a poultice on the scrotum as described in the treatise on poultices.
And pause that for some beats, for that is the way of cautery. And do this according to that method and order which I have already said.
And therefore if by those means it is cured; and otherwise, then make three cautery marks on the rear part of his head, which should be descending from the upper part of the head between the lower parts of the neck. And pause the thickness of a finger between each cautery, and then apply the cautery as it is proceeded.
More so, if you add more and the patient can tolerate it, then make the cautery in the middle location; and if you have a greater addition, then cauterize that over the two horns.
Then apply the cautery while it is healing; and let the cautery be olive-shaped according to the form given.
Capitol.ix.
On the cautery for paralysis and the healing of the entire body.
Cover that you process in modification of the head with jerras and as we have said; then raise the head of the patient, and carefully place a cautery on the middle part of the head, and a cautery on all the horns of the head, and a cautery on the back part of it, and three cauteries on the vertebrae of the neck.
And if it is necessary in the disease of softening of the body for them and the gout sufferers, and the disease is strong, then apply a cautery to them with four cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, and behind with a cautery where it is completed by the skin of it, and raise your hand. And then cure that when it is healed, and this be an olive cautery.
Capitulum .x.
Of the cautery for epilepsy.
No is it cauterized the epileptic, but only if the epilepsy is due to phlegm.
And thus modify the wound at the beginning of its edges with a hot and cold application, which we have described in the division when the patient is large and tolerates the exception of the medicines.
And if the child does not tolerate the medicines, then administer gargling and mouthwash remedies, preparing them for several days beforehand with good nourishment.
And near the head of the patient, and apply a cautery in the middle of the head according to the previous method, and another cautery at the occiput, and over each horn of the head, he cauterizes. And if the patient is strong and tolerates it, then apply the cauteries I have mentioned, having first paralyzed and softened the body around the vertebrae of the neck and the vertebrae of the back.
And use an olive oil cautery as described before.
But if the patient is a child, then use a fine cautery according to this method.
Capitol xi.
Of the cautery for melancholy.
When the causes of melancholy are damp and gross flame, then apply the cautery to those areas where we have said in the case of paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is excess moisture turning into melancholy, and the body of the patient is humid, then let him drink that which purifies his brain according to what was said in the division.
And place your hand on the head of the patient, and properly make a tortora (a type of cautery) over the circle, and then pause that one in the middle of the head.
And let the patient rest quiet, and be kept from all disturbance.
And place the liniment; it is most fitting for an old sheep to bear this. And heat that over the fire for tempered warmth by measure, which it bears when more is in it. And then place something in the middle of his head in a circle, and let it be fumigated.
And do this for the patient every week once, using the other regimen until it is healed; or if you wish, make a small cautery mark according to its size, but keep your hand on an ordered cautery: this is a kind of cautery which you moisten equally.
And then place that cauterized area on a border or piece of gauze.
Capitol. xii.
Of the cautery with descending water.
When the beginning of the water descending in the foot has been declared by the signs which I have said in the division, then begin and give to drink to the patient what modifies his pulse, and keep that free from all moisture.
And boil that sugar in water for several days.
And then command him to raise his head, and cauterize that with a cautery in the middle of the head; and then cauterize that with two cauteries on the temples if it is the beginning of scalding water in both hands, or of one burn if it is the beginning of water in one hand.
Cauterize all the veins and arteries which are left without a bond; and let the cautery be in that place along the width of the temples.
And guard against flows of blood when it is cauterized; and if you see the flow of blood, stop it with any medicine which is within your reach.
And I will bring wisdom which is in the extraction of arteries and in their cauterization, as well as caution about flows of blood.
And sometimes it is cauterized in the neck leaving two bones to be produced by two cauteries.
Capitol. XIII.
Of the ancient cautery of tears.
When tears from the feet are ancient and through the veins and arteries, which are in the manifest place of the head above, it is verified that this is excess phlegmatic humors, then cautery that area with a cautery as we have recounted in the chapter of the beginning of water cautery in the feet, and make a cautery in the middle of the head and two cauteries on the neck placing two temples, and make two cauteries on the neck placing two bones. And if there is indigestion, then cautery the area on the sole of the foot at the end of the eyebrow with a small cautery.
Chapter XIV.
Of the cautery for nasal odor.
When your treatment with what we have said in the division does not improve, then prepare and give to drink to the patient chicory for three nights; and shave his head, and cautery the area with a medium-sized cautery and an olive cautery. And then cauterize that with a pointed cautery on both supraorbital regions, leaving the hair a little.
And guard that the artery not be burned there.
And the use of this pointed cautery is as follows.
Capitol. XV.
For the cautery for softening the eyelids of the feet.
When the eyelid of the foot is softened due to gout or humidity, then cauterize that eyelid with a cautery like this lunar one; and this is its form:
And if you, cauterize that on both supraorbital regions a little with two cauteries in total, making them long from the temples. And let the length of each cautery be according to the size of the supraorbital region.
And do not press too hard with your hand on the cautery, but according to the amount that the inner part of the eyelid is adhered.
Chapter XVI.
Of the cautery for the eyelid when the skin is converted to the inner parts and palm of the hand.
When the skin of the eyelid is converted to the inner parts, I must puncture the eyelid. The cautery for this can be performed in two ways: either by a hot cautery or by applying a burning medicine.
If using a hot cautery, command the patient to look away from where the skin is to be burned as one would when cleansing the skin, ensuring it is thoroughly and evenly applied; and if puncturing, place the point at the origin of the eyelid. Then strengthen the eyelids with a bandage so that they do not tear before the skin has healed.
Then, once the skin is healed and even, place the head of the patient on a pillow, and then apply heat to the eyelids, marking the area with a mark shaped like a laurel leaf, which will be the starting point of the incision for the skin.
And then place something hot in the abdomen or on the bladder over the belly.
And then heat the cautery, of which this is the form.
And then cauterize over the figure which is marked, little by little in small squares, while the surface of the wound, which is like a laurel leaf, is completely burned.
And a sign of health from your work is that you see the eyelid of the belly already contracted and the skin around it raised from the puncture of the belly.
And then lift your hand and leave it for three days, and then place it again carefully on the spot between where the scar is healing. And then apply ointment until it heals.
But if it returns through the skin for some cause near their origin and the eyelid becomes softened, then apply the cautery again to that area just as you did at first.
If the skin is on the eyelid, then cauterize it while elevating it to its natural place and ensure that the skin does not blister.
But the cautery with medicine burning it is what you command the patient to stretch the skin while it is elongated and ensured to be even, and then make a leaf-shaped form of paper from cloth.
And then take known soap and fresh fat, or what is instead thereof, and mix these fats well, and prepare this mixture to ensure it is not rubbed; then spread this over the paper which is made thus in the shape of a leaf of mint, and place that over one or both wounds; and place the remaining portion wrapped in cloth, and the patient's head be at the top.
And place the said portion over the medicine and press it slightly so that the patient feels the bite of the medicine, for the bite is like that of fire.
And thus, when the patient perceives that the bite of the medicine, then leave the medicine and place it at the top as just said; therefore, when the bite ceases, then put back the medicine and wash the wound with water; and then consider if the eyelid has already been raised, if so, you should constrict it with fire or incision, for then this is good; and if not, return to the application of the medicine at the place where it did not press and ensure that your operation remains even and contracts the wound.
And then place your hand over the side where the adhesion's bond is to be removed, and cure that with an ointment or something else in which it may be healed.
And you must, in your operation, keep careful vigilance that no mistake of medicine fall into it. If the eyelid becomes softened and some cause of the skin pustules on the eyelid, then repeatedly apply your medicine to that place which has become softened, and do so precisely as you did at the beginning, and soon let it heal.
This is the way to prepare the willow leaf.
And know that the eyelids of humans are diverse in size and smallness, and therefore according to this you should make your incision.
And the way to straighten it should not be hidden from those who study in this art.
Capitol. xvii.
On the cautery treatment of a fistula in the lacrimal gland of the eyelid.
When you cure a fistula as we have said in the divisions of diseases and do not bring your cure to completion, then when you cauterize it in this manner: command the patient to place his head on your lap, and have some minister between your laps in such a way that his head is neither hurt nor agitated.
Then place the hot iron on the skin of the calf or over the lump of the ankle on his heel.
Then heat the cautery with which this is done:
which is hollow, such as the shape of a cane or a bird's feather quill, from one end of which the cautery is made.
And if you wish, penetrate into the other end. And if you wish, let it be drawn out like a needle.
However, that which is hollow is better for your work.
And then press the fistula if it is opened, and draw from it clean and dry that which comes out. And if it is not opened, then open it and extract the pus from it.
And then place the well-ignited cautery over it, and hold your hand a little above the nose, so that your hand does not err or the patient is quieted, and then place the cautery on the nostrils and destroy that.
And so, if at the beginning of your cautery it enters into the mouth, that is good; and if not, then iterate the cautery one or two times, as needed; and leave it thus for three days, and then place your hand over that spot to keep it warm and surround it with an ointment until it heals.
And if it has passed ten days and it is not healed, then place your hand over the sharp corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed and removed as you see fit in your treatise.
And another method of cautery for a fistula which some first doctors will say: place it at the location of the fistula and do that and then place your hand on that fissure like a thin form of it. Pour in there the quantity of one ounce of melted lead; hold your hand in good retention, so that the bad humor does not enter through that which the melted lead does not penetrate to that place; cover over the location of the fistula until it is covered as if in white of an egg or in water, for lead adheres to the location of the fistula and heals that through marvelous healing.
And if the fistula is healed as we have said of the cautery and the cure, well and good; but if not, then it is necessary to administer a draft from the nose and reduce the fistula to the body of the nose according to what will come in its proper place.
Chapter XVIII.
On the cautery of the fissure of the toe.
Small cuts often occur in the lips, and especially in the lips of children.
Then, when you cure those cracks as we have said in the divisions and your cure does not improve, then ignite the small surgical cautery according to this form that is taught:
Let the cavity of the wound be according to the subtlety of the knife.
Then place that hot iron in those cracks until the cautery reaches the bottom of the cracks.
Then cure that with cerote until it is healed.
Chapter XIX.
On the cautery treatment of a fistula in the mouth.
When an abscess forms in the tonsil, palate, or gum, and then breaks, heals, and becomes old, forming a fistula, and your cure does not improve, then ignite the cautery according to the quantity received in the fistula, place that ignited cautery into the tract of the fistula, and with your hand ensure it reaches the bottom of the fistula; do this one or two times. Then cure that with what we have said about the cure until it is healed.
And so, if the abscess is incised and healed, that is good; but if not, it is necessary to uncover the place and set the corrupt bone according to what will come in its chapter.
chapter. xx.
Of the cautery treatment of teeth and the softening of tumors.
When the tumors are softened by humidity and the teeth are decayed, and you cure those with medicines and do not confine them, then place the patient's head in a basin of water, and soon after heat the cautery in the form which will be described below. Try to pause the hot cautery over the tooth and insert it into that area vigorously, ensuring that the patient remains for a short time so that the heat from the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
Then lift your hand, and repeatedly apply the cautery several times according to your desire.
Then the patient spits out the salt water and keeps it in their mouth for an hour, after which they spit it out, as the decayed tooth is sealed and the softened gum is tightened, and the corrupted humidity is dried up.
Chapter XXI.
Of the cautery for tooth pain.
When tooth pain is due to inflammation or rot, or if medical treatment does not bring relief, then the cautery for that area can be performed in two ways: either with a cow's horn cautery or with fire.
The cow's horn cautery is done by taking a bull's horn and placing it over the tooth area. Then take this and wrap it around the end of the probe, and immerse that part in the heated bull's horn, and hold it over the painful tooth pressing quickly before it cools down.
And repeatedly do this several times until the heat from the fire permeates to the root of the teeth.
And if needed, immerse a wick or cloth in the bull's horn mentioned above, and hold that over the painful tooth. Hold it over the burning probe until the heat reaches the root of the tooth cavity.
Moreover, however, the cautery from fire you must attend to the wound of skin or of iron, and in its core there is some grossness and the acuity of the fire not penetrate to the mouth of the malaise.
And then shape the cautery as it will come, and place that one on the tooth and put your hand in between until the cautery is well rubbed; and do this a few times so that the pain may not be aggravated on that day or the other day.
And ensure that through the impression of that cautery, the malaise opens its mouth well and keep it that way for an hour; and then scrape it; this is the form of the cautery.
And cautery as much as you can locate the extremity according to what is possible.
And this is the form of the cannula:
Capitol.xxii.
On the cautery for extrophy.
When the prolapses are due to phlegm and humors that are not obedient to digestion with medicines, and you wish to digest those slightly, then you heat the cautery to the form of which this follows: having two open ends so that smoke arises from one end through the other, and place that ignited cautery over that abscess for one minute, and another if you find it necessary before it reaches the core of the abscess.
And if the abscess is small, then place the cautery according to the quantity of the abscess, and leave it for three days, and keep it over the core infected border until what the fire has consumed is healed.
And then cure that with ointments and dressings until it is healed.
Chapter XXIII.
On the cautery treatment for hoarseness and for stricture of the urethra.
When the moisture in the windpipe of the lung predominates, especially when it is due to a complex coldness, then it is necessary to evacuate the patient at the beginning with laxative medicines, and subsequently cauterize the vein below the heart in the compressed area.
And be sure not to apply the cautery to the vein below the heart nor burn the chain of veins but only a little.
And cauterize that with another cautery at the junction of the neck in the lower part of the spine. The cautery should be placed at the shoulder in the manner previously described.
And subsequently, cure that with what was previously mentioned until it is healed.
Capitol.xxiv.
On the cauterization for lung malady and cough.
When cough and lung malady are due to cold moisture, and the gout does not have fever or tuberculosis, and is an old malady, then cauterize that with two cauteries on the furcula in the compressed areas of the leontz and buoytz; and with another cautery in the middle location of the foot between two mammary bones; and place the cautery at the shoulder according to the previous form.
And if you wish, let your cautery puncture in the cautery that is called puncta, the form of which you precede in the punctation of ear pain.
And let the puncture into the cells for those; then cure that with what you apply after it has healed.
And let the cautery have three ramps; for this cautery, you can make three punctures according to this form:
Capitol.xxv.
On cautery for titillic, which is the head of the helper.
When the head of the helper is dislocated due to lubricous humidity and does not return in the hour of its return, you must reduce its dislocation while it is about to naturally return, and then by a small movement, it will be relocated as it tries to return, as we have testified. First, reduce the dislocation, and then place the patient on their back or on their side; then lift the collar which is in the inner part of the titillic to the outer parts above the fingers of your left hand, if the joint is dislocated in the inner parts.
And then heat the cautery having two heads; this is its form:
And then cauterize the cord where one head of the cautery penetrates into the other side; and the figure of the cauterization will come when of two heads of the cautery.
And sometimes it is adjusted according to this count and because the cauterizations are .viii.
And then place salt on the cautery for a moment, and then make the patient adhere to rest, so that the limb is not used for some time until it is comfortable.
And if the dislocation is above and the treatment is done here, then cauterize on the muscle with a cautery on the clavicle or with pointed cauteries, for the joint is confirmed and the humidity is relieved and the patient is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.
Of cautery of the stomach.
When pain in the stomach is caused by cold and humid humors that extract from its composition and multiply there, if you continue the methods of cure and do not relieve it, then you will know that gout is on his back spreading its hands and its things, and then cauterize that area with three cauteries: in one cauterization, place the foot with the quantity of a finger's breadth using a small cautery, and with two cautereizations place them on both sides of the cauterization, forming the figure of a triangular cautery; and leave a space between those not adjusted to prevent suppuration.
And if the depth of the cautery the quantity of two-thirds of the thickness of the chain.
And let the figure of the cautery be as follows. If you wish, cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form; this should be a cauterization in the shape of a circle according to this form:
And let the stomach be cauterized by puncturing where someone is afraid from this cautery: and you touch the stomach with a pointed instrument according to the quantity you wish to try, then cauterize that place with the cautery; then cure it with the cure that follows until it is healed.
Chapter XXVII.
Of the cauterization of the sore foot.
When there is pain in the foot due to coldness or humidity or excessive windiness before it has returned to its normal composition through superfluous egress, and the patient is treated as we have said and not comfortably, then you should ensure that the foot is raised above the level of the hips. Touch three cautery points according to this form and this quantity placed on the foot below the iliac bones, with the heel elevated like a person lying on their back.
And let the space between each cautery be according to the thickness of the finger, and let the cautery be according to the length of the body straightened.
And do not hold the cautery too long.
And if the quantity of what is applied equals the weight of the specific part of the leg, and it is not adjusted more; and if the wound is standing on the feet of the patient; and if not standing, then lying down, which has already extended its parts, lifting its thighs.
And it is possible for you to cauterize these cauteries with a surgical cautery when you have subtlety and prudence in the art.
And guard that you do not overapply the cautery, ensuring that only the specific part of the leg is cauterized so that the heat does not spread to the intestines, as the leg here is delicate; and know this.
Capitol.xxviii.
On the perforation of an abscess in the foot with a cautery.
When an inflammation or abscess is in the hip and you want to know if that abscess is in the flesh of the hip or in its covering, then if it is in the flesh of the hip, the patient will feel a greater gravity and sharpness of pain.
If it is in the covering of the hip, then the pain will be very sharp and often causes doctors much fatigue treating it.
Therefore, ensure that the patient is lying on their side; and then locate the site of the abscess and attempt to identify it; and then heat the cautery which resembles a rod, the shape of which was shown in the previous page. And cauterize it such that the entire chain of joints is heated, until it reaches the hip, in order to achieve a healthy scab.
And then treat it with the treatment for other abscesses until it is healed.
And ensure that you use only the cautery about which study has been made in the art of medicine, and on whose marks most doctors are familiar; but this one, after some experiments, has been found suitable for this operation, so I leave that to your discretion, and it is better.
Capitol.xxix.
Of cauterying the pleura.
They said that the ancient cautery for pleurisy should be applied according to this manner: take from the branches of aristologia a long piece of wood that is found there, and let it have the thickness of a finger.
And then submerge that in oil and place it on the fire, and then cautery with a cautery in that location which is between the continuation of the furcula and the collar; and leave two small cauteries guiding them, one slightly inclined towards the part where the beard starts, and two more cauteries in what is inclined between the fifth rib and the thirteenth, inclining slightly towards the rear parts; and another cauterization in the middle of the foot; and another on the stomach, and three cauterizations at the rear parts; and one cauterization in that location which is between the two shoulders, and two cauterizations on the sides of the foot, leaving the cauterization between the two shoulders.
And do not hold your hand on the cautery, but keep it at the edge of the wound working.
And some ancients have said that certain men use a cautery resembling a red hot iron, and they place it in the location between the ribs, until we bring it from there to there eliminating the pus, as we have said when treating the arm.
More in this puncture, there is no fear, for he will soon suffer if the location of the fistula does not heal.
Capitol.xxx.
Of the cautery for the boil.
When you cure the illness of the boil, follow what we have said about the cure in division and do not vary your cure. The cautery for the boil is performed in three ways, all of which are correct. One way is to make three or four lines according to the length of the boil, following the figure of the cautery for the arm, the figure of which has been shown before.
And let the thickness of each cautery be that of a finger or a little more, and the manner of the cautery be as we said in the manner of the cautery for the thigh equally.
And do not place your hand on the cautery; let the patient be held over its back.
And this is another manner of cauterizing, so that you kindle the cautery having two vertements, which we have said in the chapter of dislocation of the muscle, and lift the cord which is in the direction of the limb to let the juice of the patient's left side flow out.
And let your elevation be such that you lift the cord according to the length of the body, so that the cautery is made according to the width of the body.
And then place the two vertements together, ignite them, and in that space where you insert the cord from the other side.
And then withdraw the cautery; and thus he makes four cauteries.
And if you burn, use a cautery having three veins.
And then cure the cautery after it has been let to burn for too many days, as this is more conducive than other previous causes in the treatment.
Chapter XXXI.
On the cautery for dropsy.
Cauterize not in dropsy but in the affected area properly.
When you treat the dropsy, use the methods of treatment that we have said in the division, and do not deviate from your treatment. Instead, apply four cauteries in the circuit of the heart, one on the stomach, another on the liver, another on the spleen, two between the vertebrae of the back, one on the right side of the foot, and another on the stomach. And the depth of the cautery be approximately equal to the thickness of the skin.
And then leave the cautery open so that it gets cool for a long time.
And you do not evacuate the bad humor from the wound while the cautery is hot so that two intentions are added to it, and it will be speedily healed with the help of health.
The shape of the cautery with which the belly is cauterized should be spatule-shaped according to the form described above, and this is the one with which the two eyebrows are cauterized according to the form described previously.
Chapter XXXII.
On the cautery treatment of feet and thighs.
When the feet are swollen and filled with yellow water, heat the foot by cauterizing it over the bone where the shinbone is between the ankle and the thumb, raise your hand with the cautery and do not twist that area; then raise your hand, and do not return to that place entirely, as the yellow water drains.
The cautery is to be used in this manner: Then place two cauteries on each thigh, and on each buttock, make the cautery touch at the extremity of the surgical instrument. The cautery is to be used according to the length of the thigh: and place one end high on the thigh and the other low at the lower part of the thigh; and on each thigh, two cauteries.
Leave the wound open for a long time so that any water exudes from it.
Then proceed to treat the cases which we have mentioned.
Capitol.xxxiii.
On the cautery of the abdominal region.
When the abdominal region is affected by cold and humidity within its thickness, it involves the digestive and retentive virtues, which are located in the stomach and the intestines. This condition is treated according to the methods of treatment and you do not apply a cautery unless the patient suffers from the evil of exhibiting virtue. Then, cauterize that area with a large cautery over its own stomach as previously described in the stomach cauterization, using the circular cautery and four cauteries in the circuit of the subtle humors, using a fine cautery; or use a large cautery on alcatin aloes, or two cauteries.
And if you find excessive moisture and the disease is tolerating it, then cauterize that on the thigh and on the intestines, and strengthen it by placing two cauteries on the stomach and near the inguinal regions, which is a perfect cure from which you will not err.
Capitol. xxxiv.
On the cauterization of ancient hemorrhoids.
When they are in the nature of old hemorrhoids or one from thick humors or corrupted moisture, and they are cured as we said in the division and you do not apply the proper cure, then cauterize three cauteries over the pus below the two small triangular spines, and with a single cauterization above the navel by two fingers.
And if you observe that the patient's stomach is inflamed and the food they eat is not digested, and their face appears swollen, then cauterize that over the stomach with a large cauterization as previously described; and with one cauterization on the thigh, and another on the spleen with a clavilh cauterization. Leave the cauterization open for some time, and soon cure them once they are healed.
Chapter 35.
Of the cautery on the thigh near the amputation site.
When you amputate the thigh, then apply the cautery that is similar to a ray. Then insert the ignited cautery into that amputated thigh, and keep your hand there until the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which the wound bleeds.
And do this one or two times; if there are more veins, then cauterize each of them as we have recounted, and apply the ointments to them until they are healed.
And if you use a large cautery on some veins, it is better for the patient's recovery.
Chapter 36.
Of the cautery of fistulas that arise in the natural passages of the body.
When nature does not obey the work we have recommended in its place, and the patient is frightened by this, it should be treated with a cautery.
Then when there is an old fistula in nature behind, and it is corrupted by foul humors, and therefore what is most worthy to come is that you try with a fine probe, and then know the depth of it with the aforementioned probe.
Then heat the cautery that resembles a ray. Then place the heated cautery in this fistula, and according to the quantity in which you insert the probe.
And repeatedly apply the cautery until those corrupted tissues are burned through, one time or two or three, according to the quantity of your necessity.
And guard yourself from burning nerves and veins; or if the fistula goes to the body of the bladder or the body of the intestine, then guard yourself from all those areas; and do not do this unless the fistula is in a fleshly location and you perceive that it is not penetrating.
And then cure the area until it is healed.
And if the area is sealed, and the materials are detached from it, and remain this way for a long time, then you know that it is completely healed.
And if the materials do not stay on the wound, then you know that they are penetrating or in the process of corrupting the flesh, or this comes from those causes which will be recalled in its place.
Capitol. xxxvii.
On the cautery of warts.
When warts hurt due to friction or because the patient's condition is weakened, then you should cauterize that area with a cautery over each wart using aawl of which the method will be recalled.
And cauterize it again with a small touch, for three linear cauterizations will follow, and thus they will be more effective in healing.
Chapter 38.
Of cauterization of the bladder.
When there is debility and softening of the bladder due to inflammation and moisture, such that the patient cannot retain urine, then cauterize that part at the location where the skin of the abdomen begins, and cauterize with a cautery on the right side and another on the left side.
And the length of each cautery should be according to the size of the patient's foot; and cauterize that area with a cautery at the lower part of the foot, or with two cauteries if necessary.
And the cautery should be applied according to how it is prepared.
Chapter 39.
Of cauterization of the groin.
When there is inflammation and moisture in the groin, and as a result, coitus is prohibited, and the menstruation is disrupted, and induction of labor is delayed, and joint pain occurs due to this condition, then it should be cauterized with three cauteries around the umbilical region, as we have said in the cauterization of the bladder; and apply one cautery at the lower part of the foot, or use two cauteries, and ensure the cautery is well prepared.
Capitol of the chapter.
Of the cautery for dislocation of the ankle.
When moist humors infiltrate the region of the ankle, and these are causes of displacement in its place, a sign of this is that the swelling extends over the other foot when compared between them. And the site of the dislocation is treated on the side of the foot.
Then cauterize the foot around the region of the ankle with a circular cautery, as you will have marked with a tent in the circuit of the region as it is rotated, so that the region falls at the middle of the circle.
And the form of the cautery mentioned above is used in the cauterization of the stomach.
And if this cautery is not present, then use three cauteries of large olive size.
And the cautery should be made according to the intensity of the pain in the entire limb; and then cure that which remains until it is healed.
Chapter XL.
Of the cautery of the sciatic vein.
When pain occurs in the sciatic nerve and its cause is cold and humidity, the patient is treated with the method we have said, and you do not apply anything else, which is an ancient practice. When you are aware that the illness is due to thick humors, treat it with foul-smelling pills or artificial ones similar to them; then cauterize the area.
The method of cauterization in this case is according to two methods: either with burning medicines, or with a fire cauterizer.
Sir according to two known methods, of which one is to cauterize the area above the width of the foot with three triangular cauterizations in this manner; and do so with good depth. And the spacing between each cauterization should be the width of one digit, and the cauterizations should be either olive-sized or larger.
Sometimes, after a few passes, cauterize in the middle of the location on the head of the anqua, as these are four cauterizations.
And if you wish, cauterize around the circle where the form precedes in the cauterization of the dislocation of the ankle, let it be a circle that burns the sensitivity of the entire tendon.
And this is the way to cauterize locally when pain is localized to the ankle and not extended to the thigh.
But if it is extended to the thigh, then cauterize there with two cauteries on the thigh over the area through which you will pass the ankle that causes the pain; and with one cautery on the heel, you should slightly raise the lateral part.
And if it is a surgical cautery, the depth of the cautery should be according to the sensitivity of the tendon.
And if the ankle passes the pain to the area near the toes of the foot, then cauterize there where you will pass the cautery with three or four points or more if needed.
And if the ankle passes the pain to be near the knee, then cauterize there with a surgical cautery.
Guard in all cautery that you do not end with the cautery to such extent that you burn nerves or great artery, and that by this you are over the patient badly hurt or contraction.
And I have seen several cases where cautery was applied to the navel and ended in the cautering, and the bed charcoal inflated between which the tumor reached the skin, and fire perforated and corrupted all the skin. And often follows a strong ventricle contraction, and often death.
And if the pain is in two parts, cautery each one according to this manner.
And the wise will say about the cautery of water: this is the manner. Make it like a circle of iron, with its circumference the width of one palm; and make its holes according to the size of an finger bone or at most a little more.
And inside that circle, there is another third; and the space between them is the quantity of a finger's breadth; and those circles are opened in two parts; and the length of those gaps is one finger's breadth or two; and make on the margin of the iron appropriately fitting to the circles; and this is the form of it.
It is heated in the fire until it turns red and sparks, then placed over the part of the water, the patient lying on the mat. And then cauterize it with three round cauteries in one go.
And then let it be for three days; then apply a plaster with honey and let the wound remain open for many days; and cure it by anointing it until it is healed.
Albucasis says: Oh, my son, we have used this type of cautery rarely because of the fear of looking at it, and due to those few things we found concerning it.
But for those who have suffered good cautery, find the place for it.
But for medicines that adhere, make two circles having an arm with a perforated hole through which the smoke from the iron door passes; let the length of the wall where they are be as wide as two or three fists.
And if the space which is between each of the quantity of the swelling of the digit; and be opened down and up, and should contain themselves among them according to this form:
And then place your hand over the part of the ankle where the patient feels pain, and hold your hand over the part of the water; and take some hot water and pour it between two circles, and let the quality of that be like fire little by little, and have that for the quantity of one hour, and suffer the patient the biting and tightening — for that atrocity bites like fire — until the biting ceases.
And then lift your hand with the instrument and remove the hot water from all the water with cold water.
And then let that be for three days and place your hand over that border until the blackness of the tightened wound fades, and let this be for some days, and the redness will go away; this is known in youth.
And then cure it by applying ointment until it is healed.
And if the pain is extended to the thigh or hip, apply a plaster containing water as is done in the water.
And this is the way of applying water cauda, and I have already written that in the treatise on the preparation of medicines. Recipe for alkali and for the extinguished caustic from both halves, one part is three times larger, and you pause in a new bowl where the half left has a small hole drilled through it, according to the quantity that enters it.
And pause placing the bottom of the bowl in another warm bowl, and pour over the alkali and live caustic with warm water until it covers by an inch, and then hold those with your hand for good compression, and let the bowl that contains the warm water drain into the half left in the warm bowl.
Then adjust all that water, and pour it over another live caustic and new alkali, for then it will be of great strength, which is administered in most operations of medicine and in the cautery of other members, for such operation makes use of fire.
And some of the medicines, which are to be cauterized wide, such as tiglium and mel anisatum and cause them to be assayed that they be mixed.
And Gualia recounts the operation and cure of an ancient man suffering from water pain and sciatica, magnifying the good deed, and says that no other treatment was necessary, for he was cured in one day as recommended, for he immersed himself in warm and cold baths as instructed.
And it should be placed near a vervain herb, and if vervain is not available, a fresh fig should be used; it should be tied with a few threads and placed on the water where the pain is, or on the thigh, or on the chest, and it should be pressed.
And it should be left for the quantity of three hours or for the amount of time the patient bears the compression.
And then place it in warm water; when the patient's body is relaxed, insert it into the ground, for the pain ceases and the patient is cured.
And know that none of these medicines are used with a cautery except near the body's evacuation.
When making a cut in the sinew vein, cauterize it, and it will heal better; and the cautery should be applied in this manner: take wool and soak it in old oil, and place it between the layers of the foot and over the bone.
And then take a dry cut of wool and inflame it in fire to make it char; then place it over the wool and let it smoke. And repeat this, and continue doing this until the heat of the bite reaches the water and relieves the pain.
And this method of cautery is called the calf cautery.
Chapter XLII.
On the cautery for joint pain.
Sometimes pain in the two [places] is caused by multiple reasons, such as from a wound or striking or excessive evacuation, and due to similar causes, through the infiltration of wet matter.
And the cautery should not be used except in this single instance where it is applied due to the infiltration of wet matter.
Therefore, open, and place pillulas fitidas and similar to them, which are applied over the two areas where the pain is present three lines according to the width of the area. Then mark with cautery or more in each line, according to the quantity that comes from the tolerance of the patient and the virtue of the cautery.
And the cautery should be applied with a pointed cautery.
And if you wish, apply the cautery with three or four medio-clavilh cauteries according to this form.
Capitol. xliii.
On the cautery at the beginning of gilbositat.
When signs of this illness appear in small children; and the sign of the beginning of it in children is that they experience difficulty in eating, rising, elevation, and movement.
And you find in the lower vertebra of the back and of the neck that it begins to protrude above the other vertebrae.
And when you see this and want to treat it, then cauterize that with a cautery shaped like a circle according to this form: that the cautery covers all parts of the vertebra equally.
And if you want, cauterize around the vertebra with a pointed cautery two or three lines wide. And let the points be close to each other.
And then cure the area until it is healed as we have said.
More importantly, ensure that the cautery is not applied in inflammation caused by nerve spasm.
Capitol XLIV.
On the cautery treatment for gout and joint pain.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
And thus, gout caused by infiltration is cured through a method of treatment rather than just alleviating the pain, but rather with cautery.
And you cauterize there near the site of evacuation in the circuit of the foot joint with pointed cautery.
And the olive-shaped cautery, the form of which is as follows:
And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. And if the pain rises into the toes or other joints, and you have to verify this, then cauterize each toe with three or four cauteries of this olive-shaped cautery.
And if you need to use cautery irons for these cauteries, then cauterize them and do not press your hand too close to the cautery before, just around the size of a cone.
And if the pains penetrate to the elbow and knee, then apply the cautery which we have said in our chapter.
And if the pains are only in the muscles and it is called "myalgia," then puncture along the course of the nerves as they run, puncturing in those two lines.
And if the pains remain in the fingers, then puncture along the course of the nerves over each joint and over the back of the hand.
And if the pains remain for several days in the shoulders or the muscles, then cauterize the areas around all parts of the shoulders.
And if you do not evacuate the patient properly and do not administer medicines well, then even if good regimen and flame are used, this cauterization will not be effective, God help us.
Chapter XLV.
Of cautery for ruptures.
When there is a rupture in the groin and intestines are visible through the skin, and this begins to develop nearby, then when you order the patient to fast on that day and use mild remedies so that the wound in their abdomen may close.
And return the patient between your thighs over their abdomen, and command them to hold their belly with force until it is stitched or the skin or intestine appears.
And return that one between your thighs, and touch the rupture over the bone of the thigh, marking the extremity of which is similar to the size of a circle in the upper parts of the body.
And then heat the cautery of which this is the form:
until it be hot enough and sparks begin to fly. Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent it from coming out.
You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
Then place the cautery over that mark with your hand holding the cautery straight, and keep it there until you succeed in burning through the tendon halfway down the thigh; and repeat this on another occasion if you have not succeeded in the first attempt.
Observe wisely the pulse of the patient during your cautery, that you do not burn the intestine so much that it leads to death or another great harm.
Be careful that when you use the cautery, you do not burn the bone, as this would compromise your operation.
And ensure that the cautery for children is fine according to their size and measurement.
And then care for the area of the cautery for three days, keeping it between the points where the scar from the fire heals.
And then care for that as with other ointments until it is healed.
And the patient lies on their back for 10 days until the area and wound are sealed.
And ensure that you support the patient's nutrition according to the length of time for the healing of the wound which closes his abdomen, and that the intestine does not come out with great effort to heal.
And then when it is time to lift after 10 days, properly apply a poultice, and keep it for another 10 days.
And let it rest from work and the replenishment of food and drink, and use strong voices, for when it uses this regimen of healing entirely, it will be cured.
And I will say the healing of ruptures in other parts of the abdomen, and at the beginning, if you do not want them to tear again, then cauterize the rupture with a round cautery according to its size; and what is excreted from the wound should be treated as the tender part of it. Then care for that as we have said, and it is not dressed.
And some first ones have said that rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery according to this form, rather than with forceps.
And a line is placed there for the width in the cuts and passes above the rupture, and another line on top; then place your hand with a cruciform cautery, but the first cautery is lighter and better.
Capitol XLVI.
Of the cauterization of tortio.
When pain in some members persists due to congestion or percussion and does not respond to medical treatment over a long time, then you should cauterize with a pointed cautery.
And the cautery should be of the size and shape appropriate to the member, its nature and intensity, and the location of the tortio and pain.
Then if it is healed by the first cautery, that is good; but if not, then repeatedly apply the cautery to it; for customarily such pains are punctured from member to the neighboring member, so that you may achieve what you seek with the cautery before the malady is healed.
Chapter XLVII.
Of the cautery treatment for leprosy.
Lepers are sometimes cauterized with a very hot cautery, especially when the species of leprosy is caused by the putrefaction of flame and melancholy.
And so, if you want to cauterize the affected area, consider whether the leprosy is common and similar to that which we have discussed in the division. If it is not, and you fear that the corruption might encompass his entire body and all its complexity, then cauterize the affected area on the head with five cauteries: one in the middle of the head, and two at the sides; leave one behind, on the neck or shoulder.
And finish your hand with a cautery slightly pressing into the cheek to create a small impression, so that the expiration of thick vapors is relieved; and cauterize on the cheek as necessary.
If leprosy is already spread over the thigh and clearly manifest, then you cauterize that area as well as those cauterizations which we said in the head; on the tip of the nose, and two cauterizations on both armpits, and two on two vertebrae of the neck, and six on the vertebrae of the back, and one large one near the buttocks, and one on the spine, and two on the thighs, and one on each thigh, and two on the shins, and one on each shin, and two on the knees, and one on each knee, and two on the ankles, and one on each ankle, and two on the feet, and two on the muscles, and two on the tendons of their foot; cauterize that on all joints of the fingers of the arm and of the foot, and on each heel of his feet.
And guard the nerves which are over the heels that you do not burn those.
And sometimes cauterization is done with one cauterization on the bone of the pelvis and another on the opening of the stomach, and another on the navel.
And know that the more tightly you apply the cautery, the more beneficial and lasting it is; and know that the patient does not feel pain in the cautery, as they do with their seams, for thus the patient's body is already numbed.
And know that the cauteries should be large or small according to the limbs and joints as indicated by the sizes of the instruments.
And place the cautery on flour mixed with honey and other remedies until it is healed.
Capitol. xlviii.
On the cautery for stupor.
When some limb is numb or paralyzed and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, and does not heal, then cauterize that numb limb with cautery according to the size of the limb or its smallness.
And let your cautery penetrate the depth of the wound a little. And then cure that which is ointed until it is healed.
And in some cases, it is cauterized a certain stupor which affects the thighs and the feet, and the vertebrae of the back, and the inflammation of the nerves which run through that member, and the stupor is relieved.
But do not assume this except for one who is wise in the anatomy of the members and the exit of the nerves throughout the moving body.
Capitol. XLIX.
On the cauterization of blisters that are morphew.
When blisters are old and do not respond to any of the medical ointments, then cauterize over that with a cautery, using a little according to the quantity of the powder. Allow the whiteness and color of it to be relieved, and its color to change.
And then cure that which is ointed with flour of err (a type of grain) and lentils in rubbed oil and leaves of arnica, or with dove's blood or with duck's blood, taking a part of each, all mixed together. Then place a cloth over the area until it is healed.
Capitol I.
Of cautery for the groin.
When cancer begins and you want to stop it, then cautery it with a circular cautery in the circuit of it as it is rotated.
And the wise will say that it should be cauteryed with the last cautery in the middle place; but to me, this is not visible, for I fear it is ulcerated, and I have seen this several times.
And it is better to cautery it in the circuit of it with a circle as we have said, or with multiple cauteries.
Capitol II.
Of cautery for adenitis.
When some adenitis is delayed in maturation, this is either due to excess causing it, or due to the condition of the patient, who may be old and decrepit, with little strength, or due to time, and if you want to hasten the maturation of adenitis; then cautery it in the circuit of it with multiple small puncturing cauteries; and leave that which will mature on its own.
But if you want to make the puncture with a cautery, then ignite the cautery of which this is the form: and place that in the middle of the inflamed area where the probe will penetrate.
And if you place the cautery in that location, let it be, so that the arm will be relieved; and then cure that which is there until it is healed.
Capitol. lii.
Of the cautery for corrosion.
Corrosion is a wandering corruption in the member, which corrodes that part as fire consumes dry wood.
Therefore, if you find the corrosion in a location where you will apply a fire cautery, then ignite the cautery with a few hot coals, and large ones as is appropriate for that location where the corrosion occurs.
And then cauterize that completely as you remove all the corrosion and do not leave any cause of it.
And for three days let that be, and place a hot cautery over the cauterized areas until all the blisters are eradicated and all the corruption is gone.
And for that cure the flesh generating wounds with ointment.
But if after three days the flesh grows healthy in the area where there is no corruption, that is good; but if not, then reapply the cautery to the areas that are rotten in the corrupted places.
And after treating it with medicine several times using sharp medicine, which is half the way instead of a cautery. But nevertheless, a cautery with fire is more beneficial for quick healing.
And I have already said the treatment with sharp medicine in the division, so use that when you need it.
Chapter III.lix.
On the Cauterization of Wounds and Other Similar Conditions.
Moles viewed near the sole of the foot in which the disease called claw is present, and it is a large, penetrating cause that affects the foot; in these cases, cautery is performed according to two methods, one with fire and another with water-cauterization.
The cautery with fire is to heat the concave cauterizing tool resembling a half circle, which is made of iron according to the quantity it contains for the entire sole, and has fine edges.
Then place that ignited tool on the sole, and quickly move your hand over the cauterizing tool in a circle around the sole until the heat reaches the depth of the sole. Let it remain on the sole for three days until it begins to blister. Then apply a poultice with chopped wild mallows salted, and let the poultice remain on that area for one night until the swelling is reduced.
Then treat the area with a cream of generative flesh until it heals.
If so non-convertible, and motas veguadas accideysso in the superficia del cors, majorment in las mas e les pes, then when tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, et prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, and pause aquela sobre le clau; then geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, and rete tu ma, and tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, and inpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, and atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; and espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, and aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.
And do the same for the other entering which you come over all of them in their parts of the body.
And then cure those pus that the roots of the claws have been eradicated by applying ointments which the flesh will regenerate.
Capitol. liiii.
Of the cautery for trembling.
When there is a tremor due to friction in the nerves or from fever of some cause, or for another similar reason, then you should cautery it with four or five cauteries on the spine, placing one cautery between each vertebra, and one on the feet, and one over the stomach.
And the tremor subsides, and the illness is healed.
Capitol. lv.
Of the cautery for accidents in the body.
When in the body abscesses are formed and pus-filled cavities are created from corrupt materials; then at the beginning as they appear, they should be cauteryed with a fine cautery dipped in myrtle wood charcoal, the end of which is extended over the fire; or with an herb stick of ephedra; or with a flat round cautery.
And sometimes a cautery is applied additionally at the beginning of its expulsion according to this manner; and not being creased, and when the superfluous part is broken, they heal from those.
Moreover, ensure that this is done near the evacuation with a flebotomy.
Capitol lvi.
Of the cautery treatment for flux from an injury due to arterial incision.
Many times, flux from an artery that is incised appears, causing a hole in the wound, or due to the incision of an abscess or cautery on the member, and then it seems difficult to stop that.
Then, when such a case occurs, hold your hand over the opening of the artery and place it firmly there. Hold it in that position until the flow of blood has stopped, then remove it without letting it come out.
Then, over the fire, hold the olive cauteries both small and large, in several places, and blow on them until they are ignited.
And then take one small or large piece according to the place and wound where the artery is broken, over that vein press strongly as you have drawn back what you said, and hold the cautery so that it cuts and restricts the bleeding.
And if the blood is expelled from the hole of the artery when you draw back what you said and tighten the cautery, then take another cautery freshly prepared from the ones that are in the fire, and therefore do not cease to do this one after another until the bleeding is restricted.
And beware that you do not burn the nerves here, and that no other evil comes to the patient.
And know that when blood flows from the artery, it is not possible to restrict the bleeding in those cases, especially when the artery is large, unless one of four methods is used: either with a cautery as we said, or with extraction when it is not extracted, or when it is extracted, its extremities are burned and the bleeding is restricted, or with lixiviation with honey or with astringent herbs, or by pressing with bandages of suitable constriction; and they should be tightened with a pulvinar for proper compression.
More than that, he who administers proper restriction to the patient with flax and bandage or by position of causes burning and similar, does not confer any benefit but harm.
More if such a thing happens to someone and neither the doctor is present nor medicine, then open gently with your finger the indicated orifices of that vein as we have said, and understand the great contraction within which the wound has remained from the upper part of the lesion, and above the archery let the finger not be moved; and above the archery let it be sprinkled with cold water fomented with great coldness before the wound is closed and thickened; and more cossire in that where cauterization or medical necessity.
Of incision and perforation and ventozas and of bloodletting and of lesions and their similarities.
We have already said in the first chapter all illness in which cauterization with fire is convenient and medicine burning, and the occasions and causes of it, and the instruments necessary among those of the forms of cauterizations; and I have ordered the chapters of the subiranetat of the cap between the feet.
And you shall proceed in this chapter in such a manner, so that the one who seeks this may be relieved of it, whenever he has requested it.
And before you begin this, hear, sons, that in this chapter we treat of what is in the first chapter concerning cautery.
And hear that you be in great caution, for in the operation which is in this chapter, many cases of evacuation occur which if mishandled can lead to serious consequences. You must ensure the proper aspersion of the vein or incision over the abscess or excision of the wound or purgation of the plague or extraction of the arrow or incision of the boil and similar procedures. And in all of these, there is fear and trembling, and in the greater part of them, death.
And I warn you that this applies to you in the position where it is situated, for sometimes cases arise where your methods may be at fault due to the patient's condition. And from them some you will go to his illness and if it is slight you should let him die, and this because of the intensity of what he finds of his illness, and for the length of his illness, and in the illness there is fear which means death.
And of those who give to you their advice, you expecting from that health, and his illness is harmful.
And so you must consent to him who comes to you of whom this manner is; and your caution be greater than covetousness and your greediness; and do not presume any cause upon that but rather certain science which verifies what you should do, and to which by succession praiseworthy success shall come.
And use in the cure of all your patients by predicting and indicating to them to which health is converted, for in that you shall have help in the acquisition of fame and memory, of praise and glory.
O, children, God inspires his understanding in you and does not deprive you of direction and protection, for this is in His hand.
And I have also arranged this chapter distinguishing it into chapters according to what was previously discussed in the chapter on cautery, for the treatment from head to foot, so that you may be alleviated with what you ask about and of which you have need.
First chapter.
Of the treatment of water that is contained in the head of children.
Know that this illness often appears in children at the time of birth and when the mother strengthens the child's head during nursing.
And sometimes appears for hidden causes that are not known.
But I do not see this illness in adults; and for all those children in whom I see it, death is certain, and thus I have been left with no choice but to treat them.
And I have seen that a child's head was filled with water, and his head remained constantly swollen until it could no longer bear its own weight due to the size of his head, and furthermore, the moisture increased until death.
And this humidity or is added between the tendon and the bone, or is added by placing the bone on the cushion.
When the operation is in that case where the humidity is between the tendon and the bone, and the abscess is small, then cut in the middle of the location on the side, and make a fissure in the lateral direction, such that the length of the fissure contains two nodes through which the humidity flows. This is the form of the spatum:
And therefore, if the humidity is much increased and the abscess is larger, then here make two fissures in this manner:
And if the humidity is on the bone, the sign is that you will find the edges of the tendon open from all sides, and the water oozes out when you compress it with your hand at the internal parts; this is not what you want to hide. Cut in the middle of the location on the side and make three fissures in this manner:
and carefully extract all the humidity; and strongly bind the fissures with bandages and pillows; and on the fifth day, pour oil over it, and remove the bandage and dress the wound with lint and ointment, strengthening the tendon with equal parts; and let the patient eat dry food of little humidity until the member is comfortable and healed.
And there is another method of incision, which consider when the magnitude of the abscess and the collection of the water appear; for sometimes it is more in the occiput, or in the front part, or on the right, or on the left; and therefore attend to the incision where the abscess and the filling with water appear, and do so according to what seems best to you.
And observe that you do not incise the artery and attempt to flow blood from the patient through that flux of blood for the evacuation of humidity.
Chapter II.
When we encounter a clot or wound in the heel or on the foot, it is customary to not consider the treatment of medicines at that time, but rather the incision of these two arteries.
And therefore cover when you want to incise those that the disease reaches its head, and nearby rub the area with a rough cloth so that the arteries appear, and nearby strengthen the neck of the patient with some cloth; and nearby consider where the vein pulses; and the areas of each over the areas near the ears pressing, as they are hidden in some people.
And then place your hand on the artery and feel it, and next incise each part sharply with a blade that penetrates into the bone, and do this for the width of the head.
And if you wish, insert the blade letting the artery and cut it where the incisions are made above.
And the length of the incision should be two digits wide, for when any vein is cut, the bleeding occurs with a pulsating outflow, which jumps frequently through the flow.
But if the artery does not appear at the pulse, then measure the distance of three digits from the ear, and next feel it, and make an incision into the bone.
And what must be let of the bleeding is one pint of blood, and more or less according to its strength, all of which depends on the quantity that appears from the virtue of the patient and the fullness of the artery.
And then consider the wound, and therefore if there remains any cause of suppuration on the bone, next incise it so that no abscess forms.
And then strengthen the wound with down feathers and pieces of cloth, and apply care to it with ointment until it heals.
Capitol III.
Of the extraction of arteries which are in the temples.
When an ancient or acute migraine occurs due to atmospheric humidity and the quality of air in the temples, or is very severe and resembles those, and is treated according to the methods of medical cure, if it does not respond to these treatments, then we have resorted to the extraction of arteries in the temples, or cauterization of those as we have shown.
And the method of the operation and extraction is that the patient lies down on their back; and understand the apparent artery in the temple where it is shown to you by your pulse, and is visible in only a few people due to its intensity.
And if it is not visible, then strengthen the neck of the patient with some cloth; and then rub the area with a rough cloth or evaporate the place with hot water until the artery becomes clearly visible. And when you take the spatum of which this is the form: And then you scrape the tendon where you pass through the artery; then place wax there and extract that from the upper parts where you extract it from the tendon and uncover those of the tunics, leaving that, from all parts.
But if the artery is fine, then wrap it at the extremity of the vein, and then divide a part thereof according to the quantity for which the extremities of the vein are lengthened and contracted, and thus there will not be a flux of blood; for if not divided, it will not rise up.
And then evacuate the blood from the vein once in three days.
And if the artery is large, then cut that in two locations with a double strength ligature or with long cords, and do not allow putrefaction before the consolidation of the wound and thus there will be a flux of blood.
And then incise the excess which is between two threads; and do so at that time or shortly thereafter.
And if you wish, cauterize that with a cautery between the bone and cauterize with a surgical knife when the extremities are incised, and it will be in place of that metal work.
And it is better to do so if the patient has fever or is of a febrile constitution; for a cautery is among those causes that help to resolve humors, and therefore it is better in treatment.
And cover the area of the artery extraction with a cloth properly placed, and place it over finely powdered substances. And after that, with dry medicines, let flesh grow and with warm applications until it is healed.
And if while working another round you encounter flow of blood from the artery, then you should constrict that blood, either with a cautery, or by placing a cloth there, and strengthen your hand until the blood is constricted. And if for any reason it is not at your present, then place your hand on the area between where the wound should be cleaned, and moisten the area with water of great coldness so that the inflammation subsides, and be strengthened according to what is suitable.
And that which is lighter in the extraction of an artery is that you cautery the vein with this cautery having two knives, after you have touched the two areas with your fingers, and place some hot coals between them until they reach the bone and cut the vein into two parts, so that what is between the extremities of it is elongated, which are not consolidated by this cautery.
And this is the form of the cautery:
And the sharpness of the two knives is essential. However, if the sharpness of the two knives is not sufficient, it is better to use three, for if they are as sharp as two knives, they can easily reach any part and do not cut the flesh too quickly.
Then when there is some swelling, hold the heat from the fire in those areas and the flesh is cut slightly.
And this work is better in every work and more gentle.
And place the space which is between two knives the amount of the swelling of the digit.
Capitular quarter.
Of the cure for bodies suffering from sharp and acidic tears of the eyes.
When the tears are acidic, and the body is affected by those veins which are on the temple of the head, and you find no cause for the cure in medical treatment, and the face of the patient already turns red and feels a walking sensation on their forehead as if it were ant走路，眼睛变得疲倦且泪水增多，尤其是在这些操作中，我们使用传统的治疗方法，并将这种治疗称为“蚁行”。
And you command the patient to rub their skin on their forehead, and then cut three equal distances along the length of the forehead. And if the length of the fissure is two digits: one fissure equally distant in length from the nose at the middle point of the forehead, and the second according to the length of a small movement of the lacreries which are in the lacrimal, and the third on another part.
And look at the beginning of the arteries which are in two branches, and extend your hand to the continuation of both jaws. And if the space of each incision the quantity of three digits adjusted.
And if you have a piece of sponge equipped or dry cloths at hand, place them over which to absorb the bleeding.
And then insert the blade of two sharp extremities, of which this is the form of the incision: that is from the division through the temple into the second incision. Excise all the tissue which is between two incisions along the line which is over the bone, and then do this for the middle incision into the second incision. And then scrape this cavity and insert into the first incision another time an instrument which is called cuticular, sharp on one side and not sharp on the other.
And place the edge of the sharp side against the adjacent flesh, and the edge inside the bone, and push it into the migrating fissure, and cut away all vessels that descend from the head to the heels.
More than this, continue the incision to where the bone appears, and then do this in the migrating fissure between the other fissure.
And when the bleeding has stopped in equal quantity, express the places of the soles of the foot where the coagulated blood is retained.
And then place in each fissure a small piece of old cloth, and place over those powders mixed in oil and wine and vinegar to prevent an abscess.
And on the third day remove the bandage and administer a large fomentation of warm orbo, and then cure this with an ointment of basilicum and rose oil until the wounds are healed.
Chapter V.
For the cure of tears due to catarrh and those descending from the inner parts of the head.
When there is an acute and continuous cold humor, and the feet of the patient are often weak and small, and their general condition shows debility, and the eyelids are ulcerated and in the prepuce its condition is acute pain and extreme tension, then you should know from these accidents that the humors and catarrh do not come from the venous motas of the inner parts.
And the best cure in such cases is this: you command the patient to rub his forehead, and then incise along a fissure in the middle of the forehead, a small one in width (starting from between the left and right temples; and with the incision into the bone, extend your hand through the temple muscles which are tense and should be carefully cut), until the bone is exposed.
Dry up all the blood with a sponge or a dry cloth, and then insert between the two edges of the incision a small piece of cloth or a bandage. And then strengthen from above with powders infused in wine and oil so that it does not develop into an abscess when cauterized.
And when you have opened it and see that the abscess has already diminished, then wash the bone where the new flesh begins, and apply a drying remedy which makes the flesh shrivel, as if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony and mix them, and from them make an ointment to be applied to such wounds arising from the flesh's nativity.
Capitol. vi.
Of the cure for that which attacks the ears.
All cause that attacks the ears is of four species: either it is mineral stone or a similar cause to stone, such as iron and vein, or it is from a plant such as cucumber or bean, or it is a fluxible cause such as water and salted wine and their likenesses, or some beast.
And therefore, when stone causes pain in the ear or another cause similar to those causes that do not fit into the ear, place the ear in the sunlight. If you see the stone, then distill it with olive oil or sesame oil, and administer its extract. Make the patient sneeze by inspiring, and plug the nostrils to prevent sneezing. And then place some pieces of cloth or wool around the ear, and extend the ear upward, as these spots are often heated by these causes.
And if it is not heated, then perform extraction with the instrument called gesti epicicarios, subtlety of which this is the form:
And if it is heated by the gesti, that is good; but if not, then perform the extraction with the fine, slightly duplicated subtlety.
And therefore, if it is not heated by this, then make a cannula of wire and insert the end of the cannula into the meatus of the ear and close the surroundings of the cannula with wax and with oil moistened so that only the cannula is opened. And then extract the foreign body with strong traction, as too many spots have been caused by this.
But if it is not heated in this manner, then take a burning coal or an ember on which are placed the embers a quantity of coals, and place that at the end of the ray, and then wrap around that sufficiently. And then introduce it into the ear canal easily, and dry the ear of its moisture.
And so, if none of the causes we have recounted is the reason, then you should incise that which tends to become an abscess or spasm.
And the manner of incising it is that you begin by marking the spot where the disease in the phaena vein starts and extract the thread according to the virtue of the vein, then make a cut between your fingers and convert the ear to its upper parts, and make a small fissure in the front part of the ear and draw out its gristle into the gently pressed area. And let the fissure be of a lunar shape so that it reaches the pier (lobe). If the pier is darkened, obstruct it if possible with appropriate instruments; then, along with the fissure, act quickly and cure it as soon as it is healed.
And if the cause lies in the ear, it is one of the glands that are swollen and inflamed, then administer the cure and extraction of it; but if it does not respond to your application, then take a thin, subtle spatum according to this form: and administer to him the abscess of that gland which is caught in the ear.
And do not do this when you think that it is already moistened by the vapor of the ear, and place it on small wicks, and properly extract it from there or by gentle handling, or by incision as we have said, for it alleviates the extraction.
In the water which has entered into the ear canal that the patient uses to sneeze, and condition at the beginning, fill the entire ear with a little old wax, and place it on top of that ear where the water is. If by this it is washed out, good; but if not, then take pears, peony roots, and lion's feet according to the length of the disease, boil these in fire for a little while, and have the patient insert one of them into the tube of his ear and suck on a piece of that part and strike it with another stone over the stone which is inside the ear. Do not stop until all the water is thoroughly washed out.
Do not stop until all the water is thoroughly washed out. And already let the water run freely, test by taking paper or wool, and put one end of it in the ear and extend the other end into the fire until the wool is burned.
And put another wool and do this as many times until all the water is run freely, and squeeze that with a cannula as said of the urinary extractor.
More in the extraction of fluids entering that ear, if it is a small object, pour more and one similar to it, cure that as we said in the division; but if it is a large object causing pain quickly, then perform the extraction with speed and precision, and the cause of it is less severe than all other causes that occur in the ear.
More in the extraction of worms generated in the ear, when you cure that as we said in the division and in the treatise on distillations, and if your treatment does not seem to work, then carefully examine the ear in the sunlight.
And therefore if any cause of worms appears here, then extract that with forceps or fine tweezers, but if no cause appears, then take a cannula and spread it wide; this is its form: And insert the subtle extremity into the ear according to the quantity that the patient can endure; and then suction it with force, and do this several times, until all the worms are extracted.
And if it does not obey to your assistance, then you insert and close the circuit of the cannula with wax as we have said; then administer distillations which have already proved effective in the treatment of worms, and you will find this in the treatise on distillations.
And let your effusion be with that which you pour medicinal oils into the ear with this instrument, which is its form: And make that of silver or copper, straight, with a small hole, and a flat surface above.
And thus they push so that it is in the cavity of the cannula here where it will be necessary. And if you wish, take the wick and wrap it properly around its end, then place oil in the cavity of the ear, or the juice of some herb, or any of these medicines in the cannula — which is in the ear —, and put the wick there carefully above and squeeze with your hand that part of it under compression until the oil is expelled into the cavity of the ear and the disease feels the oil inside.
And what is infused in the ear should already be heated over fire for a little while. And make sure that the cause which you will distill in the ear is not too hot, for ear medicines do not tolerate this.
Capitol. vii.
On the treatment of ear abscesses.
Sometimes children are born with abscesses in the ears of their parents, who do not have perforated ears; this happens sometimes in adults as well, with an abscess forming in the ear meat due to a wound or from no apparent cause; sometimes this abscess forms in the preauricular region which does not come to a head, and sometimes it forms in the outer parts.
And that which happens in the region of it, which does not respond to treatment, is in the major dispositions difficult to heal.
And in that where you can see the swelling, make sure that you place the patient in the sun and look at it. And if you see an apparent abscess, open that thin membrane under which this abscess is located:
If the extremity in which the width is small, and one part is acute while the other is not; and the membrane is of two lion's teeth widths so as not to irritate the ear.
And if the obstruction is due to hidden flesh in the ear or in the meat of the ear, then make those thin incisions and cut through them so that all the flesh is thoroughly drained.
And if the obstruction is in the region of the ear, then take a thin lion's tooth and heat that iron slightly in fire, and then place it in the flesh of the ear.
And if you sense an overflow of matter that the patient has with ease due to the heaviness of defecation, relieve the pressure on it with ease; and beware that you do not injure the nerves of the ear.
And then place a cloth in the ear according to the amount of swelling you have wrapped in Egyptian ointment; and do this for several days until you are sure of the consolidation of the swelling; or that you drain it with water and powder it over, and use it. And if you see the ear already pushed out, then dig out what you have drained and replace it with another that you wrap in cerrot made with olive oil, until the abscess is discharged; and cure it as it heals.
And if a flow of blood occurs, then immerse the sponge or cloth in cold water, rub it well, and place it over the ear, and use the other cure which tightens the flow of blood, which is said in the treatise on distillation.
Chapter VIII.
Of the care of toothache which happens in the eyelids.
Toothache which happens in the eyelids; some times it is moist, at other times it is dry.
Then make sure you have those flannel or woolen cloths, and moisten them with the foam from their saliva, and place them over the areas after thoroughly wetting them.
But if there is pain with a flow of venous blood, then use a pointed cautery to cauterize those areas subtlety.
And the best cautery is near the incisions, and the sores heal when there remains any cause of their saliva; and when they are cauterized with fire, those salivas are burned and do not return.
Capitol.ix.
Care of the great swelling that occurs in the eyelids.
Swellings occur in the eyelids of the eye at some cause which is similar in its strength and hardness, and for this reason it is called swelling.
And it is an addition of thick humidity in the eyelid above and below.
And the operation in them is that you consider whether the enlargement is present in it where appears from the eyelid and is augmented to all parts; and the cause of it is slight.
And make a fissure there for its width, and then scrape that from all parts with facilitation so that it evacuates, and suspend that and absind it.
And if the figure is large, then you adjust it with sutures; and care for it so that it heals.
And if it is small, you will not suffer ill from it because the ointment restores and heals it.
And if the enlargement is declining to the parts inside the eyelid, you scrape the inside surface, then evacuate the eyelid and suspend the enlargement with a needle, or one that you choose as an incision, and press it from all parts. If the eyelid by incision is lengthened, then this is noted for no cause.
And at the beginning, wash well with salt water; and dress the area with a solution that should be healed.
Capitol.
For the cure of excision in the upper eyelid.
Excision is caused by grays that are generated in the tunics of the upper eyelid, and especially in children, it aggravates their ills and affects their catarrh, leading to death; they cannot look at the clarity of the sun due to this, and tears congregate around those areas.
And for this, you often see them cry on their cheeks all the time, and on their cheeks they sleep; only around their eyes, their forehead is wet, which has been covered by inflammation, and the imminent appearance of excision is evident in those areas; and when you press the area with your thumbs, you feel the excision between those areas.
And one method of operation is in the patient who places his head under your hand, and then covers him with a cloth, and makes a cut according to the quantity that contains arthrench from all parts, and then places it over that and presses with your thumbs so that excision is added in the middle of the circle, and then makes a hole in the middle of that wet area by applying steam through a crack, and the crack should not be larger than the crack made in flaubotomy.
More in the preceding part where you cut the cord completely until you reach the artery, for in the later stages the artery passes through a fissure according to the form of white grease.
Therefore, extract those sheets which you have wrapped around your thumbs and fingers, and move them back and forth with your right and left hand until they are thoroughly dispersed.
And make sure you do not press at the fissure so that the fluid does not escape and leave it alone.
More if it does not appear at your artery near the beginning of the fissure, then press a little cotton into the artery before proceeding; then extract the same as we have said; and place sheets of linen in water and vinegar and apply them over the area to strengthen those with powder.
And thus rinse with salt and apply it to the cavity of the fissure so that what remains of that moisture is removed.
And then cure it until it is healed.
But if an abscess occurs in that location, then cure it by applying cold plasters until it is healed.
Capitol. xi.
Methods of palpation of the whole body.
When in the eyelids of the eye so much tension causes the natural skin to stretch and become tightened, then those loosened eyelids become signs of illness such as constant tears and softening of the eyelid and tissue. This is often a cause of destruction of the eye, which is called tactinir of the eye, and it can be treated in four ways: either with a cautery of fire; or with acute medicine as previously mentioned in the Capitol on cauterization; or by surgical incision and suturing; or with cannulas as I will explain.
And thus cover the head of the eye with your left hand; then turn the eyelid of the eye with your right hand. If it turns, that is good; otherwise, insert a needle into the one where the thread from the part of the eyelid has come loose, and drive the needle with thread above, and place this—near the edge of the eyelid where the skin arises—and pull the thread up above the eyelid, then turn it.
And then place the skins tightly against the surface of the inner eyelid, between the major lacrimal gland and the minor lacrimal gland; and extract the fat, then place fine particles of cotton or cloth over the eyelid, and cover it with a flap, as illustrated by a leaf of myrtle.
But more importantly, ensure that the figure corresponds to the degree of swelling of the eyelid, for this varies among individuals, and those in whom a significant amount of fat needs to be removed according to how much the eyelid is softened.
And then make the incision on the two lines you have marked, starting between the major lacrimal gland and the minor lacrimal gland. And if your incision near the natural skin is as thick as the king's thumb.
And then place the needle in one of the two angles of the wound, and scrape out the entire area. Then suture the two edges with a needle or thin wool thread, clean the wound, and apply any excess thread on two sutures for certain causes that require it, if you want to do this, otherwise, you need not proceed.
And after that, let the stitches of the wounds remain for three or four days, and then heal this.
And if you wish, leave the wound open without stitches, and cure it by what dries and constricts, for when the eyelid is swollen you should seal the wound and add to it; but stitches are better. Therefore, so said the ancients of taxonomy.
But if the limb is in constant use by the patient, and it is from good surgery, and not out of fear.
And another method of taxonomy is to sew over the eyelid in a figure resembling a leaf of laurel, and then lift the eyelid by three stitches arranged and gathered according to this form:
But if it is not possible this way, take the stitches, and this is not feasible, then take one needle on which you have thread and place that in the middle of the figure, and insert the other thread near the major lacrimal gland, and the other thread near the minor lacrimal gland, and adjust between the ties, making the threads equal in tension, and then raise your hand for elevation equally, raising the entire area on which it was sewn as we have described.
And then adjust the two edges of the wound with stitches, and cure what is inside until it is healed.
And if you make an incision or a fissure, suture that abscess with thread and to its likeness, and apply ointment to it.
And sometimes under the eyelid, its own skin should be converted. Then use the incision method that we have said before; but suture in as few places as possible.
To cauterize with candles is done in this manner: And you convert the eyelid and split the figure that is inside according to what I have recounted; then, with art, make two candles or two thin sticks whose length is according to the length of the eyelid and the width of which is a quarter of the width of the space. And you have incised at the extremities of each part, where you have the threads.
Then add any subtlety under what you have excised from the eyelid of the well, and constrict the canals of all parts with great stricture, and leave that for a few days, for the cord through the stricture will die and be denied, and it will be possible for it to fall by itself.
But if it is delayed, then cut the threads, and proceed to cure the wound until it is healed.
Then since it is solidified, the eyelid is raised and the skin does not sting.
And this is the way of two canals which you will make according to this form: and has neither more nor less in terms of length and width.
Capitol.xii.
For the elevation of stinging skin in the eyelid with an awl when the skin is hard.
When they are unnatural, hard, rough, and stinging eyelids, the operation on them is that you take a fine awl and place it in that fine fiber of each eyelid, and then adjust the ends of it with small nuts in a very subtle manner. And let the length of the threads be equal to the width of a palm.
And then make another fine thread and place it briefly, using the ends of the previous one if you wish.
And then place the ill area's edge in the middle of the wound, and expose it to the sun so that your work is seen, for it is a subtle and delicate operation.
And then insert the needle into the groove of the tightly set skin, adjusting it as needed, and let that penetrate deeply into the eyelid, while extracting the one above the natural skin.
And then pull the skin upwards and insert the other one into the axilla, using one or two or three pieces of skin, but not more.
And then pull your hand towards that so that the skin is well set in the axilla under the eyelid with the natural skin.
But if the axilla is pulled with the thread and the skin is not set, pull the thread to the parts where you have placed the thread, so that in doing so the axilla will be set.
And when you bind it with a view to healing, then you will apply the flax and spread it over each part of the wound, and leave the dressing for two or three days until the hair adheres to its place and grows over that good flesh.
And if the hair is shorter, then you adjust a longer piece of hair from the natural hairs, and elevate it at that place, or leave it until it grows to fill some space, and then you elevate that.
Chapter XIII.
For the cure of hematite that appears in the upper eyelid.
When there is hematite in the wound, and it causes a contraction of the eyelid that contracts towards the upper or lower side, due to poor healing of a wound or a section or a cautery, it is called leporina. This hematite can be natural or accidental, and is caused by the healing of a wound or sections or cauteries, or by something similar to them.
May the manner of the operation be that you make that consolidation and separate the lips of it, and place in it at what is between those a strip of linen cloth, and bind those together until they are healed.
And you must use the cure for those causes which dry up, constrain; for if you do this it will return to worsen more than no time having been there.
Use for those causes that soften thus as fenugreek, and soak the cloth in water in which it is steeped and seed of it, or ointment of yarrow, which be liquefied with some of the oils, and submerge the strip in that, and apply with that.
And the treasure of your cure is that you perforate with everything that is not consolidated according to the form that it was at the beginning.
And this operation which we have said, is nothing but a simple correction of hernias that do not return to the form that it had before.
Chapter XIV.
For the cure of hemicrania which is caused in the eyelid, proceed.
This hemicrania which is caused in the eyelid, which is named specifically hemicrania; and it can be either of a natural cause or an accidental one.
More accidentally, it is caused by a blow, or a cut, or a cautery, or other similar causes.
The procedure for this operation is that you take a needle on which you make a double thread, and place that needle in the flesh, making it pass from the left lacrimal to the right lacrimal, so that the thread reaches the two ends of the flesh.
Then stretch the flesh at the upper parts near the needle and sew it with the needle, making a wide incision. And therefore, if you return the figure of the eyelid as it should be, that is good; otherwise, take the edge and place it in the grooved figure, and with that, turn the eyelid, making two fissures in the margin of the eyelid.
And if the ends of the two cracks at the corners of the incision, which you have made where they converge, and a corner is made between them when they come together, form their figure.
And this figure is the Greek letter: lambda.
And then place the flesh there for the quantity that is the length of the sharp point left from it, what remains of the incision.
And then adjust the separated parts with thread; and apply those oiled with medicines and liniments until it is healed.
And if you incise further for a crack or suture or cautery, then make a straight incision on the skin of the eyelid as previously described. And then separate with the forceps between two lips as we have said.
In the sum of the speech on incising when above or left over, let it flow in the operation, as prepared in the form of the incision, and that is in the form of varied spots.
And the skilled artisans at all times prepare tools in any manner which is possible for him to return the figure to its natural form, or near that, and that malady according to what suits him in the operation and the instruments in the major dispositions.
Chapter XV.
Of the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
When this consolidation occurs in adult men, they attempt to solidify the eyelid from above with the white of the eye, and to prohibit its ease of movement and its natural actions. Therefore, you should introduce the tip of a needle, place the eyelid, and elevate or extend it over the eye.
And then you incise the adhesion with a very fine lancet, which should not be too acute for the incisions, having a slightly obtuse tip so that the malady is not disturbed by the operation, and remove the humor without diminishing the eye's acuity.
And may your incision allow that adhesion to be easily removed so that the eyelid returns according to its natural form and all the adhesion is healed.
And then put in the wound enough salt water to which you wash; or distill it from zinc dissolved in water.
And then separate between the eyelid and the wound with salt water, and place over the wound infused wool in cow's milk, and for the first day use conservative treatments until it heals.
Chapter XVI.
On the incision of the eyelid and the prominence of flesh around the lacrimal gland.
Know that the eyelid is divided into two ways: one is nervous, resembling a thin hard film; the other is non-nervous, resembling a white congealed moisture. When you touch it, if it must be taken off, it can be cut and the membrane should not be inserted into it.
And both species do not begin until the major lacrimal gland, which gradually covers the eye and prohibits both light and movement of water.
The manner of acting in the extraction is that the patient keeps his head in your lap, and then opens his eyes, and raises his eyelid with your hand, and then collects the thumb with one finger and extend it to the upper parts. And then take a needle and insert into it a hair from a horse or a bull or a cow, or similar, or a strong thread, or gradually double the tip of the needle little by little and put that in the middle of the thumb, and penetrate that with the needle, and bind the thumb with glue; and extend that to the upper parts, and scrape off the skin the moisture from the thumb which closes the pupil. And thus you follow that with the hair into the root of his eye.
And then you extract the stone in the socket of the tear duct with a fine spatula or small forceps, and leave the natural flesh of the tear duct, so that by this extraction it does not suffer continuous flow of tears.
And sometimes the thumb is placed on the sole of the extended foot or on vinegar, as we have said, and then it is extracted with a lancet from which this is its form:
And be careful that with the lancet you do not touch the corneal membrane and even if there is a rupture in it, and that the pupil is not perforated.
Then apply a little salt of cumin or of dry mustard to the wound, and leave it there for another day; and then care for it so that what comes into it is healed.
And if the thumb is not nerveous and you cannot put the needle in it, then use this type of thumb treated with medicines, and it is healed as I and recommended in the division.
And if you want to incise it, then open the space of the patient and take a sharp lancet of hot steel according to this form: of fine subtlety. And if you see that it has congealed and is stuck in the ulcer, then spit in the wound made of vinegar or urine or salt water, and pour the liquid into another vessel.
And then repeat the operation over it until all of it is removed, but if a boil remains in the wound, then leave that and cure the boil until it is healed.
And then repeat your operation over it until it is cured.
The lacrimal bone, if noted in the wound by great damage, should be suspended with a pin; and incise that part of it, but do not complete the incision so as not to cut the flow of tears.
And then spit vinegar or urine into the wound until it is healed.
Capitol XVII.
On the incision of algazardenic and what is born from flesh attached in the wound.
Sometimes in the folds of some eyes, red flesh arises and is pressed over when covering the pupil, or strengthens near the eyelids and lightly clasps the eyelids from the outer parts and is gathered close to the railing.
The operation in such cases is that the surgeon places his hand on the patient's head; then opens the folds of that area and collects all that flesh with forceps or tweezers; afterwards incises the flesh at the beginning until everything is completed with the scalpel, and guard the fold so as not to undo what you have done.
And your incision should be made where you incise those, either on the cheek as we have recounted in the incision of the eye, or with small forceps with which you collect the swelling according to the form it will take in this chapter.
Then, once your incision is completed and all that flesh is retracted, fill the fold with salted salve, or sprinkle in it powdered red substance resembling that of corrosive medicines, and place your hand over the fold from the outside as in a paste of honey until an abscess is assured.
And if some cause of swelling is observed and infected by a scab, and there is fear of an abscess, then let the whole and cure that abscess with what causes it to yield, and then repeat the operation over that area until it is healed, and similarly do in the flesh adjusted which you encountered in the healing of this kind.
Moreover, you must know that all healing of swelling from cold should be through natural means or by chance. Use iron for this, and do not place your hand in any of these operations until you see that the part is suffering from this operation.
Capitol. xviii.
Of collecting knowledge on swelling.
Knowledge is gained from veins that are prominent on the swelling and you prohibit their operation, which alleviate the swelling over a long period of days.
Therefore, at the beginning, you must consider whether the swelling in which knowledge is gained is strong and if there is no other illness (causing it), then you collect that knowledge.
And you command the patient to place his head in your lap, and then suspend those veins at one or two inches according to your discretion; and let that inch be of subtle double thickness according to this form:
or two inches gradually in one piece according to this form:
And then gather those veins with strong but subtle forces, in subtlety, and cleanse the wound hour by hour, while encouraging those veins to rise and be rotated.
And see to it that you do not let the heat reach the extremities of the spatum; and if your operation in the morning before the sun, then remain firm in your operation so as not to enter except those veins.
And when you have completed, then distill in the heat verdant vinegar or rue so that by its acidity it may corrode what is raised from the scab.
But if this is not possible for you in that hour, then plaster everything with what yields relief to the pain, and leave it for a few days until the pain is alleviated and an abscess secured.
And then iterate over it according to how the patient behaves as it is being healed.
This is the way of the gout:
Chapter 19.
On reducing hernias to the nose.
When you cure hernias with a cautery or with sharp burning medicine, according to whether the narration of its history precedes and it is not healed, then do not engage in it but instead incise over the abscess and let it mature. Extract all the moisture which is within it, and leave the bone uncovered until it is discovered.
And when the bone is discovered and corruption or blackness appears in it, then rush to it with an instrument of which this is the form:
And it is called "asper cap," and it is made of iron, and its head is round, holding which it is made punctuated by the abrasion of a file or smoothed with a fine point (as in the following form).
And place him over the rotten part of the bone, then turn it gradually between your fingers, and press your hand little by little so that you know that this corruption is superficial.
And do this several times, then restore the place affected by desiccative and astringent causes.
So if the place is consolidated and there is good hidden flesh and the corrupt flesh is cut from the body and remains for 40 days, and it is not renewed and does not suppurate and no accident occurs, then you know that it is healed.
And if not, then reduce the fissure to the form of the nose, and do it in this manner: uncover either the bone with forceps or with sharp medical instruments, once the bone is uncovered, then take three strips according to this form:
Let the tip of the forceps be triangular, and the shaft be narrowed at the tip in the same way you see it.
And place it over the bone, which should be near the lacrimal bone; then stretch your hand a little longer, and turn your hand with the strips so that they penetrate the entire bone, and that feels the pain where it finds air flowing because of the illness.
Then restore the area with medicinal powders drying as they are accustomed.
Then when the flesh and area are hardened, the material which was diffusing to the surrounding parts returns to its place, so this is lighter on the patient.
Capitol.xx.
For the reduction of the prominence of the hernia.
When the hernia protrudes entirely and there is no damage or diminution of the covering, then you should relax the patient, followed by applying ventosa several times on the neck for scarification and sucking with good extraction; subsequently place liniment on the hernia made from acatra, aloe, garlic, and dragon's blood; finally, strongly apply the plaster over the hernia using motz of powder.
And the method of the powders is that you take lint from a lion's mane, and each cloth should be folded into four parts; then use those pieces.
And then place those over each other according to the quantity of what they have need of. And then strengthen over those with a hard cloth bound tightly; and repeat the cups with suction six times; and after placing the cups, leave them fully straight day and night.
But if meantime the ligament becomes softened, then make it fully straight.
And place the ligament fully straight day and night as we have said.
And if the pain has already subsided, that is good. Otherwise, then repeat the ointment with the powders and the binding and the cups until it is healed.
Chapter XXI.
On the incision of the prominence of the uveal membrane.
When there is disruption in the uveal membrane, and then it swells and protrudes, you should remove the eyelid as much as a degree of hair. This forms a shape like that of a man. If you wish to incise this, the operation on it is as we have recommended. You should insert the needle into the slit of the uveal membrane from the lower part into the upper part, and then place another needle with a double thread in the part near the lacrimal gland, making the latter penetrate while leaving the first needle in its position. Then incise the location of the double thread and lift the part of the uveal membrane in the circuit of the needle, strengthening it accordingly.
And then extract the needle and place yourself over the wool infused with white goose fat, leaving the thread in the wound until it dries.
And then care for the wound with what will comfort that which is within as the plague heals.
And in some cases, gather all the parts into a circular cloth at the center of the wound, and then perforate with a fine needle that comes from within the wound, allowing the humeur albuminée to flow out and quickly drain the wound.
And then strengthen it until it is healed.
Chapter 22.
On the cure of ulcers.
This illness called ulcera is nothing but a disease that settles in the wound, resembling water descending, and it is not the other.
The method of treating it is to position the patient on the prepared and straight bench, then hold the head with your hands in two parts and pull that which you see the disease approaching the parts left, ensuring it dries up and does not descend, and keep the light so as to observe the causes as clearly as possible.
And if it does not descend below, know that it is water.
And if the descent is not prepared for the healing, then do the operation on the patient and then take a subtle spatium and put it over the gossypium, carefully letting a little continue along the conjunctiva to the cornea in the crown (into the place of vision), ensuring that the healing is forgotten.
And since it is forgotten outside, then you drip water infused with honey or water in which you have boiled fenugreek and honey.
And then cure the other causes once it is healed.
Chapter 22.
On the cure of water descending in the urethra.
We have already mentioned the species of water in the division and which one is appropriate to puncture as we declared, according to the health condition.
And then you must do the operation with the surgeon between your thighs on a cushion, keeping his hole there small.
And then place your left hand close to the corner of their eye where the water is the left; or with your right hand if the water is the right.
And then with your right hand take the basin, if the water is on the left; or with your left hand, if the water is on the right.
And then place the extremity of the basin near the corner for the pregnancy of the ray in the white of the eye from the side of the lower eyelid, and then pour the basin with virtue and turn your hand around it.
And then penetrate into the white of the eye and feel that the basin is already permeated due to virtue.
And make sure that the measure of the path of the basin is correct when pouring the measure of space which is from the pupil to the end of the blackness, for this is the corner of the eye; for you will see the pupil through this with the vision of the eye due to the clarity of the cornea.
And then place your hand in the spot where the water is, and then draw it down one time or another, and therefore when the water descends quickly, then see the patient there where his vision falls upon it quickly, and your hand remain there.
And then rest for a moment; therefore if the water has descended, then you draw it down another time in front that your hand be not wet.
And when it is drawn out and does not descend, then you withdraw your hand with ease, and move your hand gradually back and forth, and then dissolve a little of clear gemstone salt in the water and use that to wash the area inside; then place a cloth, or stop, or infused wool in olive oil and egg white over it, and tie this with a bandage around it.
More often now and those of our times prefer to place over it a cloth soaked in olive oil.
And if your hand does not fit into the area due to its hardness — which is common in some individuals where the area is very firm — then draw out the pus which is called alberid, and this is its form:
And therefore perforate there that joint, and do not withdraw your hand from the tract, but rather make a way to a delicate spot below.
And then introduce the probe as we have said.
And you should allow the patient to rest comfortably in a bed made for him in a dark room, and all movements should be prohibited.
And pause in the nature of the wound to allow its natural healing, and do not direct its flow towards the right or left side entirely.
And apply the ointment according to its disposition on the third day.
And then take the patient out of that dark room and expose him to fresh air, and make some incisions, and return the ointment on the seventh day.
And do not perform this during the hour of cure or shortly after the infusion. Having a cavity that you open through which water can pass rather freely by great and vigorous regard.
But if it happens that an abscess forms, having a cavity that you incise on the seventh day, and correct that with which the abscess yields.
When you make the incision and place your hand on the face of the wound, for which the bleeding may be regulated, leave it for a few days, allowing it to heal in the darkest part.
And gradually let it heal and turn into its natural colors.
And know that in surgery it is not excuses a disciple from vision for some days, and then you should attend closely to the operation.
And we have learned from some of those who treat Artach that some say to make a fire in Ayrac and heat it, placing the liquid water on it.
But, however, I have not seen anyone in our land who has perfected this, nor is it mentioned in any of the books of the ancients; and it is possible that this is a new method.
And these are the forms of the species of madness that may occur in those who ignore those:
And they are made of lead or iron properly, and their extremities are at this subtlety triangular, the尖锐端如同那个一样是形状。
Capitol.xxiv.
For the healing of flesh in the nose.
When in the nose there are hidden various pieces of flesh that are joined by some cause which is associated with a scorpion of heavy weight or with a polyp of that kind; this illness is called polypus and it is similar to that kind of polyp represented. And of it is flesh cancerous, dark in color; and of it is that flesh lion-like not of dark color.
Therefore, in that which is in these lion-like flesh neither fraudulent nor cancerous, make the patient lie between your hands and expose it to the sun, and breathe on its nostrils, and prick the thigh in those flesh. And then extract it from the abdominal parts externally, and then divide what you have grasped with a sharp thin knife between which you know all the flesh has been cut away; if any remains due to some cause where the excision is possible, then quickly use one of the fine instruments to facilitate cutting for any reason. And if the lordship develops into an abscess or a suppurating boil, then pause at it with what is needed; or of malignant boils, then open and cauterize it where the incision should be made to drain the pus and leave all the cavities open.
And then place a hot compress on the nose and apply either a salve or ointment. And if the nose is opened and fluid continues to discharge into the mouth, then you know that it is already healed.
And if the fluid does not penetrate as expected, then you know that inside there is no pus, and only bone fragments of the nose which have not been reached by the incision.
When you find that an intestinal mass is present in the patient, use needles on it and place between each needle the size of your finger or less, then extract the mass and insert one end of the thread into the naris with a ray or for another reason which is possible to him.
And since it has done this, let its odor enter before it reaches the nasal passages, and sit on its chair; for too many spectators watching this action in the schools is a light cause for those who wish to perform it.
Then return the two ends of the thread, one end that hangs over the nose and the other that passes into the nose, and then apply a ligature of flesh around the needles that are in the thread, and do this before you can tell that the flesh is against the needles of the thread.
Then extract the thread, and place a catgut in the nose near the exit of the blood, and do this for three days or more until the ointment dissolves everything that is rotten from the flesh.
And at the end of the cause, place in the nose a lead tube for several days until it is healed.
If you desire a cure that is dry, use of that.
And this is the form of the instrument for making nasal purges, at which oils and medicines are distilled in the nose:
And make it of silver or of copper, which should resemble a small open lamp, like a small basin, and the mouth resembling a spout.
And if you want, make a closed tube like a cane, and the mouth of the instrument for making nasal purges should be flat and open; to which you can manipulate at the rear end, with which you will have it when you heat in it oil or what you want from the viscous and suctible causes.
Capitol.xxv.
From the roots to the tips of the nose.
Pustules appear at the roots of the nose, and are enlarged and mounded over several days as the pimple becomes visible upon examination.
And for this reason, you should examine it when the pustule first appears, and keep track of it. And then place a covering over the area, or use a cautery or burning medicine where it was located.
But if the examination is delayed until after the pustule has enlarged, consider whether it is hardened, dark in color, and of little sensation. In that case, do not touch it with a sharp object as it may be an abscess; for pustules that you examine at this stage should beware of the great harm they can cause to the person upon whom they have formed.
And if the abscess is due to a blow and not dark in color, and examination is possible throughout the area, then drain the infection and examine it without fear, and treat the area with what dries and constricts until it heals.
Chapter XXVI.
For the suturing of the nose and lips when the continuity is dissolved by plague or similar diseases.
Know that when there is a dissolution of continuity in one of these cartilages, you should not much concern yourself with that operation but rather with some skilled individuals.
Therefore, when you find any cause of these conditions, consider whether it is fresh plague with its own symptoms, and then adjust the two lips of the plague with sutures, and proceed to cure that which remains until it is healed.
And if the lips of dissolution of continuity are already separated, and any one is made healthy, then you should scrape each part of its visible edge until it bleeds with pus. Then adjust the two lips with sutures and strengthen them, and sprinkle dragon's blood powder and thistle over them, and place a piece of transparent plaster or some other consolidative plaster on top of the powder, and leave this mixture for two to three days. Then remove that and change the plaster, leaving it until the roots have resolved themselves, and proceed to apply ointment until it is healed.
The manner of suturing is that you add the solution of continuity or use needles as we have recommended in the belly suture, or add the solution of continuity with thread as you are made to know.
Chapter XXVII.
Of the extraction of those causes that wind enters in the two lips in the parts within.
Slight rashes often appear in the inner parts of the lips and become hard swellings resembling lumps of fat; some are small, while others are larger.
Then carefully remove all parts of the lips and each of those hard swellings, and during the excision fill the area with three threads to tighten the wound, and afterward wash it with wine and treat the area with water that is astringent until it heals.
Chapter XXVIII.
Of the incision of the flesh adhered to the gums.
Great care must be taken over the gums that are tightly attached, which the ancients called albulus, then withdraw that probe or whatever instrument you have used, cleanse that place thoroughly, and let the healthy fluid flow or let it coagulate.
Then place something warm on the area, or other styptic or excitatory powders.
And if that flesh returns, then incise it again, and cauterize it; for afterwards the cauterization will not return.
Capitol.xxix.
On the reason for teeth being firm.
When on the surface of the teeth in both internal and external parts, and between the gums, there are sharp, hard edges, some times they are blackish and are caused by yellow or green substances that corrupt the gums, causing the teeth to become loose.
And therefore, make sure you cut the patient's thigh between your thighs and place the patient's head in a pillow, and rub the teeth where these edges and similar causes appear with some substance that does not cause any harm, and this is done for the blackness and the yellowish coloration and other changes they may have undergone.
Then if what is in those at the beginning of the reasoning is good; and if not, then you iterate the reasoning on those the next day and the second and the third until it comes to the final statement in what you want.
And know that the teeth have required grooves carved in various forms and with diverse figures according to what is prepared for your operation. And so, some razors for which the tooth is shaved from the inside out are different from the razors for which it is shaved between the teeth according to other forms, and these forms of razors you must prepare, which you will often see:
Capitol.xxx.
For the extraction of teeth.
Cure the tooth with all skill and take your time in its extraction, for no cause can compensate for the removal itself when it occurs, as a substance is sublimated during the process of extracting it.
More carefully cure when the gout forces you to extract that tooth, for firmly you must be certain which is the painful tooth, for many removals of pain deceive the gout and mistakenly target a healthy tooth, and you extract that one and soon the pain does not cease until the diseased and painful tooth is extracted, for we have already seen this in the operations of barbers.
Therefore you must be certified which is the painful tooth, and knowing well, when you incise along the circuit of the tooth with spatum in which some virtue may be dissolved from the root of the tooth of all parts, and then near those ties said, or with fine scissors at the beginning gradually until those concussions.
And then apply water to it strongly holding great force for good speech or strong fracture, and place the head of the patient between those ties well that you do not suffocate, and then extract the tooth according to right manner so as not to break it, nor give greater pain to the patient.
And if it is not forced out, then take one of those instruments, and place it under the area with ease and force the removal of it as is done at the beginning.
But if the tooth is broken or corroded, then you must wrap that part with cloth and tie it tightly at the end of a fine thread so that it does not get broken during your manipulation of it and hold it firmly.
And ensure that you operate precisely during the scarification of the circuit of all parts of the gum and keep your strength so as not to break any part of it, and return over the patient for the malice that is more than the first pain of it.
And beware that you do not do what some ignorant barbers do in their operations and boldness regarding the eradication of boils; for they do not administer what we have advised; which vain thoughts bring great illnesses upon men, which are harder to treat than boils, and the reasons behind their failures all, or some of those, or that they extract from certain bones of the jaw as we have testified with many examples.
And for the eradication of the boil, wash the mouth with vinegar or water mixed with salt.
And if there are fluxes of pus for this, as often happens, then take some ginger and sprinkle it over the wound. If this does not work, cauterize it.
The shape of the forceps and fine tongs used to extract a tooth at the beginning should be long, short, and thick, so as not to bend when you need to use them.
And they should be as when you close large openings so that when stretched they remain brief and tightly bound.
And they should be made of iron from India, straight and tightly bound, and in the ends of those, there are teeth which enter each other and stretch by descending force strongly, and some times the ends of those are in the shape of a duckbill which is called a ciconia, so they are strong in construction.
Chapter XXXI.
On the Extraction of Teeth and the Removal of Broken Jaw Bones.
When you need to extract a tooth that is broken due to some cause, first ensure that you apply pressure firmly over the area for one or two days until the area becomes softened; then insert forceps or tongs at the ends of which are shaped like the bill of a duck called a ciconia or guant, the form of the forceps:
The ends of these should be made inside like a hammer or awl.
And if your attempt with these forceps or tongs does not obey you, then carve over the crack and strip all the flesh, and insert the instrument which is named atali, so it is a small lever whose shape is like this:
And briefly, the extremity is broad at the top and small at the bottom, and it should not be twisted so that it does not get stuck.
So if the crack is already opened, that is good; and if not, help me with these other instruments, the forms of which are as follows: the form of the first instrument is triangular, broad at the extremity, in which there is some thickness.
The form of the second instrument is triangular and narrow at the extremity.
And now help me with this instrument, which has two ramps, the form of which is as follows: And with other instruments which are used for the rasuration of teeth; for this youth is made with this instrument, which resembles a large spoon, and this is its form:
From the triangular extremity twisted or curved, which is some swelling, and not completely enclosed so that it is not contracted.
And another note that the tooth extraction tools resemble other instruments.
But the skilled and subtle artisans find suitable tools for themselves according to what the operation and various ailments signify; for there are ailments to which the ancients would neither apply nor pause with a proper instrument, due to their diverse forms.
But if the bone of the mandible or other bones in the mouth are broken, or if possible, then place a weight over it in its location. What is convenient from the instruments and forceps that we have mentioned in the extraction of roots of teeth should be applied, and the gesture for this is as follows:
And place some swelling little by little, and tightly hold or press it with your hand so that it does not escape or move while the bone is completely drilled; then return the area to its proper place using suitable medicines.
If in the bone there is a small ulcer, first remove that part of the ulcer and its blackness, and cure that until it is healed.
Chapter XXXII.
Of the treatment of prominent teeth above others.
When the teeth are prominent not according to their natural course, especially when they protrude in women, and particularly in elderly women; therefore consider: if a tooth is nearly touching another tooth and cannot be separated or aligned with it, then extract that tooth; but if it is not attached to another tooth, then use this instrument, the shape of which is shown here; and it resembles a pig's snout, made of Indian steel with an extremely sharp edge.
And make your incision with the instrument you will use to extract that tooth over several days due to its hardness, and ensure it is not too close to any other teeth.
And if the tooth is prominent and worn down, then file that part with an Indian steel file of which the shape is shown here:
And let it be all of iron and the margin sharpened; and made of small pointed pins like those of a file, on which the tooth is filed little by little over several days for ease, so that there is not another sharp tooth. And then line the one at the end, and sharpen the other with a few razors.
And if the tooth is such that a part of it is broken and hurts the tongue, then you must file that part so that the sharpness of that fracture is stopped and equalized, and be filled to prevent the tongue from being cut and the word from being corrupted.
Capitol.xxxiii.
For the restoration of decayed teeth with gold or silver foil.
When the front teeth are injured by concussion or removal through impact or extraction, and the patient cannot strengthen the area that is missing, and you have treated this with styptic medicines but your treatment has not been effective, then for those that are strong use gold foil and not silver, because silver becomes loose and may come out in a few days, while gold does not change over any amount of time.
And let the honey be in such subtlety and thickness according to the quantity that can enter between the teeth; and the form of the recao is that you take the honey and put twice its amount between two healthy teeth, and soon there will appear two tortuosity of the honey between two molar teeth, or one or spots, before the mesh reaches the healthy tooth from the other side. And then pass the thread into the part from which you started, and strengthen your hand with ease and skill before it is mangled.
And let your tension be such that when you pull the thread, it tightens the honey at the roots of the teeth so that none escapes.
And then divide the excess threads of the honey with forceps or tweezers, and add them to any place with care, and mix those and the hidden ones between the healthy tooth and the mangled one, so as not to injure the tongue. And then let it stay thus tied like a Roman.
If it is slipped or broken, strengthen that or those parts in such manner throughout its entire duration.
This is the form of the teeth and the figure of the extraction of two healthy teeth and two wisdom teeth, as you see these ligaments:
When one returns a tooth or two to their proper places in the jaw, and they have grown back as we have described, then they should remain.
And it is not done by any mere artisan or fool.
And sometimes it is suitable for certain causes of cow bones, and they are made in the form of a tooth, and placed in the location where the tooth failed, and strengthened as we have said, and remain and serve for a long time.
Capitol.xxxiv.
On the incision of the ligament which is in the tongue and prohibiting speech.
This ligament which causes the tongue to be affected for some days is either natural, one that one is born with, or accidental and occurs due to a wound which has already healed.
And the operation is to open the mouth of the patient, their existing head in your hand; elevate their tongue, and then incise that nerve according to the width between which the tongue can be separated from its root.
And if there is any hardness or nodularity, and this is due to the consolidation of a boil, then you grip one end and incise it according to the width at which you have incised the nerve and where the nodularity has dissolved.
And make sure that no crack is made in the subcutaneous layer and that you incise here to allow the flow of pus.
And then wash the incision tracts with warm water or with vinegar or with wine; and then place the tongue to drain. If it is necessary, let the patient keep the tongue out overnight so that it does not become swollen again.
And if there is a flow of pus, place a glass triplex over the area to drain it; and if the pus continues to flow, then cauterize the area with a pointed cautery that suits this. And then the other causes are treated once it is healed.
Capitol.xxxv.
For the extraction of a ranula, I leave the tongue.
In some cases, when an abscess in the tongue occurs, I leave it untreated, prohibiting the tongue from its natural operation; and greatly it is enlarged until it fills the mouth.
And the operation for this is to open the mouth of the patient sixty degrees facing the sun and examine the abscess.
And if you see it of a dusky color or black, hard, to which the patient does not feel any sensation, then do not touch that area.
And if it is turning white, in which there is moisture, then you apply the probe to it, and incise that with a sharp knife, and incise all of it. And if the wound begins to bleed during your operation, then you stop above tigli trissat, which is vitriol, until the bleeding is reduced.
And then return to your work after you have brought him to completion, after he has been washed with vinegar and salt; and care for that with the other cure when it is healed.
Capitol. xxxvi.
For the extraction of abscesses in both ears and those that arise from the gola (throat) and other abscesses.
When pain arises in the gola (throat), they are glands which are clustered like ears, which occur externally and are named as two ears. When you treat them as we have said in the division and they do not heal, then consider if the abscess is hard, of dusky color, and has little sensation; then do not touch it with a iron.
And if it is of red color and the root is large, then do not touch that with iron due to the flow of blood; first let it mature, and then either you will incise it, or it will break by itself.
And if it is of white color, tender, and the root is fine, then it is to be incised.
And in the operation, you must consider before your operation whether the abscess has already rested and is completely cured or if it has decreased somewhat; then operate on the patient before the sun, with his head on your lap, and lifting his mouth, and a servant holding his tongue between their fingers, taking the noblest instrument of which this is the form:
And let it be made of silver or steel, and let it be sharp like a knife.
So when you press at that tongue and the abscess is shown to you, and cut over it quickly, then take a probe and place it in the abscess, and pull it outwards as far as you can. Another thing you pull from the tunics, and then incise that with the instrument of which this is the form:
Another thing you pull from the tunics, and then incise that with the instrument of which this is the form: and it is similar to forceps, but the ends are curved, so that the opening of each of those is in the straight part of the other, sharp points, which should be made of iron and well tempered.
If this instrument is not at your disposal, then incise that space from which this form comes: it should be sharp on one side, not on the other.
And since you have incised one wound, incise the other according to this manner of incision, and near the incision the sore should heal with water.
If there is a flow of blood, heal with water from the decoction of crushed colocynth or of hollyhock leaves and similar to those causes that constrict the flow of blood, and cure that once it is healed.
And sometimes sores appear in the groin or other abscesses elsewhere on the two ears, and incise those according to what is said and done in the incision of two wounds equally.
And I had already treated a woman with an abscess which was located in her groin, which abscess tended to have a brown color, with little sensation, and which had already closed her groin. The woman breathed freely, and had been prohibited from eating and drinking water, and she was close to death if more water were to remain for one or two days.
And the abscess had already been pressing so long that there were two handbreadths between where it would exit through two cuts.
Therefore I would incise the fistula completely and fix it in one of its ends, then pull that end, stretching the large portion. Next, I would incise the other part, and firmly hold the mouth of the other cut, grasping its tongue, and finally fix the end in the abscess.
And then I would cut a large part of it, but blood was flowing from it only in small amounts. Therefore the swelling was gone from that woman, and she began to drink water soon, and also eat food. Then I did not cease incising that abscess for a long time, and an abscess would recur in its place, which continued to form as long as the previous one lasted.
Therefore I enlarged and cauterized the swelling, then applied the plaster; next, I walked around and did not know what God had done to that nearby me.
Chapter XXXV.
Of the incision of the heel when it is swollen.
When a catarr (catarrah) affects the uvula, and it is swollen and long, then it is named perpendicular; if it is in the part large and round, then it is called a bubble.
When it is cured according to what we have said in the division, and you do not find your cure agreeable, and thus you often observe that the abscess caut has already passed away and become subtle, then probe that you incise that which is aggregated round; if it is at that length, and it bleeds, of dusky color or black, and is not a centimeter, then you should fear the incision of it, for there is fear concerning the illness.
And when you observe that according to the manner I have said of its whiteness and length, you should lance the illness and press the tongue of it with an instrument of which you determine its form and then fix the needle in the new site, and draw that down and incise that with one of the two instruments which are called in the incision of two abscesses.
And ensure that you do not insert it further than what is adjusted over the natural term of addition, for if you insert it more, you will alter its speech.
And near the insertion, use what we have described in the insertion of two fingers, and ensure that it is cured within.
And if the patient was frightened by the insertion, ensure that you use anesthetic in the cautery to alleviate his fear, and the way of applying the cautery is simply with sharp water. You should place the head of the patient in your lap, and then press the patient's tongue against the instrument as described. Additionally, take the sharp water from the section on cautery application, and apply it to the area without being too thin or subtle. Fill the cavity of the instrument according to its shape:
Let the external part of the cavity in which the medicine is applied be as wide as the handle of a ray, and place the instrument with the medicine over the vagina, while the patient opens his legs to allow saliva or mucus from his mouth to enter through the internal medicine, so that it does not decrease for any reason on the ligaments and affect him.
And then place your hand on the medicine, and express it over the uvula for half an hour between each time you let it darken due to the bite of the medicine.
And if you want, take some cloth and wrap it around the tip of the reed, then immerse the cloth in the medicine, and insert the reed with the cloth into a tube from above so that the cloth adheres to the tube. Do this as many times as needed to achieve the cauterization of the uvula you desire, and then let it dry and fall off in about three or four days.
And if you need to apply the medicine again, apply it, and then cauterize the area around the uvula with a wrapped cloth. Modify what is in the circuit of the uvula by the medicine, and wash it with water, and treat externally by soaking and internally with remedies until it heals.
And this method of treatment is safe and long-lasting without fear.
Some cases of tonsillitis are cured by what is finer than a cautery or incision, which is treated with subfumigation in this manner: take calamus, hyssop, origanum, rue, scikadis arabicus, camomile, powder and resemble those of the herbs, and adjust all those causes, or some of them, in one ointment, and be submerged in vinegar and boil; let the ointment be well beaten with decent honey, and let it be in the middle of the ointment a wick, over which is placed an instrument hollow of iron according to this manner; let it be made of silver or iron.
And let the extremity be inserted in the mouth of the patient so that the vapor rises to the tonsil above the uvula, so that the uvula becomes somewhat obscured.
And then it repeatedly passes over those spots several times while they are dry, and guard that you do not perform this cure at the beginning of the appearance of abscesses, for it would too tightly bind the abscess. You should not do this, but declare the abscess with a cautery.
But if you do not have this instrument at hand, then take a cane and place on its end a clog of wood, so that the opening of the patient's anus is blocked, for the wooden clog prevents the vapor from burning the opening.
And this cure is good for health.
Chapter XXXVIII.
On the extraction of thorns and what adheres in the wound and other causes.
Spots or thorns that adhere in the wound or from a thorny plant or some other cause.
Then carefully extract what is obvious and visible from the wound or thorn, by pressing the tongue with an instrument in front of the sun, so that you may know what is in the wound.
And what is not apparent and hidden in the wound, make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach, because if the cause attached to the wound is strong, it will be expelled through vomiting; or have the patient swallow a piece of napkin or flax cloth or a piece of dry bread; or take a piece of sponge dried with wine and tie it tightly with thread, and make the patient swallow that, for it will reach the place where the thorns are located and will be expelled. And take an eel and wrap it in honey, then place it inside and gently extract it; or take a pepper and gently insert it and then remove it.
And if none of these methods work as we have said, then use a lead instrument in this form:
And let it be as thick as a small finger, and at the end of it, have a cavity that you insert into his throat with ease.
And let his head be raised up, and guard that the touch of his bone in the throat reaches him, so that it affects him and either what covers the bone or the spine, or what that doctor places with his hand.
And instead, let the patient himself insert honey, by his knowledge of the place of the cause and cover it below, and pull his hand towards the instrument, all this according to the quantity which is prepared for him before it becomes ineffective.
Chapter XXXIX.
From the extraction of gouty fluid associated with the gout.
When the gouty fluid is treated with what we have said in the division of the treatment with medicines and you do not agree, consider at the heat of the gout during the gout attack in the sun, for you may have misunderstood the language of the instrument we have recommended.
Therefore, if you see the gouty fluid, extract it either through a small needle or with fine threads properly.
And if it is not possible to extract it through that, then take a concave cannula and insert it into the gout attack of the gout. Then place a burning iron in the concavity of the cannula, and do this as many times as necessary (until the gouty fluid is dead and stays out of the gout attack), and let the patient abstain from water for the entire day.
And then take a towel full of water, work its mouth into the area, and wash the area with it; and do not swallow any part of it, but let the water remain on the area for about an hour using your hand, as soon as the gouty fluid senses the water it will begin to drain.
If it is not already fomented with what we have recommended, then foment the thigh with cimeter or asafetida using the instrument we have recommended in the fomentation of uvula.
Do this, so that it may heal.
And another way of fomentation is that you take a bowl in which are burning coals and the bowl is covered with a cloth in the middle of which there is a hole, and place the end of the instrument in that hole; then proceed with the subfomentation; and place the thigh on the end of the cannula, and close its end so that the subfomentation does not get extinguished until you see that the subfomentation has reached the uvula, for the uvula will soon fall.
And if it does not heal, then you repeat the subfomentation several times, and abstain the thigh from drinking, eating salty foods and others, and do not drink water. It is necessary that this regimen be followed.
And this is the form of the instrument used to treat gout when it is seen; and it resembles tongs as you see them, but with some curvature in it: and the end of it is similar to the beak of a stork, which is wide, and on which it is filed with a file, so that when any cause is grasped, it does not slip.
Capitol.xl.
In which the essence of the speech concerning abscesses and their sections is found.
Abscesses are special kinds of boils, according to various methods as remembered, for each one in this treatise.
And they are varied in puncturing and sectioning them through two methods. Of these, one is according to the kind of abscesses themselves; and by this, they grasp the humors.
And the second method is according to the places where bodily accidents occur, for an abscess in the head is different from an abscess in the buttocks; and an abscess in a fleshly place is different from an abscess in a joint; and each one of them has its own judgment through operation.
And of abscesses, some which cover that they should not be punctured but rather wait for the maturation of the healing in those or their complement.
And of other abscesses which cover that they should be incised when crossed, and are not maturing according to their complement, thus like abscesses that are near joints, for an abscess when near a joint, the essence of it is prolonged into what is within that circuit, and greatly corrupts the ligaments or nerves of that joint, causing contraction of that limb; or it is near the main member, and if you delay the incision of it until its natural maturation for the main member; or it is near the anus, therefore incise that which is not matured; and it should not be incised raw, due to incomplete digestion, but one that is near the anus, so that no preon from it can extend into the inner parts of the anus, and a fistula may be formed, or what is done in its term until it is healed. And you should know the time for the incision of the abscess, and this is when it is matured.
And know that it is ripe when there is the reduction of pain and the cessation of fever, and the diminution of inflammation and pulse, and the acuteness of the head of the abscess, and other signs.
And know when to make the穿刺在脓肿下方的位置，并且是脓液从切口排出的时候。
And the puncture should be made along the length of the flesh or body, if the abscesses are in the parts near the groin or feet, and at the location of the groins, the cords of the nerves, the arches; and, otherwise, in all similar locations where there is no reflection; for in those that are reflective, use puncture according to that member.
And when the abscess is in a fleshly location, it is better to wait until the digestion of the pus is confirmed according to its natural course, as we have said; for if you puncture it before this, you will prolong the course of the pus and mucus, and increase the thickness and depth of the abscess.
More abscesses should be punctured according to the width of the flesh or body as necessity demands, or according to that from which the member suffers.
And see that you administer a small puncture in large abscesses, and a wide or multiple sections according to the diversity of the size of the abscesses.
And in other abscesses, see that the cord is returned to its cavity and tied, when this is done as with bread and done in such a way that it stays, just as one does for crops of melons and buboes.
And of those that are incised with a section having three angles; and of those in which an incision is made as the shape of a holly leaf, just as with abscesses of gout.
And of these, see those in which a round section and a crescent section are administered, and similar to those.
More for those in which none is done as such, where the abscesses are superficial, see that you puncture them with a superficial puncture, or flat one only.
And when the abscess is large and has already collected some healthy pus, you should pierce it and do not hesitate to extract all the foul matter at that time; having extracted one part, then pack the abscess on another day, and extract a larger part, and repeatedly do this until it is thoroughly drained.
And especially if the patient is of verdure virtue, or a woman in labor, or a small child, or an old person in decline, for the animal spirit has resolved into the exit of the healthy fluid, and greatly alleviates the illness, so you should openly proceed.
Take great care with this chapter, and when you make your puncture in which you perforate these abscesses, ensure that you clean the wounds and consider whether the wound of the abscess is small, or a flat section, then administer either herbs or cumin seeds; if the abscess is large, and the cracks of the puncture are deep, then you should pause to allow them to heal together.
And if in the abscess a part of the cord has been cut or you have concaved it in the circuit, then you should close it with old wool or with a thread made of linen, just as when you have drawn out bandages or roots, their humidity; strengthen it on the third day; and proceed with it and cure the area as what is appropriate from ointments until it is healed.
If you happen to have a flow of blood during the time of your operation, then you administer hot water mixed with wine in which you soak a cloth, and place that over the location of the blood flow for many minutes.
If the flow of blood persists, then you must administer treatment and care, as well as powders which I have recommended in many places of this our libel and division.
If it is in the time of winter, and the location of the abscess is near major nerves, then you should apply powders mixed with wine and oil using a cautery, and place those over the locations.
And if it is in the summer, and the locations are fatty, then you should place powders soaked in water and oil or in wine and oil, all of which should be applied within the first three days, as we have said, and then you should incise the abscess, cleanse it, and administer to it what is appropriate for its healing within the time that it heals.
And this is what is necessary regarding the knowledge of the treatment of abscesses universally, but according to the division I have already spoken of, all abscesses are treated in a particular manner by chapters singly.
Chapter XL.
Of the section on abscesses that occur in the vein of the head.
In the vein of the head, small abscesses occur, and they contain nodules which are formed; and the nature of these nodules is spotted.
And they are lumps, and among them are those that contain a humidity resembling lime. And among them are those that contain a humidity resembling dust, similar to it; and among them are those that are hardened, hard.
And in the section of all, and in the extraction of these, there is no fear, just as you should not fear the extraction of these without causing any resistance.
And the operation for the section of these is that you puncture them with an instrument in the form which is close at hand, which is called a lancet until you know it contains fluid.
If what is contained is humidity, then section that with an instrument along its length for a superficial section in this manner:
And begin in the section of line B between line G. Then as the humidity is evacuated, you scratch that skin which contains that humidity, and leave none of that cause of all, because too many times returns if left of that any cause.
And then immerse it in Egyptian ointment if present, and otherwise in water and salt; then apply it to the wound and leave it there for another day, because with it you will dissolve all that is rotten of that skin.
And then repeatedly apply it to that part with Egyptian ointment gently if you need it, confident that there is no rotten cause of that skin; after that, cure the wound with ointment while it is healing.
And if there is an abscess containing fatty nodes, then you incise it according to this form: In the section having the form of a cross, and make an incision between two sides of the section, and sweep all of it away, and exert your virtue in extracting the tunica which contains it.
But if your artery resists, then do what I recounted to you first.
And similarly, make the incision and for treatment as we have said before; the incision over an abscessed lump is lighter, because it has little bleeding and little humidity.
And sometimes such abscesses in the head have no humidity; the cause of which is that I cannot incise an abscess on a woman's head, so I probe and extract the abscess like a hard, rough, white pear that could not be cut, and if any were subjected to percussion, it would burst.
But in other abscesses in the head, this is not covered in this chapter; as with abscesses that occur in children's heads, you should drain the ears, but the incision for all of these should be a superficial one.
And place the incision for those below the knee in such a way that it relieves the body of the disease to the lower parts.
And then attend to those things that concern the cure.
Chapter XLII.
Of the section on scrofulas which occur in the neck.
Black spots often cause abscesses in the neck, in the armpits, and in the groins; and sometimes they occur in other parts of the body.
And those that occur in the neck, and the spots that are generated among them, and all scrofula of these is within its own membrane. Just as with nodules and abscesses in the head, as we have recounted.
The species of these scrofulas are spots. Some are rough, and some contain moisture, and the malignant ones do not respond to treatment.
Then in that one which you find to be of good disposition in the Touchement, where the color that is manifest is similar to the color of the skin, and is diffused throughout all parts, and is not attached to the nerves of the neck, nor to the veins, nor to the artery, and is not a swelling, cut that one with superficial dry incisions from the upper part to the lower part along the line of G. to the line of B., and scrape it out completely, and extend the edges of the skin flap outward with needles, or with several small needles if you need those, as we have said in the case of abscesses in the head, and extract it little by little.
And it is more careful that the vein or nerve not be injured.
Let the incision not be too deep, so that it does not touch the vein or nerve with your hand during the operation, or to relieve the patient, and do not cut what is not necessary to cut; for if you were to cut a vein or artery and stop yourself from operating, then apply a glass of salt or other powders which are fluxes of safron, strengthen the wound, and leave that in which is paused the acuity of the abscess and makes the wound mollified and begins to suppurate. When the blood is incised.
So return to your operation once it is completed.
And then inquire if there is any other cause for the small scrofulas, so cut and cure those.
And if it is near the vein of the scrofula, avoid cutting that scrofula near the vein. Before you place a strong fold of cloth there, let that lie in such a way that it may fall by itself.
And then fill the wound with old wool which you have already soaked in Egyptian ointment, and then dress it.
And if you incise the scrophula completely, then you must adjust the two lips of the wound and press until there is no further discharge.
But if you see that there is excessive discharge due to the size of the scrophula, then you must understand to incise its base, remove it, and administer suturing as described.
And for those scrophulas containing humidity, make a superficial puncture at the place where it appears, and pause the puncture below where the dry pus of the body accumulates, as we have said.
And then administer the puncture, applying ointment and similar substances to it, so that it dissolves what is rotten from the corruption. And when you see that the wound is already clean, then apply the cream of generative flesh for its healing.
Capitol XLIII.
Of the section of the ulcer from the abscess in the groin.
The ancients performed this section in the inguinal region, and no one in our land has ever seen it done.
And this is the inscription of the speech of those.
But in men with oblique veins, a cavity should be avoided during the excision of the inguinal region, for if this is not done properly, all the veins and major vessels of the groin may be injured.
But in those who have abscesses on the mouth or groin or ears, when the illness is not in the brain, it is advisable to use the section of the inguinal region to avoid the damage caused by perforation.
When we want to do this, incise the epilhotium and leave three or four small circles of the epilhotial rings, each in the space between two rings by quantity, so that the section is in chondral, not cartilaginous tissue, and this place is suitable for a section, which is devoid of flesh and the vessels of blood are low.
And if the doctor fears this, he should do so when he extends the thread of the needle away from him, and then cut the thread just before it reaches the channel, but more importantly, avoid the vessels of blood if he sees any.
And then incise the cicatrix as we have recounted; and it is significant on the section of the channel by the flame which is from that ignited by what is of its disjunction and by the interruption of the voice.
And leave the wound open for some time.
And when the time is delayed in which the perforation is feared, add two loops of the thread of the wound, and sew that one to the cartilage.
And then administer medicines that cause flesh to grow where it is missing.
And Abu casis says that the essence of what we have recounted, the exposition, is merely that you see which of those abscesses have already drained pus, and the patient has come out of danger, with his life preserved. Some go on to incise the epiglottis so that the patient can breathe through a small opening in the area of the wound, thereby saving him from death.
And for this, I order to keep the wound open until the malignity of the illness is consumed; and the malignity of the illness lasts for three days; and then, when it is time, I order to close the wound and treat it until it is healed.
And what I have seen with my own eyes is that a servant took a knife and placed it in the patient's wound and incised part of the root of the lung. I was called to treat this case, and collected the blood as it flowed from the small wound. Then I uncovered the wound and gathered the blood which was flowing from it.
Therefore I must confess that there was no incision of vein or artery, and the wind has passed from the wound, and cured her where it was injured.
And she did not suffer any injury, not even in her voice, and soon returned to her normal state.
And now I say that in the case of the paronychia there is no fear.
Capitol XLIV.
On the section about an abscess that occurs on the forearm, and is called a wrist hernia.
This abscess, known as a wrist hernia, is a large abscess according to the color of the body, and it is common in women.
And it occurs in two ways: either natural or accidental.
And in the natural case, it is not easy to cure.
And the accidental case occurs in two ways: one is similar to fatty nodes, and the other way is similar to an abscess caused by the obstruction of an artery, and in this case, there is fear. And do not let him think you are a blacksmith only in the small one. And touch that and investigate what is said about it, and if you find a semblance of fatty nodes, and they are not suspended in any of the veins, then you cut there as with the nodes, and extract it from the skin and bursicle; and if not, then thoroughly examine his entire being, and place the area to be cured under what is suitable for healing until it is healed.
Capitol. xlv.
Of the section on types of fatty nodes.
Of the various types of nodes, and I have already mentioned all the types of nodes in the division.
And note that I recount thus the difference between a node and an abscess so as to avoid doubt.
Then I say that in an abscess there is heat and fever and violent pains until the boiling of the excess is alleviated; and when the putrefaction is complete, then the fever, pain, and heat cease.
More often than not there is no heat or fever or pain, and concerning that lion's head which is at the back of the neck.
And it is according to the color of the body, and the beginning of it is like a rash and is made thus, either larger or smaller, and they are according to two species, whether oily or contain humidity, and the colors of the humidity are spots, as I said in the division.
Therefore, when you come to the treatment of nodes, express it and inquire about it at its beginning in the tissue which is called interstice, according to the form it will take in the capitol which is nearby.
And this is the method of inquiry for abscesses and all nodes, and it is that you take this tissue and insert it into the place most humid which you find in the abscess, and you will mix the threads thereof gradually with that until you know that the tissue has penetrated the core.
Then place your hand near the measure of the size of the abscess, and then remove the interstice and consider what is situated in the recess thereof.
And if the running moisture of any color is neglected, then you incise according to a superficial section as I said in the other abscesses.
And if there is no moisture from the intrusion, then you know it is fatty.
And if dry above it in the incision has the shape of a cross according to this form: As I have taught you, suspend that in the incision, and strip the vein from all parts with ease, and keep the skin or sack over it, if possible, and extract the healthy part at the node.
But if it is broken during the operation, it is not possible to extract that healthy part, and you should tie it with several ligatures, and then you extract it in pieces so that it does not rupture for any reason.
If it ruptures for any reason, either little or much, the node returns according to the most likely outcome.
And if you see that it ruptures any small part, then fill the wound with some corrosive powders and strengthen the wound, place a cautery over the area that is an abscess, and cure the other with the other method until it is healed.
And if it is not large, then you close its two lips and cure that which is within.
If the vein is pulsatile on the opposite side, or non-pulsatile, then you incise and fill the area with one third that is vitriol and let it dry for two days or three until the swelling subsides and the boiling of the blood calms; then return to incising what is ruptured from the node.
Capitol. XLVI.
Of the forms of instruments necessary for section and perforation.
Of those, these are the forms of the instruments, and they are of three species: some are large, and others are medium, and others are small.
The form of the large instrument is this:
The form of the small instrument is this:
Make them of iron, or of alum, or of fallen leaves properly, so that the instrument enters into the abscess.
These are the forms of the experienced physicians, and they are named Albared, and one of them is called Berid.
These are made from three spices, of which one is major, and the others are minor.
The form of the experienced great, form of it:
The form of the experienced minor, form of it:
The form of the experienced pauc, form of it:
It is advised that they be used for those abscesses, discharges, fistulas, and buboes, so that they are of the bones or other causes.
And they are made round, large, like lions, as well as with large needles to which threads are attached. They are made of iron, or copper, or steel, or silver. The best are when they are made of copper.
And they make the experiences with black-feathered birds, which are agreed upon that for those in which fistulas in their cavities are open, they be reflected to those reflections by their lightness among those reflections.
And so of three species, some are long, and others medium, and others short, according to the quantity of the width of the fistula and its stricture.
Form of the experiment with great lead:
Form of the medium-sized lead experiment:
Form of the small lead experiment:
The forms of the arrows are of three species. Some of them are simple, having only one curve, and are of three species: long, few, and medium.
And they have bodies of arrows, which are of three species.
And those arrows having two curves are of three species.
And from them there are three curves, and of three species.
And all these are necessary in their place.
Shape of a single small curve, like this:
Shape of a large curve with two curves: Shape of a medium-sized curve with two curves: Shape of a small curve with two curves:
Shape of a large curve with three curves:
Forma of a woman's knee having three curves:
And these are the forms of the knives with which nodes and abscesses are cut and drained, and they are of three species: one is large, female, and knee.
Forma of the large knife:
Forma of the female knife:
Forma of the knee knife:
The extremities of those from which section is made are acute, while the others are blunt. They are not used in such a manner as to cause injury to veins or nerves during the incision of nodes, but rather for timely and gentle excoriation of abscesses, thereby ensuring the healing of the patient and some tranquility due to the mild heating effect of the procedure.
And these are the forms of the knives, and they are of three species: large, female, and knee, as you will see.
If they are caused by wind and resemble a red spot where the alcohol was applied.
And if it is in the external side punctured with spatum hidden and there it flows to the inner and outer parts, when you want, thus as you see.
The forms of spatum, which are hidden between the fingers and do not bother the patients, are of three species: great, female, and small. And these are the forms of those:
The forms of windy abscesses, in which the flow of the pus is cut off, are of three species: great, female, and small; the forms of it:
If they are caused by citrus wind, round of some length, and are subtle.
And ensure that these cups are of varying sizes, large, medium, and few, so that through those cuttings the flow of blood occurs quickly when needed, and when first applied there is no medicine.
But do not use those to cut the blood in all parts of the body, and use them only on fleshly areas, such as on the knees of the legs and on the thighs, and on the elbows, and on the nipples, and on the abdomen, and on the armpits, and similar fleshly areas.
And sometimes small cups are made of those instruments, resembling scars, according to this form; through which the blood is cut when done by bloodletting, or through an incision in a vein or artery.
And sometimes they are made round according to this form:
Capitol. xlvii.
Of the treatment of the nipples of men which are similar to those of women.
Sometimes the breasts of some men swell when they begin to be full, and at times the breasts swell and are gathered in women, and Roman flabby ones, let them rest.
And to those for whom you have this, incise those areas where the lunar section occurs according to this form, from line .B. into line .G., then excise the tumor entirely, fill the wound with carnațious medicine, suture the two edges of the wound together, and cure it until it is healed.
Moreover, if the breast sags to the sides and is softened by its size as it does in women, then cut it into two layers such that each part contains the other. Ensure that one edge lies within the other according to this form between line .B. and line .G. Then excise the tumor which lies between the two edges of the wound, remove the fatty tissue, and proceed with suturing and applying powders as previously described until it is healed.
And if you do not complete the incision that needs to be made due to the patient's restlessness and flow of pus, then you must fill the wound with cotton submerged in corrosive ointment and leave it there until it dissolves the flesh from the fat, and then properly treat what remains to heal.
Capitol. xlviii.
Of the incision of boils where pus has left it dry.
These boils that the pus has left dry are of the species of scrofulas, tumors which contain a core that is extracted.
And of those that contain moisture, they must be incised at the lunar quarter according to this figure: from the line of G to the line of B. And when all that is in the boil of the suppurate has been evacuated, then you should fill it with cotton on another day.
And then let the cotton be soaked and treated with ointment suitable for it until it heals.
And if the abscess of the glands or scrofula is, then you incise there in such a way as we have said in the section on scrofula.
And if the ulcer is extended to such an extent that it causes suppuration, then apply a cautery to it according to what we have said above.
Capitol. XLIX.
Of the section on abscesses that occur through an arrow or vein.
When an arrow is broken, and the string which was over it is consolidated, then dark spots develop into abscesses. And the signs by which it can be known that inflammation or abscess is due to the artery or vein: for when an abscess occurs from an arrow, it is long and aggregated in the front part of the body; and when you press on the abscess with hot objects, you feel a stridor within it.
And that which is from the vein is round in appearance on the surface of the body.
And the section over this abscess is error, and especially in those that leave the axillae, and the inguinal regions, and the neck, and motley places of the body; and if it is large, then one must ensure that its cure be avoided, and that which is in the extremities, or the head, must be avoided.
More about that due to inflammation of the orifice of the artery, cut the longitudinal section in the cord; and place the section with incisions near the artery, and deliver the tunics where they are uncovered.
And place an needle over that, and make it penetrate into the other side, and strengthen the artery with double thread in two places — which you will demonstrate in the extraction of two arteries, which are located in the temple area.
And place a point on the area which is between two threads with forceps to ensure the wound fills with blood, and dissolve the abscess.
And administer care in which powder is applied before the threads fall; and cure it with appropriate ointments until it heals.
And if it is an abscess due to venous drying, then you should have your hand where it is possible for you to grasp the abscess with the cord, and then insert the needle at the place where you held it with your hand, making that penetrate; and take out one on one side of the thread between which you extract the other from the other side, and tie the abscess tightly with good lint as I have said in the grapevine leather of two parts between two ends of the thread.
And if you fear that you will extract the thread, then insert the wax at the needle and remove all the abscess. You should make the initial incision of the needle, and strengthen your wax threads in four places.
Then dry the abscess in its middle location such that when sitting on it, you should incise the excess of the cord, and leave what is soaked.
And then place the powder you have soaked in wine and oil, and administer the cure which is made with garlic and ointments until it is healed.
Capitalize the abscess which has occurred due to nerve injury.
Similarly, an abscess can occur in arteries and veins, and similarly, an abscess can occur in nerves when there is percussion injury or injury due to excessive work, and similar cases.
And it is most frequent in the areas of the joints or the thigh, or in any location where the joints are inflamed.
And it is a severe abscess, and its color resembles that of the rest of the body, and it is located in the largest spaces within him. When pricked with urgency, pain seems to stun him.
And it is not an abscess that spreads throughout the body, and therefore, no chain reaction occurs, and he is inflamed in all parts and does not go to the front or back parts.
Therefore, that which occurs in the joints should not be attributed to iron, for strong pain indicates contraction.
More so is that which occurs in the head or on the forehead, causing a chain reaction with spasms. If the abscess is small, then apply heat and incise it with a scalpel.
If it is large, then suspend it with forceps, incise it, and clamp it; stitch the wound, and treat it until it heals.
Capitol.
Of the section on abscesses that occur in the cheek affecting the abdomen.
Some people have growths in their abdomens and in other parts of their bodies. These growths are called funguals because they resemble fungi; the root of each is thin, and the head of each is large. The lips of these growths are convoluted, and some are small, while others are significantly enlarged.
And I have seen one myself, and in its abdomen were two growths that resembled fungi, and there was no difference between those white ones, with their thin roots.
And the lips of those growths were convoluted and split, with moisture running from them constantly.
Then I incised those and excised in the one foot having eighteen inches, and the other having six inches.
And in the operation of their incision, consider whether the gout is humid, and the color of the tissue is white, humid, of fine fibers; then you incise it with a spathula, and let it be in your presence cauterized in the fire, for visible spots you should ensure the section is thoroughly burned to prevent infection; and if you see the pus, cauterize that.
And if you see the gout painful and fearful, avoid incising with a knife; instead, when you take lead juice made recently, strengthen that tissue, the manner of which is as we have said; leave it for two days.
Then adjust in the constriction of the lead wire; therefore, continue to strengthen the lead greatly within the tissue, even after it is incised and has begun to heal on its own.
But if the tissue is of coarse fibers, then in its incision there may be some cause for fear and panic, especially in that which is in the abdomen.
It might be possible that you incise the soreness of it, and then cauterize it to prevent its return.
And then cure what is within so that the wound heals.
And beware that you do not incise any part that is of a dusky color, with little sensation, and looks suspicious, for such a part may be cancer.
And I will add a reminder of the disease nearby.
Capitol. lii.
On the cure of swelling around the navel.
Swelling around the navel is caused by various reasons; it may be due to fissures in the cartilage which is above the abdomen, and protrudes the membrane or intestine depending on where the other ruptures are; or it may be due to a wound that flows from a vein or artery as previously mentioned, or due to constricted fatty tissue.
If it is due to a cartilage fissure and a swelling of the membrane, then the color of the abscess resembles the color of the body; and the pain is severe, often appearing in various locations. And if it is due to the exit of the intestine, then place that part as we have described in greater diversity of position, and when you press that part against the thighs, it is concealed, and then return; firmly hold it there so, and make a strong movement for washing and vigorous work.
And if due to humidity, then it is loose and not concealed when you press it with your hand, nor is it compressed or believed.
And if due to scab, then in this case the abscess appears blackish in color declining.
And if due to no flesh, then the abscess is severe, large, and hard, and is inserted according to a quantity.
And if due to humidity, then the touch of it is loose.
And the operation on it is that you consider whether the prominence of the navel is due to an arrow wound, or a vein, or due to humidity; then know that you must be careful about treating it, for there is fear and dread as you were taught in the Capitol where I said about abscesses from arrows and veins.
And if the prominence of the navel is due to the intestine or the fabric, then command the patient to hold their breath, and stand extended; and then touch around the entire circumference of the navel, and command the one standing between your hands to hold them in place, and surround with a wide strip over the area you marked with the touch; and extend the size of the abscess upwards by about an inch; and place something strong or soft on the way to bind decently.
And then extend the widest part of the abscess over the membrane and insert your finger into that indentation to feel for the intestine; if you have already touched it and protected it with the membrane, then carefully extract it and push the intestine into the internal parts of the abdomen.
And if you have touched the fabric, then take it with an inch; and incise the superfluous parts of it.
But if it is contrary to your artery or vein, then surround that spot, and then return to your operation; take two needles and place them in those strong threads, and insert two needles into the circumference you made around the abscess in a cross shape, making sure they penetrate; and then strengthen the abscess in four parts over the needles.
And if you wish, hold the needles and let the place where the extended flesh may fall in by itself; or incise that which is thin-skinned and let it flow out, and then cover it with ointments until it heals.
And if the prominence of the navel is due to flesh nowhere in it or by humidity, then you should treat the abscess as we have said and drain the pus or moisture which you find in it, and then cover it with what heals and strengthens the area.
Capitol. liii.
Of the cure of wounds.
We have already said, in the division, of types of wound and in what manner medicines are used for their cure. And that it is sound in the wound to treat it so that it does not become ulcerated; and we have said that wounds are generated in the manner and care of their treatment.
And the ancients said that some wounds are in places where it is possible to remove them entirely, such as with those in the breast or in the thigh and similar areas of the body, from which all of it should be extracted, especially when it begins small.
When it is old and hard, I cannot say that you have properties in it, for I cannot heal such a case nor have I seen another, or one that has been cured of this.
And the operation is when it is laid out as we have said, that you first prepare and leave the patient and purge of black bile several times, and then drain it, if found to be filled with obvious blood.
And then prepare the patient for the operation in which the operation will be located, and proceed with making incisions that lead to it; and then hollow out from all sides with the probe as good a thorough drainage as possible without damaging any of the vessels or organs. And let the blood flow, and do not stop it lightly, and squeeze the areas, and wipe away the thick blood with your hand or an instrument that is within your reach.
But if your cut into a vein or artery and causes much blood loss, then cauterize that area once the flow of blood has stopped, and subsequently treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
Capitol. liv.
Of the cure for dropsy.
We have already discussed, in the division, the species of dropsy from water, and the signs of each species, as well as the cure for it using medicines.
And that which is cured with iron is nothing but the species of algithias alone, and it is not approximated by iron to the species of tympanites nor to the species of hydrops, for this is fatal.
And when you have medicated this species of tympanites with medicines and your treatment does not succeed, consider that if the patient has already achieved debility from another illness or another dropsy, such as in their coughs or abdominal organs and similar to those, then do not treat them with iron, for there is fear regarding this.
But if you see the illness of excessive virtue, and in them there is no other illness but dropsy alone, neither young nor old, then the method of the operation for it is that you lift the illness between your hands, and apply your hand to their abdomen to expel the water from their body, pushing the water out through the opening below the pelvis, and then take a spathula thorn according to this form:
It should be of two sharp parts long, with sharp ends like a spear; merely however let it be in it some small shortness gradually, so that in the operation you do not pass into the intestine, and hurt it.
And then consider if the generation of dropsy is from the intestines, for when you reach the section you should be about three digits away from the parts on the right side above the pubis.
But if the generation of dropsy is due to illness of the kidney, then your section should be on the left side of the navel by three digits.
And if the generation of it is due to the liver, then your section should be on the right side.
And do not place your section on the side where the illness is located to prevent the superfluities from flowing to that area.
And then puncture the instrument through the entire length of the cord, and insert it into that section, elevate your hand with a spear between the cord and the siphon, and you extract it; if the quantity is about an egg or more.
And then perforate the cyst so that the pus reaches the desired location, and this is the place of the water. And then extract it and insert an instrument of this form: And it is similar to a fine silver cannula; it is made of silver or gold or copper, on the lower part of which there is a small hole, and on its sides are three holes: two from one side and one from the other side; and the end is inscribed in the manner of a feather, as you can see.
And at the end of the instrument above is a ring; when the instrument reaches the water, it soon begins to rise, so that it expels a small quantity of water through the middle opening. If you expel more from there than can fit in the hour, it will cause the patient great harm due to the resolution of his animal spirit, or it may lead to five signs approaching death.
But expel from there according to the quantity of the virtue of the instrument and according to your understanding of the condition of the patient from the pulse and the quality of the instrument.
And then extract the instrument, and remove the water which causes it, as soon as it is retained by the cord which draws it to the surface from which you have perforated it.
And then repeatedly apply the instrument on another day if the patient tolerates it, and remove a small quantity of water, and do this for several days with caution, and be careful not to become wet from the water but only slightly.
But if you fear for the patient, and allow a large quantity of water, then cure that with burial in sandy earth, and washing with wet sand, and in the sun, wait for a long time; and cure that with drying medicines until it is healed.
And cauterize on the stomach, and the liver and gallbladder near the removal of the water, as I have recounted in what was previously mentioned.
Capitolium.
For the cure of children who are born with the urethra not perforated.
Sometimes some of the child is expelled from the mother's belly and the opening of her mixture is not perforated (or is sewn straight or does not return to its place).
Therefore, the opening should be perforated with a fine needle soon after birth according to this form:
Then place a fine lead nail and sew it up, and let it be for three days or for four.
And when he wants to urinate he should be helped to do so; then return it.
And if you do not sew the lead, it is possible that the urine which falls on the area will prevent this from closing.
But that which you pull out should be sewn with a lead needle, as we have said, for many days before it is enlarged.
But those in which it is pulled out of its place, are said to be caused by this: the one that is born during labor should have the end of the head of the birth canal sewn so that urine cannot pass through the internal parts; while raising the birth canal with his hand above the parts above; and it is not a generative matter, because the sperm cannot reach the mother according to its straight path, and this is a malady that lasts.
And the manner of the operation is that the patient lies on his side, and then extend the head of the penis with your left hand in strong extraction, and incise the head of the head of the penis at the place of percutia with a sharp blade, thus as if it were an incision of a feather, or any part you do not raz, so that the root thereof comes seeming like the head of the penis and that I pull it down into the middle place according to where it fits.
And beware in your operation for sand flow, if you notice any motes accidently fall into it; pause there and cover the area where you cut the sand, and treat the wound until it is healed.
Capitol LXVI.
Of albiter, which occurs in the prepuce at the head of the penis and involves corruption, discoloration, and adhesion of the prepuce to the head of the penis.
Motes (particles) stuck in this albiter occur on the penis and form an elevated mass of flesh.
And of those two, one is malignant and the other is non-malignant.
And of those two, the non-malignant one, you should suspend it with a fine thread and cut through that in which that monster is entirely contained; then place your hand over it to submerge it in Egyptian ointment; then treat it with diafinicon until it is healed.
And if the abscess is malignant, of white color, then you should apply a cautery near its incision and around it.
But if the abscess is in the foreskin of the head of the penis in an uncircumcised man, and one part of the abscess is inside the foreskin and another part is outside, then you should remove the part that is inside at its beginning before it becomes consolidated; and then treat the part outside, for when you treat this along with the foreskin, it is not assured that it will not become infected.
And we have examined accidents in the testicles and in the black foreskin with corruption. Then you should reduce all that is already darkened and that is about to腐烂或已经腐烂；然后在其上画线，用蜂蜜，它是由新鲜大黄粉、三种筛过的药草制成的。
And then attend to the other cure while it is still warm.
And if there is a flow of blood, then administer a lunar cautery according to this form:
A lunar cautery is used in two positions together, either for a flow of blood or during the plague when it has broken out.
And if the head of the abscess is corroded and destroyed entirely in an hour, then you should introduce a lead cannula into the flesh of the prepuce so that the disease canur through it.
In the adhesion of the prepuce (where this adhesion occurs only in that part from which the prepuce is drawn, and no circumcision is required; and when such adhesion occurs due to the plague or an abscess), you should excoriate with a blunt instrument while the adhesive substance is dissolved and the head of the abscess is completely released.
And if it is difficult to excoriate them thoroughly, then you should excoriate with a blunt instrument some part of the head of the abscess and the prepuce, and this is because when the prepuce is thin and light, it is easily perforated by its thinness.
And then separate between the prepuce and the head of the penis a thread of fine linen, which has already been moistened with the cautery fluid so that another swelling does not occur.
And then let it be treated with astringents until it is consolidated.
Capitol. lvii.
On the purification of infants and the treatment of what occurs to those who have been circumcised.
Circumcision is not a solution for continuity in the same way as other ailments: however, since it is of our operation and our will, and those of others are properly in infants, it is necessary that we assign to that the best operation and the most gentle method to preserve health.
Therefore, it is said that the ancients did not speak of circumcision among any of the free peoples, for they do not use it in their laws, and it is only because we have acquired this knowledge through experience. The reason is that I have examined the majority of surgeons and barbers using circumcision and purification with a knife and toreros; and they use linen with honey and incision with unguals.
And I have already tried all these methods and cannot find a better modification with scissors, or with lime or honey as a modification like with a unguent, for you will see the cord come out from above, for the cord of the prepuce is in two tunics, and the inner tunic remains, and it is necessary to make another incision and cause certain pain. And in the modification which is done by alphecting, and is digital, of which cobblers use it, the incision at the extremity of the male member is not secure, for it often enters into the groove of it.
In the operation with an unguent, you must use iron and corrupt your operation. And the cord of the child is short by nature, and most often does not require any modification, and I have seen it.
More of the modification that is done with scissors and lime or honey, its quality, I can describe from experience, for the scissors are of proportional incision, for which reason the acuity above is as acuity below; and therefore when you press your hand proportionally to two acuities, and cut accordingly in one time; and it is made compression of the honey in a figure containing the cord of the foreskin from all sides, by which no error occurs at all.
And the manner of the first operation is that you make the child stay mainly if it is one that understands a little, that you do not do other than to tie the faeces in its bowels only, and let it remain for another day.
And then make that child happy in every way that is possible for what receives its intelligence. And then place that child among your legs properly prepared, and do not be more than two hundred [steps away]; and hide the scissors in your hand or let him hold them, so that the child does not see those nor any other of the instruments.
And then insert your hand into the child's bowels and blow into the intestines, and pull that out so that it straightens the head of the bowels, and then modify that which is added to it by deafness.
The shape of the forceps after modification, this is the form:
If the fingers are not incised and the others are incised, let the shape of the tip be such that it forms a ram of the key, and let the length of the two points be as long as the length of two equal handles.
More importantly, the error in modification is that you may lift the intrinsic tendon entirely or partially, and you must incise it.
Therefore, ensure that you extend the one of your hour with your finger in front of the incision site and incise it according to equality.
And if you cannot hold it with your finger, then extract it with the thumb and incise it.
If they have passed three days and remain what is swollen due to the venereal disease abscess, then you let it until the abscess is punctured with a cautery, and excoriate that for ease, and cut it according to how you are prepared.
And guard the head of the swelling, for that will not be in it.
And therefore treat that part where the plague consolidates from the powders which we have recommended in the treatise on powders.
And if it is cut beyond measure, and you obey the rules above, this will not harm it.
And therefore treat that part as we have said until it is healed.
Capitol. lviii.
On the treatment of retained urine in the bladder.
Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by an obstruction due to a stone or a thickened stricture, or a polyp or flesh growth, and resembles those we have described in the methods of treatment in the division.
And if what we have said is not dissolved, then vigorously make the cause on the patient, then know that you should perform extraction of it with an instrument which is called a syringe, of which this is the form: It should be of silver and should be very fine and slender like a catheter of an ostrich feather in thinness of a long ray similar to half a palm, with a very fine tube at its head.
And the way to evacuate the urine through this is that you take a thread doubled and tie it at the end with good knots; and insert the ends of the thread into the part left by the syringe, and cut with scissors if any excess of the thread is needed. Then strongly insert the catheter with vigor, and quickly withdraw the syringe from the side and from the wood of the stool.
And make a cut over the scrotum, and sponge the bladder and the groin with oil mixed, olive oil and vinegar.
And then introduce the forceps gently so that it reaches the root of the groin; and then fold the groin upwards at the point of insertion; and then push the forceps into it so that it reaches the bladder; and then push this one until it reaches the scrotum being directed to its proper place, and not the meat in which there is a tortuosity.
And then gradually insert the probe into the wool, for urine will soak the wool.
And then extract this and use a probe for irrigation with urine, use forceps, continue doing this until the bladder and scrotum are fully evacuated.
Capitulum 6.
Of the quality of the irrigation of the bladder, use clamp forceps and similar instruments that are appropriate for this.
When an ulcer or abscess occurs in the bladder, or there is a burning wound there, or it is constricted by swelling, and you want to distill waters and medicines into that area, then make an instrument which is called a clampcedra, and this is its form:
So that in the extremity of it, it is closed. And in it there are three holes: two from one side, thus passes.
At the beginning it is concave, in which what is enclosed is located, and according to its quantity that fills it, its addition, within which when any cause is drawn by the humidities, it is drawn, and when it is expelled, then is drawn again, and when it is expelled for a long time, according to how it functions as a clampcedra upon which naphta in the battles of sea is placed.
So, if you want to prevent humidities in the bladder, insert the extremity of the clampcedra into the humidity, and draw out what is pushed towards the upper parts, so that the humidity is drawn into the cavity of the clampcedra.
And then insert the end of the cedar rod into the urethra as we have recommended in surgery; and then expel the humidity by what you expel, for that humidity will quickly reach the bladder, and the malaise ceases there.
The form of the urethra is subtle and through which the bladder is uritized, and this is its form:
And it is made of silver or tin, of which the head is either like a small feather or a little bulb, and place the cane inside linen.
And then take a bladder of leather, place the humidity you want to uritize in the bladder, and tie it between two firm ligatures with double thread, and heat that humidity over the fire.
And then insert the end of the urethra into the urethra.
And then strengthen your hand on the bladder with the humidity in a descending structure so that the malaise ceases as that humidity reaches the bladder.
But if you do not have a parchment piece, then take a piece of paper and make a circle from it; perforate that circle entirely round its circumference; then insert strong thread through those holes so they are turned around; then fix the circle in such a way as it is fixed alsofatur, but while you place where you want from the humidities, smell and waters.
Then attach that to the instrument and do so with it as you did with the bladder, and keep your hand in such a way that the humidity reaches the bladder.
Capitol lx.
Of the extraction of pear.
We have already mentioned in the division the species of pear and its cure with medicines, and the difference between a pear generated in the gonads and a pear generated in the bladder, as well as the signs of it.
And we have mentioned the pear for which the major operation and section are performed.
And the stone generated in the bladder is that which is inserted in the bladder.
And I am now narrating that matter in this exposition and abbreviation.
Therefore, I say that the stone generated in the bladder most commonly affects children; and among its signs is that the urine excreted from the bladder resembles water in its subtlety, and appears with that sand; and gout rubs its joint, reddens, and is swollen; and often there is a sore in those areas.
And the recovery of children occurs within about four years; and it is a difficult cure in the elderly. More in the young, it occurs halfway through those four years.
And of that which has a larger stone, the cure is less easy; and if it is small, it is contrary to that.
Therefore, when we arrive at the cure for that, begin with the treatment of gout by applying a plaster which extrudes all the fluid which is in their intestines; for that fluid sometimes prohibits the passage of the stone and allows its inquiry.
And then place the patient's feet and ensure they are extended and flexed by hand so that the sole descends to the neck of the bladder, or that it touches the ground a few times.
And then place those cushions you have prepared under your hands, while the other servants remain in their positions, so that the bladder is made to hang downward.
And then apply that and all that remedy.
So if you feel the sole in the space, then immediately touch it with your hand.
And if you do not feel any difference with your touch, then anoint your index finger of your left hand with oil, if the patient is a child, or your middle finger if the patient is an adult, and insert it into the patient's anus. And ensure the sole is in place by inserting your finger. And gradually guide that finger into the neck of the bladder.
And then press upon that area as you have said, and expel that to the external parts, see the place from which you made the section.
And command the minister to press the bladder with his hand; and command another minister to with his right hand extend the genitals to the upper parts, and with his other hand relax the cord which holds the genitals, at the part of the location where the section is made.
And then insert a spatulum; this is the form of it: And cut in it what is between the anus and the genitals, not in the middle location, before the groove of the left thigh; and let the section be on that stone which you said is at the anus, and make a transverse section, so that the section outside is wide and inside narrow according to the quantity that flowed from the stone is possible, and not greater, for we carefully avoid making the section too large in the location of the anus, where the stone should be removed and the wound sutured.
And observe that from the stone there is some angle and margins, because the exit of it is made difficult by this.
And of that which seems like a lion's stone, and is round, and is made of it a slight exit.
And if of that which has angles and margins, adjust it in the crack.
And if not so incised, then probe it with your finger or strengthen it with a gesture decently, the end of which should be like a file on which you strengthen the stone, and do not escape from it; or insert a thin instrument under it with a curved end.
But if you cannot do this, then enlarge it a little, and if you see a flow of blood, incise it strongly with vitriol trioxide.
But if the stone is more than one, then at the beginning you press your hand to the mouth of the bladder, and then incise it about there; and then press a little near that; and similarly do if its spots are more than two.
And if the stone is very large, then ignorance leads you to incise that great section, for which happening to the patient one of two causes occurs: either it dies or it achieves continuous urinary distillation, by which the area is not totally consolidated.
Administer the expulsion of the intestine when it is within and bring it back to its proper place, or use forceps in the fracture of the limb to extract that which remains inside the wound.
Then, after you have completed your operation, fill the wound with slices of aloe and dragon's blood, and strengthen it. And place it over that soaked cloth in oil and wine, or in infused oil and wrung water, so that the abscess may yield.
Then lift the patient's leg on its pillow, and do not remove the bandage on the seventh day.
And when you have removed it, wet the area with water and much oil, and then cure that place with ointment containing diaphenicon and ointment containing diabazicon until it is healed.
If in the wound there happens an abscess with suppuration and corruption, and it appears as if the blood is frozen in the bladder and thus urine excretion is prohibited (and this is known by the expulsion of blood through urine), therefore insert your said instrument into the wound and extract that blood, for if remaining it provokes the bladder to corruption of the bladder and its putrefaction.
Then wash the wound with vinegar, water, and salt, and oppose all species, using what is convenient for the cure while it is healing.
And observe the hours of the entire cure that you have made between the thighs and applied the medicines which are placed over the area.
And if the stone is small and is in the meat of the penis, and urine excretion is prohibited, then cure it by using what I have recommended before you reach the section; for too many applications of this remedy are accused of causing dryness; and now I describe this: take a perforating iron instrument, of which this is the form:
of triangular excised piece, sharp, inserted in cloth.
And then take honey, and apply it to the wound, leaving the stone there so that it does not return to the bladder.
And then insert the iron into the wound, perforating easily where the puncture will reach the stone. And you rotate the puncture instrument with your hand around the stone little by little, and you complete the puncture on one side before making it penetrate on the other side; for the urine is quickly released.
And then press your hand on what is left of the stone from the punctured wound in the wound, for that part is broken, and the hole is filled with urine, and the patient is cured.
But if this cure is not possible for some reason you are unable to do it, then apply honey to the stone, and another piece of honey above the stone. And then cover the stone in the wound with a dressing between two layers. And then extract it there. And then separate the ligament and modify the seton, which is done in the wound.
And there is no need to use thread for the stone; it is done so that it does not return to the bladder, while the other ligament is placed above, for when the thread is separated near the edge of the stone, the cord returns to its place and closes the wound.
And for this reason, when you thread the cord above, you must lift the needle to the parts above, or that it returns by your compliment, and close the wound as we have said.
Chapter LXI.
On the Extraction of Stones from Women.
Stones in women are not commonly generated.
Yet if a stone does occur in any of them, the cure is difficult, and it is prohibited by too many methods.
One of them is that a strong maiden who is a virgin.
And the second is that you will not find a good woman who can describe whether she does it for the doctor when she is chaste, or if she has done it with other women.
The third is that you will not find a good woman who knows this art, especially the operation more.
And the fourth is that the location of the section on the stone in women is far from the location of the stone, so you need a longitudinal section, and there is danger in that.
Yet if necessity prompts you to do this, then seek a wise and knowledgeable old woman, for she is not easily found.
Yet if you are lacking in that, then seek a wise and subtle doctor, or present an experienced matron skilled in the treatment of women, or a woman who has partaken in this art.
Then have her present and command her to do everything you will instruct her to do, from the inquiry about the stone to the beginning; for this reason, she should check if the woman is a virgin, and then insert her finger into the woman's anus to feel for the stone.
Then if you find it, cut it out and leave its said part, and then command him to incise over it.
But if it is not a stone, then command the midwife to insert her finger into the wound of the patient and inquire about the stone, while placing her left hand on the bladder, and grasp it well with good grip.
Then if you find it, gradually moisten that from the opening of the bladder into the parts, leaving some of its virtue so that it reaches the root of the thigh.
And then incise over that application of the material at the root of the thigh wherever it is stopped and center the stone in that part, so that the said part is not moistened by the stone, cut it out.
And the incision should be small at the beginning; then insert the probe over that incision, and if it feels the stone, then adjust the incision according to the quantity he knows the stone will be removed from there.
And know that the grains of pepper are small: some are white and large, lion and sharp, long and round, and having horns.
Therefore you know what grains of pepper are so that you may signify about what you want.
And if you want a flow of blood, apply vitriol tincture to the area for one hour before cutting the blood, and then return to your operation after the pepper has been removed.
And make sure to prepare among your instruments those mentioned in the extraction of pepper in men, so that you may be assisted by them during your operation.
And if you want a flow of blood, and you know that the expulsion of the blood is from the artery that is cut, then apply powder to the area and strengthen it with powders and allow descent; and do not repeat this. Leave the pepper and do not extract it, for firmly removing it will kill the patient. And then cure the wound.
When the heat of the pain in the blood subsides after some days, and the place permits, then you return to your operation while the swelling is forgotten.
Chapter LXII.
On the section about inguinal hernia.
Hernia aquous is nothing but the addition of humidity in the white skin, which is left by the bond of the genes containing the humor, and it is named ciphac.
And sometimes it is in the proper skin, which nature prepares at the parting of the humor, before it is cooked and another humor has taken its place; and this is the bond of the gene between the white skin, which we have said, and it is not this but a tumor.
And the generation of this hernia is due to weakness which occurs in the genes, because this material infiltrates them. Sometimes it occurs due to percussion performed on the genes.
And this humidity having colored spots, its color may be gradually yellowish (citrine), or bloody, or red, or black floury, or watery white, and it is this that is most significant.
And the signs by which it is known where this water addition is located are these: if it is in the white cell which we have said, then the abscess is round, slightly tapering in length like an egg, and the genus appears, for the humidity contains that from all parts.
And if the humidity is in the proper flesh, then the abscess is round and divided from the egg, and for this reason one estimates that it is another egg.
And if the humidity is between the genus layer and the white cell, then cut away the membrane.
And to know the color of the humidity, you probe the color of the humidity in the abscess through a catheter whose form precedes; and according to what is seen in the passage of the catheter, judge what is inside it.
Then when we come to the cure of it, you must command the patient to bleed if this is possible, and often raise his body.
And then let him be placed on his back for a little while, and place your hand on the side of his body.
And then set yourself on the left part of him, and command the minister to stand on his right side, who extends his staff across one of the sides at the hip bone and the lower part of the abdomen.
And then take a spatula and split the hip bone in the middle location along its length near the pelvis.
And make the section according to the correct method, equally distant from the line where you should split the skin of the hip, until it reaches the white cartilage.
And excise that, and observe it, and keep it for this: do not let your incision go beyond that; and your excision from where you have excised it should be suspended at the uppermost and subtlely examine it along the incision according to the quantity possible.
And then puncture the cartilage full of water with a wide hole, and extract all the water.
And then separate between the two labias of the section with forceps, and extend the flap above; and do not touch the cord around the genitalia, and incise the flap in that manner which is possible to you. And incise that completely or in parts, especially its thin layer; for if you do not carefully examine the incision of it, there is no guarantee that the water will not return.
But if you proceed with the procedure outside of its cord around the time of your operation, when you have completed the section of the flap, return inside that, and carefully adjust the two labias of the cord around the genitalia with sutures, and carefully treat that as you would the other wounds until it is healed.
And if you find the vein corrupted by another illness, then ligate the vessels which are above the suspensory, extract the vein, and carefully treat that as we have said.
But if the water is found in two parts, then you know that there are two hernias; therefore, incise that part according to how you have done in the other equally; and if it is evident to you that it is an operation, then you perform it.
And then you cleanse the blood, interpose in the sections soaked wool in oil or in rubbed oil; place another piece of wool which you have soaked in wine and oil above it, and spread that over two genii and the miracle of the belly; place further over cloths folded and powders, and lay those over bran which is according to this form:
And then press two cloths and fill them with well-stuffed wool according to this likeness; make the ends which are pressed with a wedge or wet wool, and attach them to the structure in the waistband of the breeches, one end entering into the back, and the other attached to the crotch part, and place two ends on each side of the thighs, and two more ends on each side of the ankles, and all structures be secured in the waistband of the breeches.
And sometimes this hernia is treated artificially with a cautery at the section instead of the opening; so you take a thin surgical cautery and incise there at the cord of the genii, and ignite it as we have recommended until the white ciffe (a term possibly referring to a certain anatomical structure) containing the water is uncovered, and then you use the cautery in this form: and it resembles Greek letters.
And then puncture that blister, and ignite within it to expel all the moisture.
And then lance the blister with needles, and excoriate it with needles, and cauterize it with a fine ignited cautery; and incise that part according to what is possible so as to eradicate all of it; and guard it from the smoke that the fire does not touch.
And know that this operation is safer and farther from the risk of infection, and better than an incision.
But if you encounter a boil during the incision or during the cautery, or the risk of infection, then treat it as any other contraindication, applying the cure appropriate for it as described.
But if the patient is faint, and does not expect the second operation due to its horror, then administer puncture as I advise; and it is when you must certify, based on what we have said about the meanings, that that hernia is dangerous.
When you must place the patient on an elevated bed, then perforate the abscess at the lower part of it with a spatula, and pause the perforation according to the length of the body.
And let the incision be wide enough to drain all the fluid.
And place your hand over the area carefully, touch it and leave it, so that the fluid can continue to flow. And place something there to ensure the wound heals.
But if the condition is contrary to the discharge of fluid at that time, you perforate it: this is not done so that the white gauze in the openings of the wound causes a contrary condition and prohibits the discharge of fluid. When you must place a pen or instrument in the wound from which water is drained by the hydroptics, the form of which precedes; or adjust something in the vicinity of the wound.
And observe that the fluid returns, and is well drained for about six months or until it is healed; when it is healed, then perforate according to that method, so that the patient passes their days thus.
Chapter LXIII.
On the section about a flesh hernia and its cure.
Know that in the section about this hernia, there is danger of losing life through severe complications; for I have seen cases where the release of it and being saved were due to the better method.
And I am recalling the operation in that case and the types of abscesses.
Therefore, I say that abscesses arise in the tissues where the glands are present, and this occurs for several causes: either due to acute superfluous heat, which is infused into the glands, or due to percussion.
And the color of the abscess depends on the color of the tissue, and pain does not affect it; it is a severe abscess.
And the abscess is firm when ripe, of which the color is dark, and there is no pain in it.
And sometimes it occurs due to the concretion of arteries, and due to inflammation of those vessels, as you can recall, or due to inflammation of veins.
More than that, which is due to the inflow of arteries, it is known by the dispersion of the apasteam when we take those ties away; and note that you should not touch.
More than that, which is due to the inflow of veins, it is not dispersed by any cause; you should apply compression with your hands.
And it is possible that sectioning be done on this type and on the other muscles; you incise the cord of the tendons, then extend the heel above, and extract that from the white chip, and deliver the suspensory ligament of the vessels, ligate them, and incise the suspensory ligament after you deliver that from all parts of the heel.
Then if the heel is already consolidated in those muscles, you should extract the heel and incise it.
And if there is an adhesion due to any part of the chip, or between what is between the vessels, you should deliver all that adhesion and incise it with a round incision.
If the native flesh is in the place of adhesion which is behind, then remove all that is from it, and extract the humor as we have said.
Then when your operation is completed, fill the wound with wool soaked in rubbed oil and wine; and place it over the other dressing until it heals.
Chapter LXIV.
Of the cure of hernia caused by vitiation.
Vit is an aptestema enveloped by some envelope similar to a blister, and it makes exertional movement, exercise, and walking difficult for the patient.
And in the cure of this illness, there is fear of what preceded it, which is remembered.
However, they should perform the operation there according to what was done first.
And I say that you should suture the patient's wound on an elevated cushion; and place the testicular suspensory ligament over the parts left; and have the codena of the inguinal canal attached to the tie downs that are tested for strength at the groin; and have another minister do this, extending them with a strong pull.
And then incise with a sharp blade through a transverse section along the middle of the vessels among which the vessels are discovered.
And then excise from all parts as we have said in the extraction of arteries which are in the temples.
And then place a needle in which there is double thread, and tie one end of the thread at the beginning of the location where you have incised, and tie the other end at the end of them. And then incise those in the middle location through a straight section according to the length of the body, and extract what is added from the foul and corrupted humors.
And then cure the wound by the healing of other wounds in which you want health to be generated so that it causes vessels which do not nourish either of the two elements, for this is not harmful.
But if you incise all the vessels, then ensure that the testicles are extracted or that they shrivel due to the incision of the vessels, so that it be deprived of all nourishment by the incision of the vessels, and may atrophy, or that they wither away for this reason.
Capitol lxv.
Of the cure for intestinal hernia.
The occurrence of this hernia is due to a section that descends into the cavity extending over the abdomen from the inguinal region of the abdominal wall. Because of this rupture in the intestines, some of the intestines protrude.
And this rupture is either of the cavity or of its weakening. These two types occur due to various causes: through a blow, by jumping, from crying, from an elevation caused by some heavy reason, or from similar reasons.
And the sign of this, when it is due to the extension of the cavity, is that it occurs gradually over a long period of time and does not happen suddenly. It is an abscess that develops within the flesh, which the cavity compresses the intestine.
And the sign of this is when it is due to the weakening of the cavity; at first, it causes sudden and intense pain. It is an abscess that appears different from the surrounding flesh, and this is due to the pressure on the intestine, with the body's parts outside the abdominal wall.
Sometimes the intestine or cloth is left out, and this hernia is called zirbal.
Sometimes there is a distension, and sometimes it flows in the intestine's rift, where it is stopped, and this causes great discomfort to the patient. Sometimes it becomes painful, especially when pressed.
In the treatment of these symptoms of this illness, there is fear, because it is feared that the hunting in that area should be avoided.
The method of the operation for this is that you command the patient to return the intestine to its cavity using their hand at the internal parts of its cavity if it obeys on its own return, and then tie it over their collarbone between your hands, and lift the patient's shoulders.
Then stitch the cord which hangs above the scrotum at the upper parts, and incise the cord of the testicles entirely along its length; then place it in two flaps of the incised section as needed to open the section.
And if from that section according to the quantity that it is possible for you, let the humor be evacuated.
And then excise that scab which they leave from the cord of the testicles, while the white hard part of each section is uncovered.
When you insert your finger into what is being excised from the testicle, into what is between the white scab, which they leave from the humor, and between the scabs, and release any adhesion that is in the rear part of the humor.
And then place your hand on the rear parts of the testicles, and with this, spread the white scab with your left hand, and raise the humor to the part of the section; and command the minister to extend the humor upwards while you dissolve the adhesion that is behind with the completed solution.
And look for your fingers that there is no cause of the intestine enveloped in the white hard scab. But if you find any cause of it, then strip that from the abdomen, leaving it out.
And then cut in the part below the base of the testicles along the section from which fluid and healing proceed as we have recounted in what we have said.
And soon administer wool submerged in oil, and place it on the wound; apply the plaster which we have recommended (and some times the white paste is cauterized, which we have said near the incision of this fear of bleeding, because many times accidents occur there) and leave the plaster inside so that it may fall by itself.
And if the application is delayed, then pour cold water and place it over that area until it falls as we have said.
And soon cure the wound with another treatment for wounds until it is healed.
Chapter LXVI.
On Hernia Ventosa.
In this hernia, nothing has been seen that was burned during the treatment.
And the first ones said that it should be done as we have recommended for the hernia that is inside; which is that you tie the vessels near the section over there where there is facilitation; and then dry in the middle place by applying a poultice with what I operate there, so that the vessels fall.
And cure the wound as we have said until it is healed.
Chapter LXVII.
Of the disorder that occurs in the ankles.
In some cases, there is a rupture in the ankles as we have said, and cover the area with a cloth.
And the genii do not attribute any cause of the hernias to the genii; and if they do, it is very little; and return them to their place at all times.
But if the time is prolonged, there is an adjusted fissure in the capsule through which to return the hernia into the capsule; and this happens due to the extension of the capsule, which occurs in the ankles as we have said. The cause is that the capsule becomes stretched, and further, it softens, causing suppuration, and covering the area.
And the treatment of it is with a cautery as in the preceding description of it.
And sometimes it is cured by applying iron according to this manner: and it is that the patient lies on his back between your knees, and then dry the area of the rupture of the abscesses emits by seepage according to the breadth as per the quantity of three digits.
And strengthen the white cloth that is under the cushion once it is uncovered.
And place the rod and hold it above the area where the cloth is emitting, and press it against the front of the abdomen.
And hold the two emitting areas above the ends of the rod of the cloth, and adjust one to the other for suturing.
And extract the end of the rod, and do not go beyond the limits of the cloth, nor extend the hole, nor any other cause like this, as I trust in the cure of intestinal hernia.
And cure that in the cure of the wounds, and as you incise the flaps, clean it and restore the wound while it is not yet consolidated; for the cloth contracts and does not adjust the prominence of the rupture.
And cautery is better in this place, for it is more proximate to health.
Capitol. lxviii.
On the mollification of the scrotal skin.
When the scrotal skin becomes spotted or discolored in some men, it is mollified accordingly because the flesh between those areas is also mollified, and the condition of this is observed.
Then it is necessary for the one who is overseeing the treatment to have the patient lie in a position suitable for their condition, and completely expose the scrotum which is mollified over the natural scrotal skin; and then carefully suture the two edges together.
And if you wish, begin the closure of the excess scrotal skin with three or four stitches and a final suture.
Then carefully cut between the sutures; and continue to treat the other wounds until they heal and the stitches dissolve.
Capitol lxix.
Of castration.
Know that castration in our law is excommunicated, but by cause it is allowed to me to remember it in this treatise; and the remembrance of it is necessary for two reasons, one of which is that when asked about it as a doctor, one knows the cure for whom it happens. The other reason is that we may have necessity to castrate other animals for our young ones, such as bulls, goats, pigs, and similar to animals.
And therefore, it is said that castration can be performed in two ways: either by traction or by incision.
But in that which is performed by traction, the way of the operation is to tie the beast by its tail in water until the testicles are softened and relaxed. And then take those with your hand until they are relaxed and do not appear to have marks upon touch.
In castration performed due to fissure and secution, ensure that you have the beast and press the cord of the testicles with your left hand.
Then lift the suspensory ligament, and incise over each groove between two testicles.
Then incise those abscesses that have formed in each place. And do not incise any of those on the scrotum for any cause, but incise only the thin one which is over the veins.
And this method of castration is better which is performed by traction, for traction firmly leaves no cause of the testicles, because the beast desires copulation.
Then cure the wound while it is healing.
Capitol.lix.
On the cure of hermaphroditism.
Hermaphroditism in males occurs according to two methods: one where a fourth testicle appears between the two testicles, resembling that of a female with its appearance.
And sometimes urine flows from that area in the region of the testicles.
In women, it is special: and the swelling in the groin is such that it appears like two testicles of a man, slightly different in size, with some hardness at the outer part like the scrotum of a man with its two testicles.
And the cure is of three kinds: two for men and one for women. And you must incise those tight tissues where the tension of that area escapes, and then treat those with the cure for other wounds.
And in the second kind for men from which urine flows from the region of the testicles, neither cure nor operation is needed.
Chapter XXI.
On hernias and flesh protruding due to female causes.
If the hernia is firm, it is tight against natural causes where it is strained and appears legible upon examination; sometimes in women, it becomes enlarged to such an extent that it sags like in men and protrudes during intercourse.
Then you should have the superfluous mucus of the phlegm in your hand or cupped with your hand and removed.
And do not finish with cupping, especially on the back, so that no flow of sweat occurs.
And then care for the wounds until they are healed.
More hidden flesh is flesh that grows in the horror of the womb until it fills that space, and a larger cyst is situated outside according to the likeness of a coconut (and for this some first called it "hidden illness"); therefore, we should cut it as we cut phlegm, and care for it until it is healed.
Capitol.lix.
Of the care of alum disease.
Alratica is when the hymen of the woman is not perforated, or is only slightly torn. And it can be natural or accidental.
Accidental is due to a malady which has preceded, and that one is caused by flesh not fitting well or by a thin or thick membrane.
It is caused in the region of the kidney, or in its flanks, or in the upper part of it, or in the lower part of it, and you prohibit coitus and copulation and childbirth, and especially you prohibit menstruation.
The knowledge of that is made by looking at the midwife, if the obstruction is obvious, promptly; but if it is not obvious, then you search for that among the thighs or in the groin.
But if the obstruction is due to a thin membrane, and is close to the two lips, then you open and rupture that.
And you place powders over the two lips, and then place your hands on the indices of both sides near them.
And the woman is on her back, her thighs extended, and then spread the two lips with force while that thin membrane is broken and the obstruction is opened.
And then take wool and soak it in oil and place it over the area, and keep someone there to prevent the incised area from healing too quickly.
And if the abscess is large and thick, then you must incise it with a lancet or a leaf of myrtle.
And if the swelling is due to an abscess, then suspend it with a pin, and incise it.
And use the medicines that stop the flow of venom from a bite, such as acacia, dragon's blood, and resin, mixed with honey.
And then administer a broad lead tube to prevent the wound from healing too lightly.
And keep it for a few days and administer water that has been boiled.
And then it should be cured with the other healing method for consolidation once it is healed.
And sometimes accidents occur in the natural growth of other tissues, then you must incise according to this method. But if this is due to a malignant apstema, the apstema which is in the greater must not be treated by any method that could aggravate it.
Capitol LXXIII.
For the treatment of hemorrhoids and prolapse and red boil that occurs in the vagina of women.
Hemorrhoids are appreciated as the result of small veins around the anus through which blood continuously flows; and as for old hemorrhoids, they form piles.
And I have already said in the division the species of those and the signs of those, and to say likewise which receive treatment and which do not receive treatment.
Therefore, it is said that hemorrhoids and piles when in the pelvic region and do not appear to the touch, then no treatment should be applied to those.
But those that are in the pelvic region and can be felt by touch, these are the ones that should be treated.
And when you place the woman in a supine position and extend her legs, or spread them with forceps or a rough cloth, and incise there where the veins are.
And then powder the veins of one of the incised polvers' flux with seven bites, as if kissing and appearing to them.
And then foment the soles of his feet for an hour, and place him in cold water.
And if the bleeding persists, then make her sit in a decoction of sumac and seeds of millet grass and of walnuts and of appearances.
And then take flour of ocher and mix it with honey and wine, and make an ointment with this over his back.
And if the bleeding is stopped, that is good; otherwise, apply it to two ventosas, and make seven incisions on the breasts.
And then take wool and submerge it in the juice of caraway or in the juice of angelica or in the juice of agrimony in fermented wine, and apply it to the area; and cure the area with ointments until it is healed.
And cure that which is within until it is healed.
Chapter 74.
On the perforation of the eye in the upper part.
Various special cases of apstumas occurring in the upper part, such as carbuncle, apstema lapidatum, ulcer, adhubelatum, erythromenon, fistula hemorrhagica, and thyloides, and other apstumas. And I have already mentioned these ailments and their special cases, as well as the signs of them, and their treatments in the division.
And cover that I mention in this treatise on apstema caut which appears in the upper part when it is one of the apstemas that usually heal, and if you want to know how the operation for it is performed.
Then consider whether the pain of the abscess at its beginning is acute upon percussion and flux and fever, and sometimes that reddening and if catz over it the sense, when no·t cuts of it, and cure it with what helps on the maturation until the acuity of the accidents ceases.
Then you must place the woman on a bench that has two benches; recline her on her side and adjust her legs to the part behind her abdomen, and spread her thighs, and place her arms below her hips, and hold cushions with lint to what is suitable.
Then the midwife follows straight to the left and administer the instrument through the opening of the meatus, the shape of which will come in the cases that will be discussed later.
When you want to administer this instrument, place it on the right side of the meatus of the woman, and what part of the instrument enters the meatus should not be more than the width of the meatus and help the patient. But if the instrument is larger than the mouth of the uterus, then cover it with powder over the mouth of the uterus so that no instrument can enter.
Cover it so that the vitriage that runs in the instrument of the lute above remains covered, and let the minister hold the instrument and rotate the vitriage until the orifices of the uterus are open.
And when the excitation appears, and is touched with the hand and is hard and moist, then cover it by drying that part of its head with spit.
And when the foulness is evacuated, then cover it by placing a sponge soaked in olive oil or green olive oil with some astringency in the area at the mouth of the uterus.
And place the uterus in position and over the pubis, a clean cloth soaked in water in which vervain has been boiled.
And it is usually cured in about two days by applying an ointment that you should use until it is healed.
And sometimes the liver and the wound are washed with an ointment made of honey and vinegar, then immersed in water in which pepper or long pepper has been boiled, and then returned to the ointment.
And if the wound is deep within the liver, then avoid any treatment of it for now, taking care to follow what we have said in the division.
Capitol. 75.
To instruct midwives how to properly treat miscarriages when they occur according to an unnatural process.
Necessary cause is that the midwife know at the beginning the sign of a natural birth by its symptoms, for when you see the female expel from her parts and desire to smell the air, and she is refreshed by what comes out of her, and quickly brings forth the embryo, then you know that this part is according to a natural figure, and the expulsion of it is above her head, and the second one is either suspended or pendant from the umbilicus.
Then when you see those signs, at once hold the abdomen so that the fetus descends lightly; when it presses on its head, deliver the second one, and it is cleansed of those superfluities by good purification.
That which is another to this part is unnatural and unmentionable, for when the fetus sits on its feet and the body of the mother is sitting in front of the head of the fetus and its feet, or the hand of the mother, or at the side of the mother, or the head of the mother, or the hand of the mother, or over the abdomen of the mother, and strong it is turned over its own back, resembling the unmentionable figures.
It is necessary for the midwife to be wise and subtle in all those causes, and to guard against error and deception.
And I show all the figures of those, and which engine is in them so that it may be significant by this and be placed there.
When the pain is sitting on its head by natural means, and that is vehement upon the woman and is made to her part difficult, and sometimes the virtue of her is weakened, then apply that seser, or what women have for it, and evaporate the congestion with fenugreek and with humid oil.
And then insert the probe between his said spinal spaces slightly and separate the second one, or dry that one with its finger tip, through which drain what is within of humidity. And press the woman's abdomen so that the fetus descends.
But if it does not descend, then cause the woman to be anointed with a mixture of pigeon dung and fenugreek.
And then command her, using the fumigant, to inhale it while in a certain condition; and keep her mouth and nose covered for about an hour, until the fetus passes.
And if both halves of the fetus have passed at the beginning, then cause her to pass them gradually little by little. But if she does not obey the instrument, then place the woman on a pillow and lift her feet off it, and hold the pillow above the ground; and keep the woman so that she does not fall due to the vibration.
And if the hands are not turned inside and the cut is deep, then incise there and extract the remnants of the cut or hold the body with a cloth and extract it equally, for that will be for removal.
When the cut extends to its feet, then push those parts back in, and gradually reduce the size of the cut, and finally take a piece of it and extend those parts little by little.
More when it extends into the thighs, then command him to express it, and make that discharge external, for that will be for removal if God wills.
And if it is not removed by what we have recommended, then return the cut little by little until you pause it according to its natural figure, for that will be easily removable by slight incision.
And if all that we have recommended is prohibited, then take a mixture of alum and dissolved gum, and crush it well in the mortar for good pounding, and then apply it to the inside of the woman's thigh, just below the belly. And then perform that operation in clear water, when he has achieved the hypochondria.
And when you see that the parts around him have become numb, then perform a mirtle fumigation under him and place it near him. And when you have kept the fumigation for an hour, then perform the operation on a cushion, and then perform that evacuation and extend the mouth of him, and lift it, and apply a light compression to the lower part of his abdomen, which will soon produce flatulence.
Suture the wound longitudinally with one of their hands. Gently reduce the hand back into place, but if you cannot reduce it, then elevate the woman and make her urinate.
And if she cannot urinate, then apply pressure to the abdomen, and shake the patient's thighs with vigorous shaking, and then administer linaments which you have prepared from mucilages.
And if the childbirth has come, then apply pressure to the abdomen, and then study the reduction of the hand, and close the wound according to its natural figure, and make the woman cough and command her to breathe deeply while the wound is not dressed.
Raise the foot above the heart spread wide his hands and the foot's ligament is at the side of his mother. Hold that the midwife has the foot and then slowly rotate it little by little, so that it becomes easier.
And when it is equal and then place over the wound what we have recommended of oil and linseed.
And then command that it be gently moistened little by little, and when you have done this, place the sponge on a cloth and command that it be inclined over the wound, and then command that it be warmed; and make it breathe with a flatus. The fetus prepared for exit is on the side.
When the mother experiences convulsions in this manner, consider it, and then incise the second layer with your knife so that it is evacuated of moisture.
And if the foot is suspended over the face and neck of the child, then incise the strangle vein to ensure it is not obstructed and causes death.
And then push the fetus into the parts inside, as you place that [fetus], and order the woman to hold herself several times, and let it slip out-gently, if God wills.
The exit of two infants or many fetuses. Know that twin spots several times are natural, and sometimes they may be born three or four at once, but this is strange and hard to determine. Mostly these are causes from nature, and not harmful.
And count those, even if they are multiplied by a second one, and they are separated by cipha (a ligature), distinguishing those between the ligaments in the navel of each. Sometimes they are naturally expelled several times as if it were a fetus gently, and some times they are retained for an indistinct time as we have recounted.
And if they are difficult, some of them you should induce labor and proceed to what we have said about non-natural figures, then cure those as we have recounted.
And if the midwife is subtle and does what she does with ease and subtlety, and with delay, and be ingenious according to all form as prepared by her bringing about health.
Recollection of that which is formed in the matrix from embryos and are aborted.
Sometimes embryos are formed in the womb one, two, three, four, five, six, and more ten, and you must verify that one female aborts with a vi, and another with all formed x, the cause of which is made by the measurement of glorious sages.
And all this covers what is in the science of the midwife who fortifies that part seeming to her, and then places her hand on it knowing well.
Chapter LXXVI.
On the extraction of the fetus when it is dead.
When you treat the dead fetus as we have said in the division of medicine and it is not outside the body, then you must use surgery manually. You must consider whether the woman is of good health and not among those accidents for which her life is feared to be in danger.
When the woman is placed face down on the board on her back, and her head is bent forward and her thighs are elevated.
The minister should hold that part with two hands or tie it to the board so that the body does not extend during the extraction of the fetus.
And then moisten the mouth of the mother with olive oil and honey, as well as with juice from chicory and sesame.
And then the midwife should anoint her hand with those oils and honey, and place her hand with ease in the mother, and seek with her hand the location where the fingers will be placed on the fetus.
Place the fingers accordingly: then consider if the fetus is prepared to be delivered through its head, and then place the fingers in the folds of its neck, or on its collarbone, or in its mouth, or on its palate, or leave the beard area, or on the furcula, or at the appropriate locations of the ribs, or leave the hypochondria.
But if the discharge is from his feet, then in the ankle, or in the middle of the back.
And ensure that the finger is held with the right hand, and curve it at that location which is between the fingers of the left hand, and insert the finger with ease into one of those locations which we have mentioned, until you reach the cause.
And then place and hold another finger, or the third if necessary, so that it is in equal apposition, and not extension according to its straightness solely.
And let it be held at all times, so that the discharge of it is alleviated as is done in extracting a tooth.
And ensure that the extension is softened; and if any part of it is retained, then let the midwife apply some of her fingers with oil and insert them expertly and rotate them to what is retained.
Then if the part of the bowel is left outside, let the fingers remain inserted in that place for now; and do this until all the bowel is expelled.
But if the hand is placed in front of the other, and it is not possible to reduce it due to the constriction, then cover that part with a cloth; and extract it until all of it is expelled, and incise it at the junction of the hand or near the elbow.
And do the same with the other hand and on both feet.
But if the head of the bowel is large, or there is constriction during insertion, or it contains fluid pressed tightly, then you must insert spitted wick between the fingers, cut open the head, and drain the fluid, or use an instrument called "alundat," the shape of which will be shown in the forms of other instruments in the chapter that follows this.
And do the same if the bowel is naturally of large size: then you must incise it with a sharp instrument, or use an "alundat" as we have said; and extract the bones with forceps.
And if the head is swollen and compressed, you should open the foramen, when the humidity from the feet has infiltrated.
And if it is not complicated, nor susceptible to swelling, then you should incise the head as soon as possible according to what seems appropriate.
And if the swelling of the abdomen is suppurated or in hydroperitonium, then you should perforate it where the humidity is located.
And if the fistula is near their feet, then the attraction of it is slight and its direction to the mouth of the vein is slight.
And if it is compressed, you should incise the abdomen and feet, when you withdraw that which you have wrapped around your hand, and incise the abdomen and feet where that which is within flows.
And if the other limbs are stretched and the head is turned, then the surgeon should insert his left hand; and if the mouth of the vein is opened, then he should insert his hand into the vein's proximal part, and search for the head, pulling it with his fingers into the mouth of the vein, and then insert one or two forceps, and pull them with those.
And if the mouth of the uterus is constricted by an abscess, cautery the one that occurs to him; ensure it is not irritated; first, do so in order to administer effusion of fatty humid causes. And administer plasters; and follow the patient with waters that soften and moisten.
And if the wound is on his side, then if possible, incise it: and administer what we have said about the living wound.
And if this is not possible, then incise it in segments, and extract it.
And ensure that you do not leave any cause inside the wound.
And when you have completed your operation, then administer what we have said about the treatment of abscesses caused by the uterus.
And if there is a flow of blood, then apply compresses of astringent waters and administer the other treatment.
And I have already seen a woman in her belly where one child was dead, and near that fire another pregnancy began, and the fire is dead for the second. It happens that after a long time an abscess in the groin; and inflammation begins within that open fire, and starts to discharge pus.
And I was called to treat it, and medicated it for a long time, and the wound did not heal.
Then I applied over it several causes of strong attraction, and extracted one bone, and after some days, extracted another bone; and I was too amazed, for in the belly there is no bone.
And then I realized that they were the bones of the dead fetus.
Then I dressed the wound, and extracted bones from it, the woman existing in her belly's many dispositions, and I had seen such a manner for a long time, corrected it with a small incision.
And I do not administer treatment as strange, but rather because in this is science and aid to what the physician accomplishes with his hand for healing.
Of the forms of the instruments that are necessary to extract the stone.
Form for vomiting in which the liver is opened:
This is the form of a strengthener in which you tie the ligaments, with which tying there are two vertiges at the ends of two flets. However, let this vertige be more subtle in texture, and made of hemp or the wood of young plants.
And let the width of each flet be as wide as two fingers, and the edge on both sides as wide as one finger. The length of each is one palm and a half; and in the middle location between two flets are two fastenings of that same type of flet, which are already secured, with their length being about one palm and a little more, and the width of each is as wide as two fingers, or a little more.
And these two additional elements should be inserted in the mouth of the uterus so that they are open when you reverse the two prescribed vigors.
Form another one similar to that, but finer and lighter:
Make it of silk thread or linen thread according to the likeness of forceps. However, at the extremity of each, make two additional elements as you see, and the length of these elements is about one palm, and the width of each is two fingers.
And when you want to open the uterus, then place the woman on her side with her feet hanging down, opening what is between her thighs. Then open your hand with the instrument as you would with scissors equally according to the quantity you want of the size of the uterus before the forceps do what you want.
The form of vigor which the ancients described:
Form of pressing which is applied to the fist:
Form of supporting which contains the great head
And it is assembled to forceps which have teeth at the extremity, as you see. Sometimes it is made long like forceps according to this form, as you see, with teeth like fishhooks, into which is inserted and contained. Form of supporting light:
Form of a hook having one spine:
Form of a hook having two spines:
Form of a spatula having two extremities such that the head is incised:
Form of two flat spatulas:
All these instruments are exercised, and when more species of that kind are multiplied, the artisan should prepare them, making their operation lighter and providing more to the people in quantity.
And do not delay in preparing those instruments, for the need is urgent.
From the extraction of the second child.
When the second child is retained, you must induce labor, while commanding the patient to hold her breath, and then perform that procedure with caution, and strengthen your hand over her mouth and nostrils. If by this she delivers, it is well.
And if not, then take a rod and perforate in the cover a hole and place it over the herbs burning at the mouth of the uterus, as with calamus, rhubarb, anise, camomile, scidax arabic, and cinnamon bark and santuaria. All these herbs or some of them may be submerged in water in the rod, and place that over the fire.
And place a cane cannula in the mouth of the uterus, and hold that so that the vapor comes into the cavity of the uterus.
And then perform that snuffing as we have said before, and the second one should be administered quickly.
If this method for this cure does not succeed, then you command the midwife to submerge her left hand in sesame oil or aleppo cotton, and then insert it into the wound and seek out the second one, and do as you have found. If it is attached in the region of the mother's hand, then insert her hand according to what we have recommended, and when you have found the second one, extract it little by little so that the mother does not fall due to the strong attraction. Before you insert it into the right and left sides with ease.
And if the mouth of the mother is constricted, we have already recommended the cure with snuffing and treatment with herbs.
But if none of the causes we have recounted are outside our consideration, then guard that you do not fatigue her repeatedly in abstraction, but instead anoint that area with ointment and tetrafarmakon; for that will allow it to dissolve and be forgotten over a few days.
But when you permit it to resolve, apply the fomentation to the head and stomach, which leads to the illness; then it is necessary that suitable sub-fomentations be administered for this.
But some of the Ancients already prescribed sub-fomentations with nettles and dry figs.
Form of the instrument with which the woman is sub-fomented, you should retain the menstruation and the second flow:
It should be made of iron or copper.
And place the thin end inside the cone and the broad end over the fire, and position the sub-fomentation above the flames.
And hold that there while the subfumigation is consumed and they iterate another.
For the treatment of an unperforated anal condition.
The child moves about and its anus is not perforated, which have already been cauterized with a fine and hot instrument. Then have the midwife perforate with her said cauterizing instrument; otherwise, use a sharp spatula and ensure that it does not touch the wound.
Then place it over the wound soaked in oil and wine; afterward, apply ointment to it while it is warm.
If you fear it has been burned, then place a catheter for several days to ensure the child can pass urine.
And if an anal fistula occurs for the consolidation of a plague or abscess; then have that consolidation incised, and afterward treated as we have said for treatment and lead powder.
For the treatment of fistulas that discharge.
The fistulas that discharge pus below are nodotic and gross, those that discharge near the buttocks or in the space of one side.
And it is a fistula or spots.
And when that nodosity is old and flows from watery white or subtle rot, sometimes these fistulas penetrate.
And those that penetrate are known by what is caused by them through the discharge and by wind condition; sometimes the patient complains of the discharge, and strongly suffer from those worms.
And of these fistulas, sometimes in the space they penetrate into the bladder, and into the flesh of the groin; and of those that penetrate into the joint of the thigh and into the notch of the buttock.
And to know whether a penetrating fistula goes into the buttock or not, you should insert your finger into the buttock and gently probe with a fine stick of reed or iron in the fistula when there is no pus.
But if there is hardness, then insert a thin rod of lead or horsehair between that tent and feel the rod or hair with your finger.
And if you do not feel that at all and there is no cause for obstruction or worm or hardness, as we have said, then know that it is non-penetrant, and then apply a remedy.
And when the fistula is penetrant into the bladder or into the flesh of the groin, then its significance is dysuria from that and prohibition thereof until the area with medicine is consolidated.
But if it is penetrant into the junction of the thigh or into the bone and causes pain in the circuit, then the sign thereof is that the probe passes into here if there is no hardness in the bone, and pain in the circuit of the limb; and that pus comes out continuously; and that it does not respond to that medicine, nor is it consolidated with ointment.
And in all those penetrant fistulas, complete cure is not always achieved, and the cure of these is hard work and the diligence of the surgeons over them which must be firm.
In those that are not penetrating and not ancient, heal them with iron as I will recount to you later, and what I have already said and advised.
And it is that the patient lies on his back and elevates his legs between them, the thighs inclined towards the abdomen of the patient, and near insert a lead tube or an iron one if it is in the tortuous fistula, so you can feel the place where the tube passes.
And if the patient feels pain around the throat, then you should insert the thumb as directed into the throat.
And if you feel in the thumb that the tube is already by itself fully exposed and penetrating, or if you feel something between the thumb and the siphac or flesh, then you can certainly determine that it is penetrating; and then do not work on that, for healing does not occur there, as we have said.
However, some say that it is healed in some men after the third day.
And for the treatment by which hope is given of healing, you should use a fine cautery according to the size of the fistula as described before, and insert that fire into the fistula until it reaches around the bowels; then repeatedly insert it two or three times until you know that all those tissues adjacent to the fistula are thoroughly cauterized and appear like feather reeds.
And then cure that which is with bands wrapped around the limb until all those tissues that are cauterized are healed, and then cure that which is with medicines, the flesh generating and consolidating, and if it is healed, well; and if not, then it will not be cured in some time by another treatment.
And if the tent enters but does not penetrate deeply, you have described it as being in the anus. Between that and the tent which is often a veil of flesh or cloth, sear the fistula in what sieves the surface of the canal, then dry the canal from the beginning of the fistula, and dry the tent itself, ensuring that the drying reaches the location where the tip of the tent passes through, thereby freeing and cauterizing it.
And then cleanse those fistulated tissues which are similar to a penile canal and do not rupture from any of these causes.
And if a flow of blood comes between you and the operation when inspecting those tissues, then as soon as possible and with the lightest and gentlest instrument, cauterize it either with fire or with sharp medicine. For the fire cautery makes two good adjustments: it adheres to those tissues adjusted, and stops the bleeding through the excision of moisture.
And then cure that which is caused by water bags enveloped in border or in a triangular cut where the area gets inflamed, and then immediately cure the wound with a strong flesh-generating ointment.
And in those medicines which have stiffness and excision; when restoration is restored, it is healed, and you need not fear recurrence.
And if the fistula has already pierced through to the perineum and is long from the surface of the body, then insert your finger into the perineum and inquire about it.
And therefore if there is an attempt and between you and her it is veilment of cloth or of skin, and is close to the penetration, then this operation is not performed in her but according to a way of faith and hope.
That cause is to administer in her one of three ways: or cauterize that thus as we have said; or secrete that until you achieve the cavity of it so that it may be possible for you to insert something and the cure; and do not proceed by incision lest you wound the uterus containing the child, and operate against the will of nature; and then cure that as we have said which is strong enough to be healed; or extend that veil and cleanse that until dry near the anus, thus as we have said, or attempt or with another instrument of sharp extremity, and then modify those fistulae which are in the section where you can by percrustation; and then strive to perform the restoration of all the wound by incision, and if the opening above is not consolidated, and rupture the opened fistula at the part of the anus, and it will be easier for nature. And sometimes the fistula is closed this way: when you insert the probe into the fistula, and place it in the cavity of the buttock near the surface of the body and at the edge of the buttocks, then take hold of the perforated extremity, which is like a needle preparing the veins according to this form:
and insert it there with threads or around those; then insert a probe with thread into the fistula until you achieve its cavity.
But if it penetrates near the edge of the buttock inside, then you extract the thread from that, doing so as you insert your hand into the buttock; then extract the end of the thread and adjust both ends evenly, strengthen each one, and leave it for a day or two. When more flesh is incised, strengthen that part where the flesh is incised between the two ends of the thread.
Then cure the wound once it is consolidated and healed.
If the openings of the fistula are not penetrable, make them penetrable in any manner you prepare, but ensure it is moist on the inside so that you do not injure the skin; then apply something to promote healing.
The shape of the spinal spike where the fistula is divided: the curvature of which is acute and the other part is not acute, so as not to injure what is unnecessary, thus you see.
For the suturing of hemorrhoids where there is pain in the incision of those areas.
Hemorrhoids can be of two kinds: one where the part between the buttocks resembles charcoal, or those that are like the fat of a date fruit. And of these, they can be small and large, and the pain from them comes at times and is one, as well as marks, and around the anus, in the extremities thereof.
But the ones that are around the anus are according to those with less humidity, from which yellow water or a little of continuous blood flows, and are according to the color of the skin.
And the cure for that which is inside the womb is to command the patient to lie down and squeeze between when the womb contracts and the veins appear before you. Then you lie down and hang by the wrists those that you have there on your fingers, and immediately cut their arteries.
But if the wrists are not held there by their moisture and softening, then take those by a rough cloth or cord or a slit piece of woolen cloth, and tie them at the places called ties, and immediately cut them and sprinkle over them some powdered caustics near the incision, so that they act on them as a cautery; or cauterize them according to what is described in the chapter on cauterizing. And immediately treat those by another cure while they are healing.
And if the anus does not yield to evacuation, then cauterize the patient with a small bite from a cauterizing instrument, and wash it with the fluid in the womb that yields slightly to evacuation when the patient bears down.
If the hemorrhoids are outside the anus and the cause is slight, then you should grasp them with your finger or grasp them with forceps, insert them, and later cure them with what we have said when they are healed.
And if you have an incision, make sure to suture them according to this manner: take thread wrapped around a needle and carefully extract the hemorrhoids from the surrounding parts, and make the thread penetrate through the other part. Wrap both ends of the thread around the part beyond the needle, and do so longitudinally; strengthen the hemorrhoid with firm structure, and later secure the thread and remove the needle.
And do this to all of them, leaving one unsewn, so that the excess blood flows from it.
And place a hot cloth soaked in olive oil or ointment on the anus; place it there and command the patient to rest. And then let that which is inside remain; when it is ripe, cure those with ointment or some other treatment until it is healed.
And since they are old and do not heal well with that medicine, it is custom to cauterize them with the point of a spatula or with your finger until they become moist, and then let the edges grow over them; which you prevent from consolidating. And then cure those that have consolidated.
And when you cauterize them with stronger heat than the first time when they start to bleed and become excoriated; then cure those that have healed.
Know that an abscess, this is key, and it is not something else but a round swelling according to the color of the body, resembling a walnut. It forms throughout the body but especially in the parts where you have the feet and fingers, and because of these pains, you must treat them.
And then cut what is in the circuit of the key, hold it with tongs or forceps, and eradicate it from its root; and place care there.
And if you wish, cauterize what follows as preceded in its chapter.
More commonly, a small sharp, round fistula protrudes on the surface of the body, and red spots indicative of inflammation appear in most children.
And the treatment for it is to extend and cut that, or to tighten it with a needle or with a thread that holds it. And if you wish, cauterize it as we have said, with fire or with sharp medicine.
More commonly, a large fistula or protrusion is found on the surface of the body, often accompanied by pain. When you touch it, it resembles the bite of a ant, and it forms around the body.
And the cure for this is that you take a needle of steel or iron, make it sharp, and place it over the blister between which you contain the circle of the needle from the sides of the patient; then rotate your hand around the needle while inserting what is within the circuit of the blister, and pause it in the depth of the flesh, and that you eradicate the blister from its root.
And if you wish, do this with a needle of reed or iron according to this form:
Let the upper part of the needle be fine, blunt (that is, non-perforated), wrapped so that above it the learning of the finger is covered and the rotation of that [needle] is unobstructed.
And if you wish, cauterize the blister as described earlier in the cauterization of athylos on the head of the cautery.
In the manner of the instruments you are administering to give cauterization.
Sometimes cauterization is performed with silver or tin or reed that has been melted or beaten; sometimes it is done with those instruments small and large according to those being administered, for the one used in the treatment of small children should be small; and of those whose buttocks are inflamed or painful, the cauterizations of these should be small.
The form of pressing great and slight:
The head of the catheter above which the bag is tied should be broad according to this manner; and there should be a place where the bag is tied as you see.
And the lower end of it, which is inserted in the anus, should be closed (i.e., not open) like a lion's mouth, narrowing to subtlety; and on one side of the tube there are two openings, and on the other side one opening, and the width of the opening should be according to the size of the rays, with the larger one being a little smaller.
And the bag in which the medicines for the beast's bladder or sheepskin are placed should be about a palm's length.
And it should be pierced with several openings as it is twisted; and the space between the openings should be about the thickness of a finger.
And then insert strong raw honey into those openings, using ten pieces of honeycomb or around that amount. Adjust the bag to that; when the bag is placed inside, it should be straight in the head of the catheter between two distinct points with a strong constriction, and then catheterize each opening: More importantly, the quality of catheterizing each one is that you fill the bag with medicine, which should be heated according to the quantity of the patient's tolerance; and make sure it is neither too thick nor too cold.
E aprop the malade be resupinat sobre seu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.
And if the medicine forces it to vomit, have the amount it can bear; and if it sleeps all through the night, it will recover more quickly.
And if you operate on that person for the belly discharge disease and vomiting of its stomach, then repeatedly apply the cautery until it is healed.
And if in the anus there are hemorrhoids or abscesses, then use a fine and sharp needle from the needles that children are accustomed to.
Of the treatment of wounds.
And I have already said in the division of the treatment of wounds what pertains to the free treatment and medicines according to necessity.
Therefore, it is said that wounds are diverse according to what they are caused by and according to the place where the plaques occur.
And the causes by which wounds are made are thus: by a stone impact, or a knife or sword incision, or a lance or rod blow, or an arrow, or something similar to those causes.
More specifically, the wounds that occur in parts of the body are thus: a wound that occurs on the head, or the neck, or the foot, or the belly, or the thigh, or something similar to those of the limbs.
And I am therefore recounting the treatment of some wounds so that you apply that reasoning and rule to other wounds.
And I will begin with simple head ailments, for the recall of compounded ones will come at the start of the third decapitation.
So say that when accidents occur in the head with simple pain and it is not a fracture, consider: if it is due to a stone or similar object, and has already struck the brainstem just superficially and is a large wound and you fear a subsequent dangerous abscess formation, then you should examine and incise the cephalic vein immediately, without delay; and extract from there as much blood as the virtue of the wound allows, provided no cause prohibits incision, especially if the blood discharged from the wound is little.
And the incision is made on the opposite side of the wounded area; and one must guard against swelling and edema from fluids and large foods.
But if some cause prohibits the incision, then reduce the food and do not approach meat or wine.
And place your hand over the wound, if an abscess is forming, apply cold compresses with olive oil or with wine that contains tincture.
But if it is certain that an abscess has formed, then place yourself over the wound, if recent with its own serum and the air has not changed there apply the powder which I will describe shortly.
But if the air has already changed there, then place yourself over some ointments until it is healed.
But if the wound is large or due to a puncture and the edges do not fit properly due to swelling, then adjust those with sutures according to what I will describe about their suturing.
But if the wound is already exposed to bone and flesh, and it is not retention of it but only a small suspensory ligament, then incise that area and properly treat the wound with medicines, restore the flesh in its place, and command the patient to eat foods in which they are accustomed: bread and form such food as resembles them, until it is healed.
And if you find putrefaction in the flesh and it does not adhere to the bone, then you incise all of that, remove it, and properly treat the wound.
If in these plaigas the artery or vein from which the flux of sanç can occur is present and cannot be abscindied by medicines, then you inquire about the artery. If you find that un-abscindied one, then you incise it with a spatum or ligate it; if necessity compels you such that what we have said does not agree, then you cauterize between where the sanç is abscidied.
If these plaigas are simple and small, then the cause is light; sprinkle this powder over them when the air changes to harden those.
The manner of the powder is this: take oil of enses divided one part, sanç of dragon divided two parts, and caus no-extincta divided three parts; let all be mixed thoroughly and sieved, and fill the plaigas with it, and confine it well within a good covering until it adheres over that and coagulates with the sanç.
Then dry it with powder and leave it, and do not disturb it while it is not yet dried, for the medicine will not be effective until it is healed.
And sometimes this is done alone with a cautery, when the heat of dragon's flesh is not at hand.
And this operation is performed on large wounds when you judge it necessary to close them up straight and to stretch the edges, especially for recent wounds whose edges the air has not yet altered.
And if the air has altered them, especially during summer, then I do not fix the position of this poultice. But then treat those as we have said, try placing your hand on those ulcerated wounds or place a poultice made from flour of rye in water and honey that generate heat; and place the other treatment where it will heal completely.
But if there is a fracture in the wound on the bone, and it is small, then you extract that with forceps.
And I will say the treatment for fractures of the skull in what follows.
Of the wounds of the neck.
Moreover, if the pain occurs in the neck, there is no difference in treatment, and between head pains when they are simple.
Moreover, if the nerve of the neck is incised or an artery, then if it is a nerve, there is no engendration but that it should be avoided, curing it in such a way as to make vehement styptic treatment, just as zinc and zegi are like them and quince pectin resembles these for protecting the nerves and counteracting those. And do not place any cause over the pain from cold, for the substance of the nerves is cold and their continuity is in the brain, which is the seat of all members.
And if it is to be treated with light medicines, such as being washed in lukewarm water twice, sometimes infused in oil roasted or unroasted, and thyme when washed in lukewarm water and the other feet immersed according to this method, and apply a moisturizing ointment.
Moreover, if the pain is great, then administer缝合，或收紧其边缘，然后在其愈合时用粉末治疗。
If there is depth to the wound or accidents in the lower part near the fundament, then puncture there at the most depressed location.
If an artery is already incised in the wound and there is a flow of blood, then separate or dry that area, or tie it, or cauterize it if necessity prompts you to do so.
If the vertebrae of the spinal cord are already incised or all are, and the veins of the neck are saved, then you adjust the lips of the chain and suture over the spine and do not touch that; beforehand equalize that and return it to its natural figure, and strengthen it with a decent structure, and let it be for some days; afterwards cure that with ointments in which there is stiffness and excitement until it is healed.
If the wound has already infected the bone, then probe that area, and if it contains fragments of bone, extract all that you can from there; what your hand cannot reach, leave it until the wound suppurates, is separated, and the inflammation around it subsides.
And if the wound is recent, then powder it with the powder that is recommended. And if in the wound a fistula is formed, then cure it as described, of which the remedy will be mentioned shortly in its own chapter.
If it is a wound from a lance or a sword, and the depth of the wound is significant, then consider more if there is flaccidity from the injury; then you know that the wound is fatal.
And if there is no depth in the wound and it is recent with its own blood, then you should apply powder for the first hour, and do not press too hard so that the blood does not remain deep in the wound and return to the heart, which could worsen the injury; instead, apply attractive ointment, and remove it after two days.
And if the ointment is not present, then you should place it on the wound for a while so that it exudes what comes from the humidities; and make the patient sleep on the wound so that what is within him flows into it.
If, however, three days or more have passed since the onset of the disease and no spasms or heart tremors nor constriction of the lungs occur, and if other good dispositions of his body persist, then you may conclude that the disease has subsided; then treat both with calx and another form of cure until he is healed.
If the healing of his body is impossible, and the wound has been open for too long, you may conclude that a fistula has formed; treat it accordingly according to its own chapter.
And if the disease is due to a stab wound or cut, and it is simple on the surface of the foot or toe, then treat it according to what is preceded by suturing, if it is large, or with powder, if it is small.
If it has already formed an abscess in the bone, and you are now incising the pus, then you should torque the disease and cut to extract those pus pockets, if they are separate. If they are not separate, then let them be as the disease liquefies, for their extraction is alleviated.
And for other accidents of pain in other members, the treatment in cure is what we have said.
Of the pains in the abdomen.
The discomfort that occurs in the abdomen is either great, slight, or intermediate.
And a small disruption is made difficult by another method. I suspect that the reduction of them is more difficult if you do not prevent the intervention in them from reaching their place soon, as they open and become swollen, making the instrument difficult to use.
And therefore, the best disruption is intermediate, for in that case the reduction of the intestine is not difficult, as it is difficult in the two species mentioned above.
And know that the suturing of the abdomen is according to four methods, but two sutures are common and apply to the sutures of other bodily wounds.
And two other proper sutures communicate to the other wounds, more properly in the suture of the belly.
And I advise you concerning each exposure and declaration.
So say that when the wound is small and is blocked by some part of the intestine through it, and it becomes difficult to reduce that, then this is in one of two ways: either due to the smallness of the disruption as we have said, or when the intestine is swollen due to the coldness of the air.
And when this is so, then you should soak that attempt by submerging a sponge or a moist cloth in clear water alone, or in water with squinancy, and spicery, and mix those in which the swelling may be resolved.
And in some cases, I have seen it where there is stiffness, and it is better to use water alone in resolving the swelling.
And when you see the swelling be resolved, then moisten the intestine in water in which it is immersed with mallows, for by this the instrument of the patient is alleviated due to little cause.
If it is necessary to use an instrument near this cure, then incise the disruption a little with a sharp instrument where veins are embedded.
The primary cure is better when it is proper that no section is made, and there is no occupation to dry up nearby and in case of deficiency.
Of the instrument, note its shape:
One part of the blade is sharp, and the other part is not acute. The tip is fine, but not too fine like a needle; it should be slightly blunt.
And therefore, since the wound is enlarged and the intestine is pushed out, ensure that its reduction follows its natural form, in its proper place. If possible, do this over the area, for it is better.
If the disruption is large and located in the lower part of the abdomen, then place the patient's back on a surface, and position their legs higher than their head. If it is in the upper part of the abdomen, then place their head and feet higher than the other parts.
And if the disruption is in one of the two parts of the abdomen, then pause your understanding and consideration for a while so that the part where the wound is may be higher than the other.
And you should apply this to large wounds and to moderately sized wounds.
And in small wounds, pause what you have prepared, and then have the minister place it so that he holds the disruption entirely with his hand and adjusts the edges of the wound, and then uncover that to this one who needs the suture for any other reason nearby.
And this is the common method of suturing: take the needle, or count the holes according to the width of the wound; then leave the tip of the disruption at the end of the ring finger, and secure the needle once, or ensure you do not put a stitch in both ends of the cut, but place two ends of the thread from the inner parts, before making that penetrate from one part to another; and you have already added two ends of the thread and two ends of the clip, and so four orders are made.
And then strengthen the double thread in the circuit of the needle, sometimes two parts at once, and properly join the two edges and the flap by decent joining; then let the thickness of the digit remain and put another needle in that place, and properly attach that with thread as you did with the first needle; do not cease to do this if necessary between the needles until all the contraction of the flap is completed.
And let the needles be of medium thickness between coarseness and subtlety, for the fine ones penetrate the flesh lightly; and the coarse ones are difficult to handle in threading, so it is necessary that they be of medium thickness in terms of fineness and coarseness.
And it should not be that the needle is placed at two ends of the thread close together, for then the flesh would be penetrated lightly and the flap would heal before its proper consolidation.
And do not prolong the sutures too much so that the flap is not prevented from proper consolidation.
And then penetrate the ends of the needles so that they do not slip out of their proper place; and place powders expanded from all parts over the sutures, which contain the ends of the needles; and leave them until you can see that the flap is already consolidated.
These kinds of stitches with needles are more convenient in small wounds, as only one or two needles are needed for their stitching.
The second stitch is as follows: and you perform the suturing of the four extremities, from the edge and two extremities of the flap, in one go with a needle wrapped equally in subtlety and thickness.
And when you have the needle penetrated these four extremities, bring the needle back from that side of the cut where you started, so that the thread retracts and rises to the wound, making the stitch like a stitch in cloth where the threads are taut.
And pause between each stitch the width of a small finger.
And this stitch is known to men.
And with this stitch, I closed the wound that was inflicted upon a man in his abdomen, which had been cut by a knife, and it was the rupture of the major wound measuring about one palm, situated around two palms from the center of the abdomen; and it was the disruption in the middle of the member. And then I returned that part after the intestine had passed through the wound for twenty-four hours.
The wound is consolidated in the space of about fifteen days, and cure that and it is healed; then those viscera are returned to their positions.
And the other doctors had judged that it was not healed; by miracle of fire, for I did not cure that without ointment, for it was in a place where ointment could not reach nor any medicine, but placed my hand over the wound as an old woman would two days a day and applied frequent washing with honey water until the fire healed.
And I will speak of two species of suture properly according to the word of narration.
And you should start with the chain stitch, and insert the needle from the outside through to the inside.
And thus, as the needle penetrates through the chain and along the length of the entire body according to the straight path, you leave the end of the thread on which you have inserted the needle; then pass the needle from the inside through to the outside in the other end of the stitch.
And when you have made the penetration, then make another penetration in that same extremity of the limb from the outer part to the inner part; leave the end of the probe in this lateral position, and insert the needle into the other internal part from the outer part.
And make the penetration with your penetration which you make penetrate into the probe in the extremity of the limb which is in the lateral part until all of it penetrates.
And then begin from this metal side and close it at the extremity that is of the probe in the other lateral position, extract the needle from the hole which you have penetrated, and return it to the hole on the other side of the limb; then extract it from the hole which belongs to it.
And do this one time and again, and do it another time or twice more as you sew all of the outer part according to that example.
And the sum of this manner of suturing is that you sew with sutures of thread on which you sew the skins, ensure that you sew the probe one time from the part of the extremity of the hole, and leave the other stitch until after you complete the suture.
The second type of suturing which Gualia uses and is from his own experience involves sewing that according to a certain seam. You should sew it with a seam that a skilled surgeon sews, ensuring that all parts are added to their corresponding part suitable by nature; and apply the extremity of one part to the other extremity of what you are suturing, and this is done as I have advised you.
Place the needle at the extremity of what you are suturing from the outside, and make it penetrate into the inside part at that point. Leave two ends of the thread; then, turn the needle and make it penetrate from the outside again through the other two ends of the thread.
Then turn those threads, and make each part penetrate from the inside into the outside through the other extremities of what you are suturing, which are on the opposite side.
This method of suturing is better than the common loose suture, and it is the suture about which I have previously mentioned.
This is the saying of Gualia
And some would say that the ventral suture is corrected with two needles, so you must introduce into these some thread, and begin with the needle insertion of what you should, and make that one penetrate through the other layer according to the sutures of those which equalize the tissues.
And know that when the disruption is in the middle part of the abdomen, then the suture of this area is more difficult than in other parts of the abdomen.
More the judgment of plague treatment is the judgment of other plagues.
That cause is when you obtain the recent plague from its own excretions before the air alters it, and you reduce the intestine, suture it, and apply it properly, then pause over that with a flesh-colored powder.
And if the air has already altered the plague, then pause over that with some ointments which must be present until they form hard crusts and solidify the threads, and be consolidated tightly; and cure that as is the treatment of other plagues until it is healed.
But if you do not have the medicines at hand, then pause over that for a while, until he begins to shiver or sweat much, and change that every two hours during the day, as I have shown you, until he is healed, in which case you would not need other medications for simple ailments.
But if you fear that the infection may spread to the main limbs, then you should soak linen in good-quality olive oil or in rubbed oil, and place it over the areas between the joints and leave the ointments.
And if there is pain or putrefaction in their intestines, then you should apply this several times a day, crush that am powder stiptic black terebinth, especially if the inflammation has affected the intestine and caused an exiture penetrating into its cavity.
And know that the one from the large intestine is more lightly healed than that from the fine intestines.
And it is difficult to heal, for the intestine called "gorgono" does not receive healing from any infection that enters it; this is due to the great number of veins in it and its large size, as well as the fine nature of that part, and its proximity to the nature of nerves.
If what you are dealing with is the skin, and you succeed in obtaining the recent (fresh) one, treat that according to your discretion with which you return the intestines equally.
If it has passed into the space and is already red or black, when you stretch that with astringent over the area that is darkened, to cause flux of pus, since in the skin there are veins and arteries.
Then cut out what is another of that ligament, and place two ends of the astringent hanging from the cut edges of the wound, so that over you the attraction to it may be alleviated by the closure of the skin and emission of the arm of the wound.
Remembrance of the wounds when they occur in the intestine.
When disruption occurs in the intestine and is small, it is sometimes possible to reduce it in some people, for this reason I saw one who had been wounded in his abdomen by a lance, and the wound was old and caused a fistula, and healed from the treatment and distension.
Then I pursue the cure of him whether he was not yet cured in the healing, but strive to subtlely place that which is healed by fire and the site is consolidated.
And when I see the site already consolidated, apply heat to the patient that reaches over the ailment and affects his abdominal region; and do not allow any to suffer from this ill accident and weaken in their mental dispositions eating and drinking, and moreover immerse in baths and excessively exercise his words.
And some experienced ones have said that when there is a small swelling in the intestine, then you should bind it in this manner: and you take fireflies from large caps; and place one of those fireflies with its mouth open over the two lips of the swelling; therefore when it lights on those and strongly opens its mouth, cut off the head of the firefly, for it adheres and does not dissolve.
And place another firefly near the first one, and do not cease to put fireflies there until you have done so according to the quantity of the entire swelling.
And then reduce that and the wound; and extracting those adjacent capsules within the intestine until the intestine is healed; and do not damage the patient in any way.
And it is possible that the intestine be filled with subtle pills made from the adjacent intestinal tissue, which is more like a needle; and you take the end of these intestine pills, making it fleshless, then place the end of it in the pill of lead, wrapping it, and then insert that pill into needles and through the intestine, reducing it to the disruption.
And this method of suturing with needles is nothing but a way of trust and hope.
And if the wound is large and wide, especially if it is in one of the fine intestines, where there is no engendration only inflammation, and does not heal from it.
For the treatment of abscesses and fistulas.
Know that any wound or abscess when enveloped and allowed to remain ancient, forming an ulcer, and not being consolidated, continually discharges pus, then in whatever member it is, universally it is named a fistula and we call it an abscess.
And according to truth, a fistula is a hardened, white node, upon which there is no pain and which is contained as is the cavity of an aisel; for this reason, they call that place a recess, that is, pain.
And in some people it is wet, the one that gets sore; and if the moisture is strong, it is absorbed within a few hours. And in some cases this moisture is hot, and small, and large, and fine.
All those causes have been shown, and the signs of them and the cure for them by medicines in this division.
And cover thus so that you may know the cure for fistula which is caused by surgical operation with the hand.
And know that fistula can occur in all parts of the body; for some fistulas lead to the large veins and arteries, or to the nerves, or to the liver, or to the intestine, or to the bladder, or to some of the ribs, or to one of the spinal bones, or to some joint composed thus from the hand and the foot; and these are those that are near the main part of the body and similar.
And of these fistulas, those that proceed in this manner are among the maladies difficult to cure, and do not receive a cure or occupation; for such is labor and ignorance.
And if any of these fistulas is so deep that it does not reach the locations mentioned, and you hope for its cure and wish to gain knowledge of it, then try with a rod or a probe, and if the fistula follows a straight path, you may inquire about it.
If the fistula is twisted, then investigate that with a thin lead wire, for lead has lightness due to its nature and is bent to alleviate and straighten the twist.
And if the fistula has horrific movements, it is not possible for you to signify about it with a probe.
Then chrystone the openings with their own openings, for the humidity by which you chrystallize the former will affect the other openings and flow from them.
And then inquire meticulously, according to the manner by which you can know if here are os or nerves, and whether the fistula's cavity is distant or close, or whether it is a fistula of openings alone, over which you apply your full strength, through your inquiry, in which you question the patient, and by which you determine the movement with your compression on the area, and the appearance of the significations and the causes of the swelling.
And when you have stood on all those causes in true posture, then proceed to the cure according to confidence: and it is that you consider then if it is a apparent nearby fistula or in a local place distant from joints, or from nerves, or from arteries, or from veins, or from one of the places which I and you call.
When you dry the fistula as previously described in its narration, and stop what is in that filtration and of corrupted flesh, and what is born in the opening of the flesh, or vein and similar, cure that within until it is healed.
But if the fistula is of great depth and straight, then delve into the preone until it is as far as possible, and thoroughly remove all corrupted flesh; and administer sharp medicines wrapped in cloths, and insert those into the cavity of the fistula, which you have understood by using iron.
And do this with that several times until the sharp medicine corrodes all that is rotten in the cavity of the fistula due to corruption.
And then restore it by applying ointments that generate healthy flesh until it is healed.
But if it is not healed by this, then cauterize it as we have recommended.
If the cause of the fistula is bone and you must certify this, then you inquire about that dry and that wet one according to what we have recommended, if you do not prohibit any cause of vein or of nerve or of main member as we said.
But if the bone is exposed and there is some corruption and blackness in it, then you must probe thoroughly where the corruption has spread entirely; and then treat that part as the flesh within it becomes healthy.
And if it is not yet healthy and you graft on another piece of flesh as you do, then you must know that you have not completely eradicated the corruption; then you uncover again and thoroughly examine the part, and reason about it and purify it with your final strengthening treatment, and then restore that area.
And so if it is healthy, that is good; but if not, then you must know that the corruption is deep within the body, which you have not reached, and then in that case, you should simply leave it alone.
And if the corrupted bone is small, or if it is possible to extract it with forceps, then you extract it with fine forceps that are suitable for this.
And if it is bones that are displaced, then you must carefully extract all of them, and from none of them do you leave any cause for concern due to your strength.
And if it is due to some cause of humidity, and in their incision there is neither fear nor error, then incise those membranes or flesh if they are adherent, and deliver the bones.
And if it is not the time to expose the bones at that moment, then pause over the wound that you may allow the part to heal there, and leave it in such a way that what remains is near those bones of flesh and membranes, and guard the wound that is not yet consolidated, and keep the section that you have incised during your operation constricted.
If there is fear, pause over the wound submerged under a warm bath of oil, or a wound submerged in Egyptian ointment, or in some other green ointments, until those membranes are ready, and the bones are free from them. Then remove the dressing, and the extraction is alleviated.
If it is a large bone such as the hip or rib or resembles those, and what is corrupted in it is only the surface, then quickly apply that resin only behind where the darkness and corruption are obstructed, and then restore the wound.
If what is corrupted in it is a large part, and the corruption has reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to close that and excise all around the place where the corruption has spread, and then cure that once it is consolidated.
And I recommend to you that, when dealing with a patient in the thigh, you place it as an example and helper for your operation.
Let there be a young man around xxx years of age, to whom pain occurs in his thigh, and the affected parts inside are over the matter inside the body where the matter has spread to the thigh, and the matter is that of an abscess, a large abscess, and it is not due to an extrinsic cause.
And then the abscess is allowed to mature due to the error of the doctors, and the matter begins to drain, and its cure is nearly paused as the thigh becomes fistulized. Make in the pus orifices all of which exude pus and the humors of the body.
And then the doctor with much effort for two years around, and not fire in those who knew more in the art, within which I was called.
And there is the leg and the materials that flowed from it through those openings; and already the condition of that man was totally stabilized, and the color of his was yellowish.
And then I inserted the probe into one of those openings and guided the probe to the bone.
And then I examined all the openings closely and found those that could be reached from all parts of the leg.
And then I lifted and incised over one of the openings through which I could describe a part of the bone, and found that corrupt tissue, which was already foul, rotten, and discolored; and a part of the leg had already deteriorated where it had penetrated into the marrow.
And then I ligated what to me was discovered and prepared from the discovered bone.
And I concluded that it is not in the bone but in that corruption which will be excised and ligated. And I had already decided.
And then proceed with the restoration of the wound using consolidative medicines for a long time, and it is not yet consolidated.
And then you should iterate and uncover over the bone according to the first discovery, and find continuous corruption in the bone.
And ligate what appears to be that corruption, and then you should proceed to perform the cure and restoration, but it is not yet restored.
And then you should uncover the other side and not cease to incise the bone little by little particularly and perform the restoration, but it is not yet restored until you incise around one palm's width of it. And then extract its marrow, and then restore that with medicines, and it is lightly consolidated and healed.
And no iteration is necessary in the operation of the section of it but for the disposition of the femoral vein and for the lack of tolerance and fear of death in it, since it accedes in all hours due to excess of evacuation, causing bad syncope.
And therefore health is through complete healing, and nothing is in place of good flesh; and it is done well the disposition of him in his body and return the virtue of him; and it is conversed in his dispositions and not made against him in movement nor damage in any cause.
If the bone is protruding in a place already damaged, then you must correct it in this manner: take hold strongly and firmly at the extremity of the protruding bone, command someone to extend it; put a larger piece of woolen bandage over the flesh where the bone was left, and extend its end so that it draws the flesh towards the left place. Then uncover the flesh over the area you wish to suture so that the needle does not pierce the flesh.
And place a stick or board properly over the bone, for when you do this, it is not forbidden to sew the broken flesh.
And ensure that the suturing is over the broken area little by little, for if the corruption is within the bone's cavity and does not appear in its manifestation, you must force another round of suturing.
And if the bone is corrupt and not protruding, there is one continuous part joined to the other, and the corruption is in the middle of it or in a part of it, then you uncover the flesh from all parts; and place fustes, and then saw through the first part where the corruption is inside while ensuring that the closure of the other part remains continuous.
And the closure should be slightly smaller according to the location of the corruption, as we have said.
And if the corruption is at the joint, incise that corrupted joint, and saw the bone where it continues from the other part.
And if the corruption is at the continuation of two joints, then it is not in its proper place but is displaced.
And if the corruption is in the armpit of the arm or the chest, it is very difficult; however, you must inquire how the corruption appears to you, and incise and drain it according to any disposition which is within your capability. In each case, it should be corrected as you see fit, provided it does not interfere with veins or nerves.
And know which are the incisors and the saws to cut these bones are made of according to the position of the bones, and the preparation of those, and their size, and their subtlety and greatness and smallness, and their hardness and rarity; so that you may prepare for every kind of operation an instrument suitable for that operation.
And know that that operation means to you concerning the type of instrument you will need; when you have great study and long knowledge of the ways of this art, and experience in the ways of ailments, then when you have them, apply what is convenient for it from the instruments for every ailment.
And you shall know at the end of this chapter the number of the instruments which you will use as simples from which you will proceed to your prohibition which you will experience with the others. Form of the saw:
Form of another saw:
Forma of another will be great:
Forma of ray: Let the head of this ray be according to the form of the head of a star key, and its points be according to the form of the prongs of a staples.
And do not apply them otherwise than to have those of the joints rubbed when they are corrupted, or to the large open wound.
Forma of the smaller razor:
Forma of the broad razor:
Forma of another properly made saw: let it be an arc of wood, and the sharpness of it of iron, and the handle of it of well-made knife wood. Forma of it:
Forma of the razor which has a cavity:
Form of a razor or something subtle:
Form of another razor with a curved end:
Form of a small razor resembling a needle:
Form of another smaller incisor:
Form of another incisor; this resembles a ray, and its end is like a point, and it is placed in certain locations in the ratio of the bones:
Form of a ray which you place according to the ratio of that perforated bone:
And its end is triangular and sharp.
And it is made of Indian iron, and resembles a cavity like all the causes we have said regarding razors, incisors, and saws.
Of the cutting edge and the joining of the bones.
The extremities may be affected either by an intrinsic cause or by an extrinsic one, or as you have treated that corruption with medical remedies and the treatment did not bring relief, or sometimes the corruption departs from the member without any apparent cause, so you must delve into that member to find the corruption, in order to expel the evil through death or malice, which is a greater misfortune for the member.
The sign of him upon whom this occurs is that the member turns black before it is cooked as if by fire already burning, or you may notice the blackness near it where that burning has entered that part and affected the whole body; therefore, examine that member closely.
And similarly, the corruption may be caused by the impact of certain venomous substances such as those from a scorpion, a viper, or a rattlesnake.
And if the corruption or impact is in the extremity of the finger, then you must cut the finger and do not give space to the corruption so that it enters your hand.
And when you approach the hand, then incise that of the axillary region, and do not give space for corruption to enter within the arm's basin.
And if you prefer that, then incise the arm between the elbow at the joint.
And if corruption passes and surrounds the elbow, then at that point it is the death of the patient; and to administer another cause other than this for cure is a quantity of virtue.
And similarly handle the foot when corruption prefers the toe of the foot, then incise that between one of the toes.
And if it takes hold in the sole of the foot, then incise the entire foot. But if it enters the toe, then incise the leg between the joint of the toe.
And if corruption has already permeated the toe, then there is nothing but dismissal, and leave the patient to die.
And the manner of incising the member or closing it is that you hold the ligament in one part and let go the one you want to incise, and hold another ligament over the place; extend the assistant's hand with a ligament to the parts let go, and extend the assistant's other hand with another ligament on their side; you separate the flesh which is between two ligaments until all the flesh is exposed between them; then it should be incised or closed.
And ensure that a piece of cloth covers all parts so that it does not touch the affected area, and that the wound and abscess are properly aligned and cauterized.
And if you happen to bleed when working, then cauterize the area intensely, or place some astringent powders on it to stop the bleeding; then return to your treatment until it is completed.
And then bind the injured member with a ligament as is convenient, and care for it until it is healed.
And I advise you that if someone finds a black spot on their foot, this incident which we have both observed, is a quarell caused by burning that resembles the combustion of fire.
And that corruption accidently first occurs within the said tissue where it tends all over the foot.
And then that person prepares himself to wait until the cure goes to the member with the intensity of his pain from both the pain and the inflammation, and the swelling of that foot into the joint, and the wound heals.
Long time that corruption accidently affects the hand indicated.
And then it comes to me, and I perform the reflection to reflect that superfluity onto what is held over the hand of the medicines; in advance of the body's purification. And the superfluity is not reflected but begins to go into the other part where it began in the hand.
And they make me incise the hand of the patient, and I do not want to do this hoping for the reflection of that superfluity, rather than fearing the cutting of the hand of the patient will result in death, as the virtue of gout was paramount.
And when he wakes from me, he returns to his land and informs me that that person prepared and incised his entire hand, and he has healed.
And I have added this narration only to serve as an aid regarding what is known about this illness, and as a guide so that it may be understood and acted upon.
On the care of colic and the quality of cathartic preparations with medicines.
When an abscess occurs in any fleshly member and the space of the abscess is prolonged such that it collects pus, and then it breaks and perforates, and the pus is drained from it, and the place remains as if it were a vessel, and the cloth above it is thus like a thin covering, and no further corruption occurs, and it does not imprint on bone or nerve nor on muscle, it is called colic, and is not named fistula.
Otherwise, if the space is prolonged such that the corruption presses on any member, then it is called a fistula and we stop.
And the treatment for it is to insert that cloth entirely thus as if it were rotated, especially when it is thin and made like a cloth, and ensure that it does not adhere to the area due to its corruption.
If you hope that the stone adheres and that the corruption has not reached a serious consequence, and on the stone there has passed through from above, then you cure that with a colostomy.
And you consider the sinus, and if it is large, and the hand that smells has a fetid odor, then treat it with a colostomy using a medicinal remedy of Egyptian origin which consists of oil and wine mixed with honey, with equal parts, and be sure to place them in a vessel, and let them boil over the fire until the medicine becomes strong and reaches the desired consistency.
And then you take what is necessary from it and dissolve the medicine in water and honey; and treat the sinus with this remedy, strengthen its openings, and leave the medicine in it for a period of two hours.
And then extract that medicine completely; and do this for several days until the sinus is purified and the swelling subsides.
And sometimes it is treated with water of ashes when this medicine is not available; and you take the ash from vetches, put it in water; and then extract that and treat the sinus with it until you are certain that the sinus has cleared.
And if the patient does not tolerate the Egyptian medicine nor the water of ashes, then prepare that mixture with water and honey mixed in seven parts, and prepare that mixture with wine and honey mixed, for the property of honey is to modify and wash, and wine makes the sinew adhere, especially when there is an excess of stringency and dryness in the wine.
And when you have done this several times and you are sure that the sinew is already softened, then administer that enema with water that causes flesh to grow in it.
And you take yafinicon ointment, dissolve that mixture with diluted oil and stringy wine; or you administer that enema with several medicines and apply other ointments that have the properties which I have already written in the treatise on ointments.
And if the opening of the sinew is wide enough to receive the catheter of the enema, then gradually enlarge it with a small iron instrument, and place it in it wrapped in Egyptian or basilicon ointment until it is enlarged.
And if the opening is large, then you should suture the lips of the wound and leave enough quantity in which the enema can be added.
And if the opening from which the stream flows is elevated above the upper parts, then dry that area below it so that the stream can flow into it. When the stream is restricted in the depth of the sinus, flesh will be generated there.
And if it is not possible to dry the sinus in the area below as you wish, then you should puncture the member for preparation so that the stream flows slightly from it according to what is at your disposal and that no cause of obstruction restricts the flow of the stream.
May that which is over the opening of the sinus, which you retain at all times so that it does not come out of its place in the arm. And so that you may know if what flows from its place in the arm is much or little, or is digested, or is not digested.
And in this way you consider the place of that sinus, if in it the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess.
And as your treatment is prolonged in this manner, and you see the matter that is discharged over the opening of the sinus already adheres, or is approaching adherence, then hold it until it detaches, or for a day. When you detach the敷料，然后更换新的敷料并重新涂抹药膏。
And if from the sinus there is a thin virus spreading, do not wait for its adherence, for the healing of it is approaching, for some people in whom the generation of flesh in their wounds takes longer. In those, the opposite happens.
And if from the sinus for nearly days is situated by indigestion, then you perceive that the sinus does not adhere; and if the adherence of the sinus is delayed and the cause is prolonged, then you adjust in drying of the medicines, and if the medicines are wet in their substance and in their virtue, they are dried thus like an ointment definiçon, when there is on it an excess of addition of zegi.
And the best remedy for what is curable, is that you take an ointment of definiçon and dissolve it in sweet oil, and apply it to the affected area with an old piece of cloth, and cover it well, and use this.
And make it appear in that action, when there is no pain, ointment of definiçon, honey when it is cooked and thickened, and use it; or what you take myrrh and aloes and incense, and crush them all together over the honey when it is on fire, and then lay this over cloth and firmly place it on the sinus; and lay that on the honey which you have cooked and thickened, and sprinkle it with crushed cloth over it.
And sometimes administer to him long-lasting alkali and root of celestial lily (and the celestial lily), and centaury powder, and use those simples or adjusted ones, sift them, sieve them, and powderize them over honey which I have recommended; and use it.
And if the sinus is prolonged and does not heal with this treatment, then know that the corruption is in the root of it, and investigate whether it affects the bones or other hard members or ligaments; then treat it with a fistula cure, as was said above.
For the treatment of tumors, nail attrition, and incision of the digit with subsequent sectioning.
Panarici is an apostema which leaves the nail of the finger or foot detached, and becomes firm in other fingers, and since its healing is less desirable, it either develops into a cauterned apostema or corrupts, eroding the root of the nail, and thoroughly corrupting that entire area, spreading its corruption to the bone within which it produces an offensive odor, and the tip of the finger is cut off, and the color of the finger becomes pale.
And when you have done that as we have said in the division and do not connect your cure, then you must enter to remove all the fluid that has escaped from the joint and place a cautery near it, for a cauterization motion is beneficial in this.
If the bone is sound and the joint is healthy, and the additions of the joint have already compressed the flesh to its inner parts, and begin to pierce and lead it, then you must pause a fine cautery at the angle of the joint that pierces the flesh, and push it out and incise that flesh with ease, placing your hand over what remains of the flesh as the medicines comburentz corrosives burn internally until it is thoroughly treated; then cure that part with ointment until it is healed.
If the corruption has already entered the bone, then you must incise the bone there and extract it, for no time will be healed that is in the corrupted bone.
And if you see the corrosion and the corruption spreading to that area, then you must incise it in one of the nodes according to where its memory is pressed, and cure that part until it is healed.
But if at the knuckle upon percussion or rubbing, and indeed in that pain is very strong, then you should at the beginning phlebotomize the patient, and soon dry the knuckle with an incision of sharp spathae transversely above in juice, and guard yourself that the section not penetrate into the flesh which is left by the knuckle, for you will thereby cause the patient very strong pain, and it will be a cause of the natural state of excess adjusted flesh in that place; and soon cure that place with what alleviates pain.
But thus adjusted, which is natural in many men, the flesh is very light and soft, or the knuckle is very light.
And some of them are located in the region of the joint, or the natural state of the fingers is such that they swell in a few nodules. But that which is located in some nodules of the finger is not painful, and this which is located in the joints is very painful.
And for those that are fleshly swollen, the section is light, and you should incise it with a sharp knife.
More difficult is the cure for one born near the joint; therefore beware of its removal.
More difficult is the cure for one born with the knees affected; ensure that you incise the beginning of the flesh near the joint into a round cut into the bone, and nearby it will be one of those convenient grooves appropriate for this, and carefully treat what is inside until it is healed.
More difficult is the consolidation which occurs to the fingers between their knuckles either by nature of the man who is born with it, or by consolidation from plague or by burning, or by similarity. Then ensure that you treat this consolidation until the fingers return to their natural form.
And then place between the bandages oiled linen to prevent them from consolidating too lightly, and separate between them, or place a thin sheet of lead between them until they are properly consolidated.
And similarly, if consolidation occurs in some fingers on the palm, then dry out this consolidation as prepared and shape it according to the figure of the limb.
Of vein inflammations, these are varicose veins.
Vein inflammations are varicose veins, and these are swollen veins filled with melancholic superfluities that occur in the parts of the body, with the greatest occurrence in the groins, especially in the groins of travelers and workers and those who carry things.
Then administer a purge of the body with black bile several times until there is a strong expulsion, and subsequently bleed the patient from the internal jugular vein.
More often, the treatment for them is according to two methods: one is to incise and extract that black blood, and the other method is to elevate the vein and extract it entirely.
The procedure is as follows: apply a compress to the groin with warm water until the thick blood has resolved, which is feculent from the groin, and strengthen the groin of the patient above the thigh by placing a bandage on the inside below the knee. Then, dry the vein in one, two, or three places with a broad drying technique, and lift the black blood with your hand at the outside of the groin upwards into it, and above it, until the quantity of blood you desire and that is sufficient has drained out, which will tolerate the power of the groin.
And then do that, and command him to abstain from foods generating black bile.
And continue the cure through phlebotomy when the veins are full and this is noted by the patient.
Raise the limb in this manner: you raise the leg of the patient, if there are ulcers on it, then place it in hot water and wrap the leg with wet cloth until it turns red and the veins are prominent; or exercise it vigorously if hot water is not available, until the limb is warmed.
And then dry the vein along its length by fumigation; at the end of the vein, you should lance it, or lower down the vein and cut it.
And then cut the vein with forceps and incise the vein from all sides until it appears through sensation, and you should notice the blood clotting to a dark color.
And then from the incision in the vein, you will see that white which is the cord.
And then you place that cloth elevated and folded from the groin, and suspend it on some hook or ring.
And then dry another section near that section for three days, and then strip the groin from above the vein until it appears.
And then elevate that and incise the latter section; you should cut the tendon, and then extract it and elevate it where it enters through the second section, and then extract it from the section that is above that.
And do this where you extract it from the section that is further above or above all sections, once everything is extracted; then incise that.
And if you do not follow this to extract and elevate, then insert a strong double needle with a thread and tie that, and then extract it. Or insert that cloth and rotate your hand in all directions where it is folded. And be careful that it is not incised; for if it is broken, it will be difficult to elevate that mass and it has come over the illness through that damage.
And when all of it has been expelled, then place over the site of the wound wool soaked in wine and olive oil, whether pressed or unpressed, and cure that until it is healed.
And if the vein is contracted having curvature in which there is wrapping at the parts, and it is not according to straightness as we have said, then cut over that entirely at all parts of its curvature and at the sites of its wrapping, and place it under pins so that you lift it entirely.
And guard yourself in your section so that you do not incise the vein and that you do not damage it, for it will be difficult to lift it; and serve your prudence there.
Form of the incision at which the vein is severed:
It is not made as with ordinary pins, nor of sharp point so that it does not damage the vein; and it is of great flexibility. If it were too thin, it would sever the vein due to its thinness; having this in its superfluous thickness as we have said.
From the extraction of the crus vein.
This vein is generated in the legs in lands with tails and as Al-Ategi states in the lands of Arabia, and in the dry and barren lands with little tenacity where no herbs or vines grow.
And the vein is also generated in other parts of the body besides the legs.
And its generation is from putrefaction that breaks down the chain as venom inside the body, serpents, vermin, and worms generating between the chain and the flesh.
And the sign of the susceptibility to the advent of this is when inflammation occurs violently in the vein at the ankle; then, nearby, the area becomes vesicated; and soon after, the vein starts to protrude from the location of that vesication, seeming like a plant sprouting.
And then, as the extremity appears, when you wrap a piece of lead around it, which weighs one drachm, and note that and let the lead hang from the ankle.
And as often as some cause affects the parts outside, wrap this in lead and apply it. And if the wound is prolonged, then you incise a part of it and cover the remainder; and do not incise that which is inside until it is outside, for if you incise that, it will contract and enter the flesh and cause an abscess, inflammation, and a bad ulcer.
To cure it, it should be treated more and extracted little by little, until it is expelled from the anus, and no cause should be left in the body.
And from this vein, some men are situated whose length is as much as ten palms and I have already been told that one was pierced with twenty palms.
And if it is incised at the time of its medication, then insert the probe into its tract and perforate that which is long in the body, until all that is in the matter is evacuated, and administer putrefaction to the area for several days with medicines; and then cure it by the treatment of abscesses.
And this vein sometimes has protrusions, especially when it appears at the joint of the foot or in the foot, and brings with it many orifices, and is derived from each orifice.
And thus cure it as we have said in the division and of what has been said above.
Of the section on worms generated under the skin and it is called bovine sickness.
This illness is named in some lands as the bovine disease. It is caused by numerous worms that often affect cattle, and these few worms are native between the skin and the flesh, and they move throughout the body up and down, and their movement can be felt from one member to another, breaking through the skin and coming out.
And its generation is through the putrefaction of some humors, just as worms, snakes, worms, and roundworms are generated in the belly.
And it is feared because of its malice, for when it enters the body and rises to the head, and affects the brain, then it strongly undermines it and destroys the brain, and this happens frequently.
And when you want to cure it and extract it, it is not done if you do not consider its circulation and appearance in relation to the sensation, then make sure that you have what is over it and what is left it by liament and strong constriction, and dry it thoroughly before extracting it.
And if it is found in the flesh and you do not find it, then place a cautery on fire over the area where it resides, and the main fear is corruption of it, which corrupts the area as we have said.
And if you see that it is pervading near the heart, then apply strong strictura over the supraclavicular area, and dry it thoroughly, and extract it; and ensure that the illness uses modification of its body through medicines that evacuate putrid and bad humors, and avoid foods causing putrefaction.
Of the section regarding the illness of the kidney.
This illness is called nafir in our land, and it is a pain that occurs in some members, and often is passed from member to member.
And I have already seen that according to which I will recount. I was called to a sick woman at a village, and upon examining her arm, I found a small swelling in the vein of the arm. After it had risen for about an hour, I saw that this swelling went up as if a red worm were moving from place to place, though less intensely than one would fear, as if it were living silver moving from spot to spot.
And then I felt the pain in that area and placed a finger in the muscle, and soon it remained there for about an hour.
And then I corrected on the other side of the body near where it affected the other arm.
And then I was told that she should move her body all over; and it was too amazing to see the change in her and the rapidity with which the member affected changed from one part of the body to another. And I had already seen this before in my hands according to that manner, but I have also seen movements where the pain is perceived to be transferred from one member to another. But not all have heels as in a woman.
And I do not consider it to be so, but rather because the woman was old, with dry organs and exposed veins, and in this appearance there is a feeling of that humidity changed.
And it is necessary that this backward curvature not appear in those who are delightful and have moist organs with enlarged veins.
And when you want the cure for it, and the patient feels that pain, if it does not appear as we have said on the heel, then strengthen that area and gently and dryly apply it over that where that constricted humidity has entered, and cauterize the place.
But if you do not see it on the thick heels, then cure that by releasing the pressure from the body and by what you expel humidity, and purge those with foul pills and with saffron pills and similar.
From the extraction of arrows.
Arrows are diverse according to species, and according to the locations in the body where they lodge; for their diversity is that some have large points, small ones, concave, and dull; some are solid; and some have three angles, and of those to which belong tongues, and of those to which belong feathers.
And of the signs of the brain are when the arrow lodges in it, penetrates the bone, and is situated above the cranium which is over the brain, for it happens by its excessive heat, scotoma, vertigo, redness in the eyes, inflammation and redness of the tongue, spasms and confusion of understanding, and vomiting of bile, and the speech is greatly impaired and the voice destroyed. And it is situated at the location of the wound white moisture resembling powder, and of its appearance resembling the humidity of flesh.
And so if you see these signs, then abstain from the cure and extraction of the arrow, unless it is outside.
And the signs of the arrow when it has struck in the heart are that it is near the left nipple, and one feels a hardness there which is due to shock; and not visible; and the strong movement of the arrow seems like the pulse, and the flow of the black sanguineous wound fluid, and the coldness at the extremities, pallor, and syncope; and from this you know that death descends suddenly.
And the signs when the arrow has pierced the lung are frothy bleeding from the wound, and the vessels near the throat are constricted, and the color of the patient changes, and he expires with a great breath or gasps for air.
And if the arrow strikes in the periosteum which is in the foot, and the pain then is near the small bones, and causes a great and severe pain along with breathing difficulties, and not all the muscles are affected.
And if you press on the arrow in the stomach, then strongly apply a hand to the wound with some undigested food.
And if you press on the arrow in the belly, and it is embedded there, apply a hand to the wound or the tissue or intestine which is ruptured, and there is no hope for its cure by removing the arrow.
And if the arrow strikes the bladder, and it penetrates through with urine flowing out, and the process continues to the parts outside due to some cause, and strong pain occurs in the wound, then know that it is fatal.
Moreover, the other members such as the face, the neck, the shoulder, the auxiliary muscles, the spinal columns, the furcula, the thigh, and their counterparts in the limbs, are saved according to the major dispositions when the arrow does not find a vein or an artery, and it is not a venomous arrow.
And I will recount to you what I have seen about the nature of these arrows, so that you may understand it regarding their treatment.
The cause is that an arrow struck the eyelid of his eye in the corner of his nose, and I extracted it from one part, left his ear gray, and he recovered, but was not injured in his eye at all.
And I extracted another arrow from a Jew which struck him in the gray of his eye, leaving the eyelid but leaving it pierced, and the arrow was already hidden and not completely removed except for a small extremity which adhered to its shaft, and it was a large arrow among the sharp arrows of the Turks, fixed in iron without ears.
And the Jew is unharmed, and not injured in his eye at all.
And I extracted another arrow from a Christian man which was stuck in the groin, and it was an Arabic arrow, and that one had ears; then I incised over it between two bones, and it was already submerged in his groin; then I dissected around it, and soon extracted it, and the Christian recovered.
And another arrow was extracted from a man which was lodged in his stomach, and I noticed that he died from that; and therefore, after thirty days had passed and no change occurred due to his condition, I incised upon the arrow and removed it, and he recovered, and was not affected by any ill accident.
And there was a man in whom an arrow had pierced his back, and the wound had healed over. And after approximately seven years, incise the arrow at the base of the spine.
And there was a woman to whom an arrow had pierced her stomach, and the wound had healed inside her, and no change occurred in her condition over time, and the woman did not experience any adverse effects from her bodily functions.
And there was another man to whom an arrow had pierced his face, and the wound had healed, but the arrow remained broken. He did not experience any more pain, and appeared similar to others.
And I extracted the arrow from the king's principal subject, who had an arrow lodged in the middle of his nose, and it had slightly moved to the right side a little bit. The entire arrow was hidden.
And I was called for the treatment of the patient around the arrow wound within three days.
And then I examined the wound of the arrow closely; and then I inquired about the one that felt subtle, but could not feel it; yet he felt the puncture and let me touch his right ear, and then suspected that this puncture was at the extremity of the arrow.
And apply the place to be plastered with an attractive and digestive substance, confident that the place we apply it will show me the location of the arrow, so that it dries on that.
And do not miss the significant location where the arrow struck; and continue plastering it for several days without missing any spot; and during this time, the wound heals, and the patient feels the arrow inside its sheath for several days until one day I feel the arrow within itself, and then this happens to me.
And then place a corrosive medicine on the wound for several days until it opens up. And by probing it, I examine that area, and examine the subtle extremity of the arrow, which adheres to the shaft.
And then you adjust in the opening of the wound with that sharp medicine until I visibly see the tip of the arrow, and pass to my time after four months.
And then, once the wound is sufficiently enlarged, and it is possible for me to insert the forceps into it, I enlarge that opening, and without hesitation, I cease to refine and invent various methods of manipulation. Instead, on one occasion, I managed to grasp that with descending forceps made specifically for such purposes, as described later in this chapter, and I extracted it; then, I restored the wound.
And some doctors judged that the cartilage of the nose is not restored, but I restored that, and the wound was consolidated, and the patient recovered completely, without any defect in it.
And I recount to you the quality of extracting some arrows, so that you pause and consider this rule and significance of what I have not yet said, for the parts of this art and the definitions of those are not fully understood in the narration nor are they clearly comprehended.
And the wise craftsmen compare a little about motion; and from what is present to what is absent; and find new operation and new instrument for the descent of foreign causes when they occur.
And therefore I say that arrows are not extricated from the members in which they are inserted but according to two manners: either by attraction of the place in which they enter; or by the contrary part.
And that which is extracted by the place where it entered, or the arrow penetrates into a fleshly location and is then fired and extracted.
And if it does not respond to the attempt to extract it at the hour in which it was inserted, then you should leave it for a few days until the flesh around it heals and the attraction and its extraction become easier.
And similarly, if it is inserted into bone and does not respond to your attempt, then leave it for a few days and repeatedly apply attraction and motion each day, and it will eventually be extracted.
And if you do not obey your sense for several days, then you should know that you perforate in the circuit of the arrow at that place of all part moving subtly where the area is enlarged by the arrow.
But if the arrow is already hidden in the place of the body and hidden from sensation, then you inquire about it by touch, and if you feel it, then extract it with some instruments which are suitable for its extraction.
And if you cannot reach it due to the depth of the wound and the length of the arrow, and here there are neither nerves nor veins, then you operate on the wound when it is enlarged and it is possible to extract the arrow.
And if it is in the ears where it is held, then you deliver the flesh in which it is embedded from all sides with all the skill that you can; and use ingenuity about this, if you cannot extract the flesh in the fracture of the ears and in torsion of those parts that must yield.
And when you administer the extraction of the arrow in any place where it is, then you use a twist of your hand with forceps from all sides until it yields; and be subtle at the back with subtlety so that the arrow is not broken and that it is made easy for its extraction and that of that operation.
And if you cannot do that at your convenience, then let it be for some days until the parts that are in the circuit of him subside, and then repeat that which is alleviated. But if it causes him contrary symptoms such as fever, then you administer what we have said for treatment in its chapter.
And preserve your virtue in incisions of veins or nerves, or cords, and administer engen in every manner for the evacuation of the arrow; and do this with facilitation, tranquility, slowness, and firmness as I have recommended.
And therefore make the arrow contract by itself so that the patient is according to the figure according to which you should place the fire on it, for this is more advantageous. But if this is not possible for you, then administer what is possible according to the figures.
But the arrows that are outwardly discharged contrary to the other part, or which you have already treated in the parts of the outside, or cause swelling at the tip of the arrow by the sensation of the part above the wound; then you dry it over that; and let the drying be according to the quantity in which the forceps take hold; and then withdraw it, for it is made light by suction.
If it is retained in the bone, then twist the limb according to the opposite direction where the arrow presses on the bone, and gradually extend it, and then extract it.
If not, leave it for a few days, and then repeatedly apply heat to the area.
If the shaft of the arrow is there, then push it into place.
If the shaft is embedded and you wish to administer an impulse, then insert it there. If it is stubborn, create a concavity with your hand so that between the concavity of the wound and the channel of the arrow, then push it in place.
If the arrow is curved, then push it in forcefully with your hand entering it, as the arrow will straighten by this.
If the arrow is poisoned, then ensure that you concave all the flesh where it is located, if possible, and then treat it with what is appropriate.
If the arrow hits the foot, or the belly, or the bladder, or the side, and is nearby such that you touch it with your hand, and it is possible to extract it there, then extract it and dry the area, and take care to avoid cutting a vein or nerve, and after cleaning the wound, treat it until it heals.
Form of forceps with which arrows are extracted:
Let the ends be shaped like the beak of a bird, so that they grasp the arrow when applied and do not let it slip.
And from these, special hooks are made, large, few, and small, according to the size of the arrow and its smallness, and the width of the wound, and the condition of the wound.
Thus, in order that the instrument in the concave groove may be relieved and be pressed towards it.
From phlebotomy of the veins.
The veins for phlebotomy from which it is customary to bleed, located in the sixteenth chapter, are two pulsating veins near the ears, called by Avicenna; two herbs that are on the two temples apparent; and two veins that are in the two lacrimal areas of the eyes, called aspirant; one vein in the middle of the forehead, and one vein at the extremity of the nose; two guidegies at the neck; two veins on the upper lip; two veins on the lower lip; — these are the veins called algelic; — and two veins on the side of the tongue. Moreover, the veins that are phlebotomized in the wrists are five; of those, one is cephalic and is from the wild thistle; the people call it "the vein of the head," and it is a mid-vein, composed of one branch of the basilica and another branch of the cephalic. They call that one by the people "the vein of the whole body," and the basilica is the vein that is from the domestic thistle, and they name it "citullar"; the vulgar call that one "the vein of the belly." The veins of the arm, which are placed on the brachial, are those in which phlebotomy is performed, and it is the one that appears over the elbow by a clear appearance. The saphena, which is the vein between the aforementioned auricular and the small one mentioned, is found in two branches.
And in the foot and thigh there are three veins; one of them is where the curvature of the horn of the wild deer is located; and the second is sophena, and its place is located in the thigh of the domestic animal; and the sciatic vein, and its place is located in the thigh of the wild deer; and in the thigh there are other veins similar to those.
The condition of the veins near the ears is catarrhs, headaches, meningitis, and old bad ulcers of the head.
And the quality of squeezing those is as I will recount to you: it should be done at the base of the patient's head, and the patient's head should be rubbed at the occipital region where both veins are located with a wide cloth for good friction; then firmly press the patient's neck with a band in which the two veins appear near the ears on two pressed areas of the head; and you want that at your right side, and if you feel the pulse of those at your right side, here it is to be tested.
Then you take the surgical lancet, and that is the one that will be inserted, and then you insert it into the vein between where the phlebotomy will reach the mouth. Then lift your hand to the vein and its branches above, and incise the vein with an oblique incision. Let the length of the incision be the width of two fingers adjusted or around that; and let the blood flow out as much as you desire.
Then press with powders and leave that there until it is healed.
And already it was mentioned at the beginning of this book regarding the incision and their cautery.
More of the two arteries that supply the temple with blood for phlebotomy are ancient and evil migraines, frequent eye strain, and a body full of acute effusions in the feet.
And the quality of phlebotomizing those is as I will recount to you: constrict the patient's neck with a cord until two veins appear by palpation, and demonstrate the pulse of their arms; then you can proceed.
And then you elevate the codena above the vein at the parts above as you have already indicated, and insert the flebotomi incidentally, and elevate the vein in them; and cut that as you have done with the other two veins; and let the blood flow according to the quantity of your necessity.
And then release the constriction of the malate, and place your hand over the vein for an hour, and then place there a coté or powder and strengthen that above with a strong construction, and leave it until it is healed.
And already the recollection of them has preceded, and after those, the incision, and the extraction at the beginning of the libell.
And the youth of flebotomy of the vein of the forehead is near the flebotomy of the cephalic for ancient illnesses of the face and migraines and swelling and foul ulcers.
And the quality of the flebotomy of the forehead is according to what I will recount to you; it is that the malate strengthens its hole with a bandage in which the vein appears; and then take the instrument which is named fossori, of which this is the form:
Pause the puncture at the point which is at the top of the fistula over that vein and strike it either from above or by another cause in the manner of it, and let the blood flow according to the quantity you wish; then remove the perforation of the malaise and strengthen it within until it is healed.
In some cases, the space is opened with a large incision for bloodletting, but I do not know if the bloodletting should be of acute extremity as in other bloodlettings, or beforehand from its lateral extremity, and cut the bloodletting according to the transverse, because the bone is close by and strong; it would break the bloodletting when it is thin.
More importantly, the youth of the two veins that are at the corners of the eyes through the groove of the eye by inflammation and pus in the eyes, and for facial ailments.
The quality of the bloodletting is that the malaise strengthens the hole in the skin with a bandage, and then cut the veins, and you stand over the head of the patient.
And the femoral incision should be made transversely along a little length, about as long as a vein where there is no flesh; and if the incision is fine, make its extremity very light.
And then let the blood flow until it is as necessary for you, pause over those points, and strengthen them with a bandage for one night, and then remove those.
More so the femoral incision of the vein of the nose is used for acute fever and severe inflammation, for facial diseases, headaches, and redness that occurs in the face, especially when it is chronic.
And the quality of the femoral incision for it is that the patient strains his side and then places his nose in your left hand, and take the fine incision tool and place it in the middle location of the nasal head according to straightness, because the vein does not appear here, and because blood begins to flow quickly.
Cover your hand with the incision tool little by little and let the blood flow according to your necessity; then remove it after one night, for that is quickly restored.
May the youth of the femoral incision lead to contraction and the beginning of leprosy and various ill health conditions and harmful腐蚀性溃疡, thus like a thorn pierces.
And the quality of the femoral incision is that the patient sweats profusely in his own bed; and the surgeons are above the head of the patient, and the patient lies on a pallet.
And proceed to make the femoral incision along the long vein, gradually making it ample but small; and extract blood according to the season's quantity or according to what is necessary; and make it similar to the other vein.
And proceed to remove the lint and strengthen the two veins with a stricture midwife so that the patient does not overheat, and leave enough room in the wound for the plague to heal.
And the youth of the femoral incision for agerich veins, you should observe small abscesses and pustules in the mouth, decay of the gums, harmful ulcers, and fissures, as well as harmful ulcers that are in the nose and around it.
And the quality of the femoral incision is that you make a cut in front of the malais, strengthen its neck with a bandage, and then turn back its lips and look for two veins, one on the right side of the lip and the second on the left; the demonstration of each is by the blackness of each of both, and more so is that within the circuit of those veins there are finer, darker ones; then you incise each with an incising cut.
And if doubt remains to you, and you do not know which is which among them, then proceed with the incision of the larger one of them, and the more obvious one among them.
And make the appearance of the two veins that are in the upper lips.
But the treatment of the two veins that are in the lower lip for the benefit of the patient is near the femoral incision for preparations that are in the groin, for the illness of the uvula, and for illnesses of the mouth.
And the quality of performing a flebotomy is to follow the patient's veins in front of their navel, elevate the vein itself, and observe the tongue, from one side of the vein and the other side of the vein, with the color of each declining to black.
And then perform a flebotomy on each; and beware that you do not end your hand in performing a flebotomy on them, for those are arteries.
And your veins that are flebotomized in the crotch are those in which blood flows customarily in all men, and the flebotomy of them is done according to two methods: either place a mirtille or olive needle of fine thickness; or perform a surgical flebotomy with a lancet, and call it an alnessil. This is the form of it:
Let the wound be as you see, and you need to open the concave veins full of apparent large vessels, and those that contain thick turbid blood.
And this fistula operation is of lesser breadth and of finer extremity, and it pertains to the fistula of fine veins containing subtle citrine pus.
May the youth of the basilic vein operation, which is one of three veins: from which we extract the pus from the ill areas that affect the knee and the groin, and from what flows from the foot and the abdomen.
And it pertains to the fistula operator, when performing that fistula operation, to well guard that and be overly cautious about it, for if he misses and positions the puncture incorrectly in the fistula, he will cut the artery and cause flows of pus, so you must not perform a fistula puncture without first cutting as with a lancet.
And if the basilic vein does not appear by a clear manifestation, then you must leave that and change to the other, or search for one of its branches; or perform the fistula operation at the end of the arm where it is manifest, and incise the fistula with a lancet as we have said.
If you want the femoral flebotomy, then proceed in front of the structure of the thigh where you touch the place and recognize the location of the pulse, then hold it tight; then lift the thigh and drain the vein by making a concave incision as we have said, and be careful that the percussio does not extend too far from the location of the artery.
When you press, as you tighten the ligament, inflation occurs in the place you held tight, then that inflation is due to the artery, and therefore avoid that.
And if the blood flows in the femoral flebotomy as red as a child's, thin blood, then you know that it is the blood of the artery; and then you tighten and hold your hand for a long space over that; and near to where your hand is, and if the blood stops, or if drops stop, then you lift the thigh and leave that.
And keep the thigh away from the moxibustion, and do not wet it for a few days until it is healed.
But if the bleeding does not stop, and often you must not intervene with present medicine; when you incise the artery, if it appears to you; for its extremity is constricted, and the blood is stopped; or that you take some passed through a fist, and perform that, and take one half and strengthen it over the place of the vein with strictura descending on linen and powder between the other day.
But if the bleeding is stopped, that is good; and if not, then cure it with that of which it is preceded in the memory of the place of the powders stopping the flow of blood.
And the stopping of the bleeding from it is difficult due to the small size of the wound and the possibility of the arm swelling.
But for the dark vein, phlebotomy is beneficial in extracting the blood from the part that will ascend to the head and from the part that descends in the body; because this is composed of a branch of the basilica vein and a branch of the cephalic vein, as we have said.
And cover the incision for the phlebotomy which is over-tensioned in his phlebotomy, for that is a nerve; then if it adjusts in the puncture of the phlebotomy and finds the nerve, it will happen to him a stupor, and the recovery is difficult for him, and rarely he is completely cured. This nerve moves several times in sensation; and if it is hidden at some men and is subtle and not shown, then cover the phlebotomy which you do with section of alnessil, and avoid the nerve with your strength.
And if the vein is between two nerves, then cut the vein in its length.
The purpose of phlebotomy of the cephalic vein is to draw the blood from the head and relieve the ailments of the heels.
And cover this properly, if you want to do the phlebotomy with an olive or myrtle phlebotomy; for it is the pure blood from all the veins, for neither the artery nor the nerve is left.
Moreover, however, abscesses are found in some individuals when the femoral incision is not performed during the first percussion, but do not mark it again for that abscess.
The first of these is that you should know that the femoral incision is administered only for the conservation of health and with hope and caution regarding the occurrence of diseases, and that the femoral incision be made in one of the veins that are in the groin: cephalic, external jugular, and internal jugular; and that the femoral incision be performed at the beginning of spring, on an empty stomach in spring and autumn, and in winter shortly after eating, when signs of congestion appear.
And perform a femoral incision and let at least three hours pass after the first part of the day.
The more frequent the femoral incision is administered, the more it becomes necessary and convenient at that time, whether at night or during the day, at any hour and in all times.
And ensure that a boy not be circumcised until he is fourteen years old, and a girl who is pregnant should not be circumcised unless it is in the fourth month of pregnancy, and old women should not be circumcised if they have passed fifty years.
And when anyone wishes to be circumcised by any means, ensure that they modify their intestines before the circumcision by applying a lion's gall (clister), if there is any retained fecal matter, so that the veins do not carry the superfluous material during the circumcision of the intestines, which are purified, and do not affect the principal members.
And do not circumcise patients who are nauseous, intoxicated, or recovering from illness or drunkenness until these conditions have passed, nor for dropsy. More frequently, circumcision should be performed near colic pain, near vomiting, near abdominal condition, near increased sexual activity and labor and exercise, and near fasting or vigils, and for all causes that dissolve the virtue, either corporeally or spiritually.
And then consider in subtlety of humors before this if the sore is large, with foods and drinks, and with medicines if this is possible to him.
And then enter the bath if any cause does not prohibit it, or exercise by some exercise so that the sore be subtlety treated.
And place the phlebotomy on the foot, so when it is around the hour of tertian, as we have said.
And I assure you that the foot of that patient should be guarded on that day from all evil accidents, as when it is angustia, ira, temor, and from all bodily accidents, as when it is toil and superfluous pain, or coyt and things similar to them.
And at her service, have ready the causes in the use of which custom has it should be aromatic and odorous, and balms similar to those according to the quantity and possibility.
And follow the phlebotomist on a cushion that is higher than the cushion of the one who is to be phlebotomized.
And then extract his arm, rub that area with your hand using the lancet two or three times; and bind it tightly with a strap and wrap that area twice.
And if the stricture is tempered, that is, when the stricture is not equal, or the stricture is due to excess, then prohibit the flux of the blood; or it is for mollification, and then prohibit the flow of the blood accordingly.
And when the stricture is near, have those who are to perform the lancing rub their hands together between them where the veins are swollen, and make it clear by touch.
And the lancer anoints his lancet with a little anti-inflammatory oil properly; and places his index finger on the vein with his left hand, positioning the location for the lancing so that the vein slightly protrudes, making it palpable. For this is where you find the vein similar to a fleeing cord, indicating fullness of venosity. When the lancing is paused over this area, the vein contracts and the lancer reveals the puncture site; if the lancing does not work on the vein, and it does, then the vein is narrow.
And therefore, so that the phlebotomist be firm and solicitous in all these causes.
And then place the phlebotomist, but if the vein is not fully opened in one pass, that is good; otherwise, you repeat this or another pass, leaving that area a little, or over it apply more pressure, if the area is not suppurated.
And if the area is suppurated, or the patient spasms, then you leave it for a day or two, and do not strain the ligament, for it would force an abscess to burst or not enter the bath.
And then repeat the phlebotomy if necessary.
And if the wound is small and the pus is subtle, and you fear that it will not drain the quantity you want, then repeat the phlebotomy in that vein according to correctness and adjust slightly for the appearance. Do so with more pressure before the area suppurates, as the area will suppurate less if you maintain a small opening.
But if you find that it has already gangrened, then do not operate on it, for it is not worth any reason; instead place your hand over some part of the opening, for it relieves the body from the blood. And it is better in this place than oil and other oils.
And similarly, administer the opening of oil in all fistulotomies where they incise the veins; they should prohibit the flow of blood from the body, and do this with tyriaca alfadoc and sagzenea when placed over one of those areas, for the blood becomes finer and is agitated when it is thick.
And if a large gangrene is generated in the fistulotomy site, where many boils occur, especially to those who have not been previously lanced but only that one time, or during the appearance of the small vein, then lance it and place a sponge infused in water and salt over the area, slightly heated for an hour, for it dissolves.
And ensure that this is done near the bleeding from that vein with the aid of another vein.
And if any darkness or greenness appears in the area for some days, do not note this; and if you wish, place over it some cause of aloes and myrrh dissolved, or some cause of mandrake juice or calamine or similar.
And when blisters and boils occur, you should perform incision on the basilica.
And place your hand over it. If at that time you find it soft, apply a compress to that area, as such an elevation is bad and harmful; then be careful to place some cause of what we have said there, for strong fluid will flow from the arteries.
And apply a plaster for styptics, so that the area may be hardened, and then treat it with the other treatment until it is healed.
And ensure that you extract from the wound all the pus according to the quantity of its virtue and according to the color prevailing over the blood as it appears.
For if the blood is black, you let it remain until it is discharged; similarly, if you see it thick, you let it remain until it becomes thin; similarly, if it is acute, you wait until its sharpness subsides.
And when there is a swelling that is hard and requires the extraction of pus in one go, enlarge the incision in the vein and make the incision long.
And when it is soft, do the opposite, and make the incision in such a way that the pus is extracted in multiple stages, and that it be straight.
And the best that is administered in venous incision is a transverse section, not a puncture.
And this method of incision saves from the flow of pus and the cutting of nerves, and is both safe and safer than venous incision according to its width and length.
And to which syncopal attacks are accustomed to occur with incision, make the incision such that you treat it before the incision with a drop of wine infused in milgrana or simple oxymel; and extract from the edge of the pus in three stages or four.
And if there is a numbness of the complexion, then apply before the incision a liniment in resin of myrrh or resin of aromatic honey mixed with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and saffron, or an aromatic and fragrant resin.
And if you happen to have a syncopal episode, perform a flebotomy, as this is caused by the excess of black bile; then have him drink water from meat and strain a subtle fragrant essence; use aromaticity like sage, and apply it to his foot.
And use the other causes that we have mentioned in the division of the chapter on syncopes due to evacuation.
And if you wish to cool his arm and dissolve his blood for the second time, do this from which the flebotomy is primarily an evacuation, and its virtue is cold, which evacuates the blood little by little, so it depends on the quantity of the virtue over consecutive days.
And if you wish to cool his arm and draw his blood for the second time, and his body is strong, then do this about seven or nine hours after the first flebotomy.
And if you wish to draw the blood from his body in the direction opposite to which it flows, do this on the second or third day.
When that body in which there is a wound is scraped and inflamed and causes fever, ensure that the blood is evacuated from it all at once and in large quantity, and amplify the perception so that syncope does not occur before the evacuation; and since you have preserved all the conditions of venesection, place your hand on the pulse to control the body's blood, so that it does not lead to death instead of syncope, for several times such things happen when the venesection is performed by ignorant and negligent practitioners.
And do not when you want to release the arm and evacuate the blood a second time, as already the orifices of the vein are closed and it is difficult to expel the blood, that you press upon that area with force and slightly extend it, for this is too harmful.
Leave it until the venesection is performed again; or remain with the perception of the effect of the venesection that has coagulated the blood in the orifices of the vein; or place your hand over the area of tyriaca alfarach, or sagenea, and keep it with a light compression until the blood settles.
And if the vein is inflamed, then leave it alone and do not touch it until the inflammation subsides.
And if necessity prompts you to evacuate the wound subsequently, and there is no excuse, then you apply it to that location or on the other arm in another vein.
And the vein called "funis del bras" is incised in place of the cubital or basilic, when they are not found or are hidden, for it is composed of those.
And the quality of incising that vein is that the patient inserts his hand in cold water while the incision becomes red and the vein appears clearly.
And then tightly bind it with linen cloth at the midpoint; and then incise according to the small transverse vein, neither longitudinally nor according to its length.
And let the incision be broad, and let your incision be small where you incise that vein near the wrist of the hand.
And if you are forbidden the flow of blood, then you repeatedly dip your hand in the trailing water and let the blood run into the water until you achieve your necessity.
But if you are in the days of summer, then you are excused from repeatedly dipping your hand in the trailing water, and instead preserve the flow of blood in the trailing water during winter.
And the phlebotomy of this vein is safer than that of all other veins, for it does not have a pulsating vein or nerve.
And the phlebotomy of thesavatella of the right hand is related to the ailments of the liver.
And the quality of this phlebotomy is that you press the hand with flax or with your hand, rather than leave it in the trailing water until the vein is swollen and clearly demonstrated; then immediately perform the incision transversely; and if you incise it completely, no harm will ensue.
And conserve that you do not place your hand at the fistula, for leave it so the nerves of the fingers are naked of flesh.
And then immerse the hand in the water basin and let the blood flow into it, for if you do not immerse it in the water basin, the blood will clot in the opening of the vein, and this is prohibited from flowing.
And when the blood is extracted in the quantity needed, then pause over the vein with oil and salt, so that it is not completely consolidated; similarly ensure that you do this for the entire length of the vein.
Moreover, the youth of the fistula from the one on your left hand is that it is related to the ailments of the side.
And do similarly in the fistula on the other side as you have done on the other.
And the youth of the renal vein from the fistula is related to the ailments that are in the lower part of the body, such as kidney diseases, and retention of menses, and ailments of groins and ancient wounds, and their similar symptoms of ailments.
And the quality of the femoral incision is that the patient inserts his foot in hot water and makes friction on that area where the veins appear; then over the joint of the foot he ties a bandage; and at the location of the vein you cut it apparent and from there its branches spread out on the face of the foot.
And therefore perform the femoral incision wide open or tie the bandage where you cut the artery, which is better and more secure.
And if you perform the femoral incision on the face of the foot, then you must protect the nerves that are left on the face of the foot, and place your incision over the area where you make the cut transversely, as if you were going to incise it.
And let the femoral incisions be vertical.
But if the emission of blood is forbidden; then you immerse the foot in hot water and let the blood flow in that area where it should be evacuated.
If the femoral incision is made incorrectly in the first attempt, then redo the femoral incision a little, for the location is salt; and do not fear its malignity, but rather protect yourself from the nerves as we have said.
And make the incision on the other foot in the same manner.
And for the sciatic vein, as we have said previously, you should make the incision at the point where the artery divides.
And the outcome of the femoral incision is pain in the hip when it is due to severe injury or infection.
And the quality of the femoral incision is that the patient enters bath, and tightens and strengthens his thigh with a thin long bandage under the knee four fingers above the incision, for it does not show otherwise.
And when it appears, then you perform the femoral incision as each method is at your disposal and according to the transversal cut, which is better; or insert there through an incision or extract it through extraction, for the location is salt.
And it is often in the big toe; and if you find it and it does not appear by touch, then incise some branch of it, and that is which appears on the side of the foot opposite the auricular and annular toes.
And guard the nerves, and let the quantity of blood flow that you desire.
And then release the constriction and place your hand over the incision site to strengthen it, so that it heals slightly.
For ventilation and of the qualities to use with those.
Ventilations are of corns, or of ear, or of eye.
And ventilation is performed according to two methods: one is by incision and extraction of blood, and the other is by ventilation without incision.
And this ventilation without incision is performed according to two methods, which either use fire or without fire.
And at the vents that are administered by scarification and extraction of scabs, there are four locations of the body, of which one where the vents are paused is at the nostrils, and is the very last part of the head; and the next best location of the two parts of the neck together; and vents of the chin leave the jaw behind and then from the mouth; and vents of the nasal passages; and vents of the throat, and it is on the end of the larynx; and vents of the ears, and are about the size of two brasses; and vents of the two spines; and vents of the loins, and are on the side of the back; and vents of the two thighs; and vents of the two hips.
And vents are not used to extract the scab but rather on the small veins scattered in the flesh, and by this no virtue is lost through those, thus as it is a remedy by phlebotomy; nor should vents be made with fire or several fires in any illness caused by congestion where the body is fully evacuated.
But if necessity provokes the use of vents for an illness or during its continuance, administer it at the beginning of the month and at the end, and in the middle of the month and at any time.
And therefore, when times occur for any of those causes, and precisely if it is in the third or fourth part of the month, then they command ventilation to be made rather than after two or three hours have passed.
And the reason for ventilating the neck is that when you apply pressure to the head and what is embedded in the eyes; more correct is that this be close to the evacuation of the entire body.
And this flask is at the location of craniotomy.
And it is not recommended to use that which is filled with pus or in which there is a catarrh, as it causes great harm.
And for this reason, I do not recommend using those of the elderly, in which there are gouty ailments.
But rather for those who have continued over it, an oblivion is caused; and for this reason, you should command the applier to place his hand slightly on the ventosa at the edges of the area treated, to prevent the generation of oblivion.
But the ventosa of alkahel is at the location of the craniotomy of the vein fusca and basilica: and for this reason, it helps in asthma, and in the constriction of air and in the rupture of the windpipe, and in coughing, and in repletion.
And it is recommended to slightly warm the alkahel ventosa, for if it is left cold at the site, it generates weakness in the body and stomach.
And the inhalation of almond confers on headaches and ocular pain, migraines, prefocacio, and toothaches; it is in place of basilica phlebotomy.
And ensure that the inhaler does not press his hand on the scarification so as not to cut the artery and disturb the flow of blood.
And with inhalation, let the menthol confer relief for alcohol in the mouth, and corruption of the gingiva, and a semblance to those illnesses that are in the mouth and are located near the alveolar bone. It is in place of phlebotomy of the alvine vein that is in the upper and lower lips.
And the inhalation that is made over two spoons confers cathartic effects, which is done by restoring temperature.
And the inhalation of the two divided parts inside the flasks confers rejuvenizing effects similar to phlebotomy of three veins, which are the basilica, fusca, and cephalic. For that extracts the blood from all those veins, especially the smaller ones in the flesh, and those finer veins between the larger ones where the extraction reaches the three veins.
And command the fan to blow not upon the incision, for the area is stripped of flesh, and leave only the nerves and arteries.
And it is a fan with which air is blown and you apply it to the hemorrhoids of the buttocks and to the ulcers, but leave them.
And ensure that you command the fan to be a large one, made of silk, for the area requires strong dryness; and use strong light thin fans in incision.
More fans from the legs decrease manifestly, for they carry the scum from the whole body, and relieve ancient pains in the kidneys and the uterus, and of the bladder; and provoke menstruation, and relieve both pain and distension; and are in place of the flebotomy of two sophenas, and hanged, and of two ankles.
But they also inflame the whole body and cause syncope in many people.
And of the fans, those for hanging are closely related to the fans for two legs.
And the quality of the position of the vents is to place the vent at the beginning wide and squeeze by tempered suction, and do not prolong the position of the vents, but pause them slightly, leave them constantly, and let the humors come to the area by equal occurrence. And do not cease to repeat this until the area is already reddening and swelling, and the redness of the sore appears.
And then you incise and repeat the suction little by little, and carefully consider the disposition of the body.
If the person has tender flesh due to dampness, ensure that you incise only once and not more, so that the area does not become ulcerated.
And command the ventillator to widen the incision slightly, and facilitate the suction.
And if the sore is swollen, then you must incise twice; in the first incision, open the way for subtilization to the sore and its moisture. Moreover in the second for the careful examination of the removal of the large bowels.
And if the bowels are foul-smelling, then let scarification be performed on the fourth day so that it may heal.
And finally, when we want to extract the bowels little by little or only a small amount, suffice us one scarification.
And if we want the extraction of foul-smelling bowels, perform a major scarification; and if we know that the bowels are large, then we must perform a broad scarification.
And the term of scarification in which is the depth of the incision only.
And if the one from which the incision is large, hard, dark, and its pores are wide, then the areas for the cups should be anointed gradually, openly resolving; if it is in summer, then use oil of aloes or oil of violet or oil of balm or oil of frankincense; and if it is in winter, then use oil of narcissus or oil of marigold or oil of chamomile or of bowels, and to those similar.
And if the excess is large, apply, then oil of saffron, or balsam oil, or aloes wood oil, or nutmeg oil, and similar to them.
And if the fan is of broad pores with tender flesh, then it should be prohibited from oil, and to these places near the pores of the fan, apply water washed or cold water, or water of solanum, or water of cowage, and similar to those.
And for that of which the wound is due to damp moisture, wash its pores with wine, or water of myrtle and sumac, and similar to those.
And for that of which the excesses are large, wash its pores with old wine, or water of santisc (which is marjoram), or decoction of nutmeg, or chamomile, and similar to those.
And it should be kept before bathing; having it should be administered immediately after the bath for one or two hours, and it should sleep near the fan.
What must be done that the wind-disposing and blood-letting occur before the releasing of winds.
When you consider the beginning: when the wind-drawer or the one who is to be blood-let is choleric and windy with a sharp pain and inflammation, then you should take causes that cool down, such as sour milken glands, endive in vinegar, and laxatives, julips, and their like.
And give them foods such as beans, chicken livers, and fatty meats, and foods seasoned with acids, and similar to these.
And for him whose complexion is phlegmatic, you should give him to drink essarop of almond milk, or essarop of asecanabin of seeds, sumac, and wine mixed with honey and vinegar; and it should be ordered that he use moderation in drinking and eating, and avoid foods like beans, canabis, pissers (a type of herb), and petiz (a type of chicken).
And you should ensure that on the day of wind-drawing and blood-letting, his drinking is greater than his eating.
And it should be given to be drunk in some hours to some men strychnine alkaloid, or musk medicines, so as musk or acelita before ventilation or before phlebotomy or nearby, so that the principal members may be comforted and the fever subside; and it should not be taken by those who are scalded.
May the ventilation that is for his scarring be ventilation placed on the liver, and over gout and podagra, and over the navel, in the places of the joints, and the side, since these members do not suffer scarring upon themselves.
And it is not desired for those [scars] but for the fever of the member, thus as we place a cupping on the breast in illness of flux of fever from the blood of the nose; and we use this to dissolve the local fatness of the member, thus as we place it on the belly and the navel; for that rarifies the member and heats it and reduces the pain which resolves the fatness.
And it is cupped over the flanks when there are accidents in their operation or stone, for by virtue of its strong suction, the cupping relieves the pain and expels the stone from its place.
And it seems when it is placed on the liver and spleen, one should notice distension in those enclosed areas.
These distensions are treated with suction in some applications; and sometimes with heat.
And in some applications, they are administered full of clear water for the ailments of the spleen.
And this is to ensure the distension is filled and becomes larger, it should be clear water alone or water in which suitable herbs have been boiled.
Form of the distension applied with heat: let the diameter of the orifices be two fingers, according to how we have formed them; and the quantity of the decoction be half a palm; and it should be in the length thereof, in the place that is in the circuit, the size thereof, I take it small according to the quantity that enters into it one needle.
Let it be made of wormwood or citrus, large leaves, hyssop, equal and thin so that it does not lead the member to deviate from its position over it.
And place a candle on the middle of the patient's thigh or leg where it is cauterized by the flame.
And this large basin is greater than the one we have used; and the small amount of water according to the ailments and the condition of the one who uses it.
And the suction cups for children and those who are fatigued are different from those used for young people and pregnant women.
And the quality of cauterizing this suction cup with fire on the member is to extend the material over the fire of decent wood before a small wax candle, and place that over the middle of the thigh transversely in the middle location of the suction cup, so that the fire is ignited around the area where it is placed without burning the patient's body.
And then it is placed on the patient's member, and the same place as we have said is used. When we have the suction cups and do not need to hold the described place and do not let it come out or burn with vapor over that thread, then the suction cup will soon dissolve.
And then heat the poultice according to its manner, and repeat it if you need to do so.
In the case of ventosa (cupping) used for the illness of pleurisy, it is applied with water, in which there is no transverse or longitudinal scar, and it is not applied unless it is filled with water, and is placed over the part only as needed.
And this is the form of the cup: And this cupping device, the larger it is, the better, so that it can receive a great quantity of water.
Capitol. xcvi.
Sanguissuguas are not administered in major members but in the members where the position of cups is impossible due to their small size, such as the tongue and similar parts; or on a member naked of flesh, such as the nose and similar areas.
And the quality of using those that you have found to be sanguissuguas in the boiled and purified waters.
And after they are laid down in warm water until they become relaxed, and no cause of swelling remains in their belly; then the body should be evacuated at the beginning with bloodletting and fomentations; then rub the limb of the patient until it becomes red; then place them over it.
And when they are filled and swollen.
And if possible, apply fomentation to the area with fomenting herbs, which is more effective in youth.
And if not, then wash the area with warm water and apply cold water; then rub and express it.
And if the course of the blood is prolonged to the site of the vessels, and where it tends to accumulate, then insert a cloth in cold water, and place it over the area until the accumulation subsides.
And if the blood is multiplied, then sprinkle vitriol trisulphate or powders similar to it in nature from stanching causes over it, until the bleeding is stopped; or place compresses of boiled fava beans on the area, and leave them until the fava beans adhere to the area, and the bleeding is stopped.
And dig, if necessary, repeated bleeding, when possible change those.
And if the bleeding is prohibited by suspension, then apply heat to the area where recent blood has gathered or insert a needle into the areas where it is still oozing; and subsequently pause, waiting until the blood flow lessens.
And when you want them to subside, powder the area with a little bitter almond, or salt, or ashes, and apply it soon.
Thus start the procedures of the fourth part: of restoration. This chapter is necessary knowledge in the art of medicine; and it concerns the restoration of fractures and dislocations in bones.
Oh, son, know that this chapter is known by the medical texts, the vulgar ones, and those who have not studied the free works of the Ancients or read a single letter from them.
And for this reason, this method of the scientists in our land is kept private; and I have not forgotten it during all that time; and I have not adopted what I have learned here, but only through a long period of reading the free works of the Ancients and studying them with understanding, from which I extracted the science.
And direct my experiments and studies in the length of my life.
And I have already described in this chapter everything that concerns my science and about which I have conducted my experiments; now I shall abbreviate this to you others and deliver this from the occupation of lengthening. And I shall abbreviate this in the end of abbreviation; and I have shown this in the end of declaration; and I have formed these notes with forms of instruments that are administered there, as is done by addition of declaration, thus as I have done in two preceding chapters.
First chapter.
Sum up and collect the main points regarding fractures of bones, from those for which a preliminary discussion is necessary before we begin the recall of various parts of bone injuries. Begin by summarizing the main points of this discourse at the prologue of this chapter; and those chapters that must be understood by the artisan at the beginning, you shall stand firm on the truth of those. It is for you and those who are prompt to know or learn this noble art from others.
And therefore say that when accidents occur to any fracture or dislocation or twist or settlement, when you must touch at the beginning for ligation or remove it, or both together, if no cause is prohibited, such as weakness of virtue, or it is one on which an accident occurs, or very in decrepitude, or is a time of vehement heat, or of vehement cold.
And therefore it is content in food consisting of herbs fresh and of flesh of pheasant and of crab; and we prohibit fatty meats and fullness from foods and from all food that fills the veins with sanguine, until you are safe from abscess caut, and if you fear effusion of matter in the member.
And therefore return the patient to its primary regimen according to the custom of the time.
And therefore, when the broken bone begins to be restored, then you must feed the patient with nutritious foods rich in both liquid and solid substances, and viscous ones, such as foods made from cooked wheat in water, rice, eggs, fish, cow's stomachs, nuts, fresh meat, and other similar foods. And with this regimen, coagulation of the fracture is induced slightly and honey is applied.
And you should know that bones crack in those men who are in the prime of life and in the decrepit, it is not possible for them to be continuous and consolidated according to their nature due to the drying out of their limbs.
Moreover, however, nature adjusts and amends over the broken bone from any part due to a cause resembling glue in which it thickens and adheres strongly to that, congealing them together, bringing forth the end of strength and firmness, just as fire at the beginning, and in no way prohibiting that from its works.
And for this reason, it is necessary to restrain the patient's diet, a diet in which there is gravity, viscosity, and thickness, as we have said.
And know that the species of fracture are diverse according to the diversity of the members, for a fracture of the bone of the thigh is different from the fracture of the skull骨；而脚骨的骨折不同于腿骨的骨折；同样，所有其他部位的骨折彼此之间也各不相同。
And I will recount all species of fracture, expanded in their separate chapter distinct from the others.
A great diversity of fracture in itself. And the species of fracture of the bone are diversified in themselves; for there is an arcuate fracture and another that occurs at the nodes; and sometimes fractures occur according to the length of the bone: and these are the fractures of the suture, nodes, and additions both present and absent, thus as when a pen is prepared to write, there is a fracture by cutting and disruption in the head, and a small fissure.
And to each species there is a specific or torment in restoration, as will be recounted separately in their places.
A sign of fracture of the bone. And by this it is known that a bone is fractured: there is curvature of it, and an elevation and prominence of it in sensation, and its pain when you press upon it with your hand.
And therefore, when there is neither apparent curvature nor pain, you should make your touch active when you touch the bone; if the patient does not experience great pain, then this is not a fracture.
It is possible that it is curvature or a small fracture, so you should feel it with your hand and by compression of the whole; then place your hand over it for a while, on which you apply some medicines from which you recall a significant effect at that place; and gradually it will straighten due to subtle constriction.
And feel that the place when it is curved but not split into two or more parts as does not happen in rupture, such that the whole part of its composition is softened; then you should begin to correct it gradually, having an abscess form on it with a pointed cautery.
And if an abscess occurs at that place, then let it be for some days until the abscess ceases; and then equalize it according to any method you can of levitation and skill.
And know that the restoration and piercing of it is lighter than the place where you are operating.
And then strengthen it according to the memory of it that will come.
More if in the bone you have found it, then when an extension of this broken member into two parts is necessary, whether it be the hand or the foot; or with your hand if the member is small; or with two strings or one string and the hand.
And place your position such that you equalize the member's location according to its natural figure, while the parts are extended from the broken member, then you must force yourself to return those additions with skill and according to any manner you can in their places.
And guard yourself according to your strength so that it does not happen to the patient due to your operation causing pain or injury; and force yourself according to your own power to place one bone with its companion bone according to their best forms.
And ensure that at that profitable hour you touch it with your hand, and if you see any other cause different, correct it and equalize it by the quantity of your virtue.
And avoid excessive extension and compression, as foolish doctors sometimes cause an abscess through their operations by these means, or cause contraction in the member, as we have seen through their operations.
The quality of the injury of the affected member is such that I describe; so that you may know that the members you break are diverse in their smallness and in their largeness and in the form of those.
And of those that are small like the arm and the thigh and similar to those, see that the wrapping is of soft fine cloth.
And of those that are large like the thigh or the chest, see that in those there is a wrapping hard and tight, for the tight binding connects the large and strong member from all sides during injury, ensuring that no stain enters.
And then begin, after your first dressing, loosely apply three or four wrappings according to the part affected; and firmly hold your hand around each wrapping.
And then place it at the uppermost part of the location of the fracture, and firmly ensure that your wrapping is as tight as you have made the area of the fracture. And then gradually extend the covering of the fracture area a little, and gently relax the tension little by little, during which time you should take from the area a large part.
And then take another bandage and wrap it around the injured area over the covering, and gradually bring the coverings to the part of the fracture; and let your operation be in the tension of the covering and in the relaxation of that according to what we have said in the first covering above.
And then place the stopa or cloth bandage where the tortuosity of the fracture is equalized, if there is any tortuosity; otherwise, do not pause at all for any reason.
And then place it over the other bandage, and gradually equalize on these coverings, making them decently tight as soon as possible, if there is no swelling or abscess in the area; otherwise, pause over what is the abscess there and what causes the swelling; leave that for a few days; then strengthen the coverings.
And let the stays of the patient's side be broad and well-formed; or made of pine wood; or of palm ribs; and let the width of each stay conform to this form and figure:
However, ensure that the bandage placed over that fracture is thicker and a bit wider than the other bandages, and the length of the splint according to the size and magnitude as read on the member; and place another bandage firmly around the splint according to our first fixation; and apply it properly with a good plaster as we said regarding the fixation, and ensure that your fixation is stronger at the location of the fracture, and the more it is extended from the fracture, the weaker the fixation.
Ensure that the threads are medium in thickness and subtlety, and use linen; if the threads are thick, as I have seen in some operations where they used their fingers to place thick cords of thread, it is a great error when applying the fixation with equality.
And similarly, thin threads are not convenient, for you will not be able to apply the fixation with those that you want, and it is not necessary that there be less than one finger's width between splints.
And if the patient is injured at the extremities of the vessels near the location, then place those of stopped wool or crimsoned wool between them so that it does not harm the area.
Some fractures are cracks, and accidents of disruption in the chain, and I will recall that in the Capitol according to their singularity.
And know that for all broken members, they are not set by vessels on the first day; this cause is because the member, when large, cannot bear pressure from vessels but after about 3 to 7 days or more, according to your safety of the onset of abscess.
And this is the method of plasters with which the Ancients restored, which are applied over fractures and dislocations.
Method of plastering for the reduction and restoration of fractures, suitable for complex cases and especially for women and children, which is made from powder of mill, i.e., the marrow that comes from the movement of the grain in the walls of the mill.
And you should keep it thus, but sieve that white powder of almonds, and place the preparation not too thick nor too thin; and then use that.
Another way to plaster for fractures, dislocations, and sprains: take asafetida, lapdanum, acacia, onion, and myrrh, which are scraped from the root of salvamar (a type of wild mignonette), all of them a drachm each; myrrh and aloes, five drachms each; alcohol, twenty drachms. Scrape all of them, sieve them, and mix them with alcoholic water or with white powder of almonds if the wound is deep. Then use this plaster, which is of good composition, to restore lightly broken bones and cover it well.
Another way to make a plaster that helps with fractures and sprains: take myrrh and one part of white alfalfa, each a drachm; myrrh and aloes, five drachms each; acacia, six drachms; and Armenian wax, twenty drachms.
All of them should be ground in a mortar with much water, sieved, and prepared with water or white powder of almonds, and then administered.
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.
More in this poultice there is no virtue of restoration, of abscess cautery and expel pains properly.
Another way of poultice that restores blocked passages: take leaves of fig tree and leaves of wild poppy; combine them all and make a poultice of them.
A brief way of poultice to administer for the restoration of bone fracture and when you want resolution of abscess: mix roots of algae, chamomile, and flowers of violets, with wheat flour, all in equal parts; sift them together and soak them in vinegar, if the limb is not scalded.
More if it is scalded, then moisten that with water of fennel or with water and use it.
Another stronger way of poultice for resolution that is better than the first, when you encounter a hard abscess and need to restore the limb: mix roots of algae, seeds of flax, safflower, clover, marigold, flowers of violet, chamomile, all in equal parts and equally; all should be sifted and soaked in water of lime, or water boiled twice, or in vinegar, according to the quality of the limb and the color of it.
May Hippocrates not say in his book that it should be placed over the limb immersed you must restore it rather a cauterization made of wax and oil and no other cause; and recommend that it be mixed between thickness and subtlety.
May Gualia be seen that it should be placed over the limb broken you must restore it and the causes in which desiccation of low temperature such as myrrh, frankincense, and similar to them of those causes that we have recommended.
Method of plaster that comforts injury and pain: take equal parts of crushed celandine, bark of a cut-down man, oryx horn, and althea, and salt; mix them, sift them, wrap them up, and make into a plaster.
May the quantity according to which you should let the wound soak and then properly disjoint it be that you consider whether pain nor pruritus has occurred nor is the bone broken, then do not disjoin from several days. And if pain vehemently or itching or inflammation occurs in the area, then you should cauterize or disjoint it at once, and apply the plaster to it.
And take a cloth and sponge of seawater, and immerse that in clear water, and with that wash the area until the swelling and pain cease; then place the member to rest for an hour; afterwards cover it with well-soaked wool submerged in wine and oil or rubbed oil, and wrap it overnight until you are sure there is no abscess, and let the inflammation of the member subside, and relieve the pain.
And then apply that fine stricture and patch only lightly with your first constriction, and keep it subtle until it is healed.
And if you see that the abscess and the swelling and the pain and the inflammation and all the accidents are already relieved, and there is no need for a patch or stricture, then apply it as you did at the beginning equally.
And if no cause affecting the member occurs among those we have mentioned, then do not remove it but leave it for three to four days or five to seven; sometimes all of this is left for twenty days according to how you judge by the healing of the member, as we said, until the fracture adheres and rests on the coagulation of the flesh there.
And then adjust the tighter fit more than in your first fit, and adjust to the swelling of the patient's belly, according to whether the recollection of it precedes.
And if you see the place of the fracture already dry and shriveled more than concave, then perceive that nutrition is prohibited from reaching there; therefore, soak that area entirely with fresh water for a full day; and let this be done over three days; and ease the tension a little, and by this operation supply the member with nutrition, and it will heal slightly.
And what the fracture restorers do another time when it is not restored to the beginning, according to whether it is concave and is restored according to tortuosity, is an error according to their operation, and great fear; if this were right as they enlarged the Ancients in their books and advised on this matter.
And I have not seen any of them do this, so it is more reasonable that this does not work.
Chapter on Fractures: When an injury occurs in the head.
The species of fractures are spots, and their figures are diverse, and the causes are distinct, for some fracture is made by spaza impact, and the impact obstructs all the bone within the socket, which leaves the bone thus as in the wood, and by this this species is named ascial; or spaza incides some part of the bone, and incides the flesh but does not pass the incision into the marrow thereof; and this species of fracture is named levatio absolute.
The plague of these two fractures is great or small, and of the fracture that is contricious or abrasive; its cause is impact from a fall or building on stone, and they resemble each other.
This fracture is penetrating and already approaches the periosteum which leaves the bone; or it is in the face of the bone, and the plague of these two fractures is great or small.
And of the fracture, it is weakened in the bone, in the subtlety of the small hair [cancellous bone], and by this it is named this species of fracture capillary.
And this is a fracture that is caused by compression or impact, resembling such that some layer of the bone enters the internal parts, and it occurs in the concave location as when you strike a metal plate and its entry into the internal parts.
And this is most commonly found in the bodies of humid bones, such as those of children.
And all these types of comminuted fractures, they are bad as if separated by stakes. And I will apply a warm remembrance to its place.
And we know all these types of fracture through detection at those sites and through inquiry about their pain and the appearance of the torn flesh that is upon them.
And the capillary type is known because it is discovered on the bone, is abraded, and limits around it with pain, for the fracture appears black.
More in the cure of fractures consider the beginning of the patient's symptoms, and if you observe through these symptoms what they signify manifestly by signs of fear, such as vomiting of bile, extension, loss of understanding, loss of voice, fainting, acute fever, swelling of the extremities, and redness of those areas, and resemblance to these symptoms in the major positions, then you should doubt that it is not healing.
And if you encounter accidents not commonly seen, then hope for recovery, as you begin the cure of it.
And the cause is that if the patient comes to you in the beginning of the attack as injured and this occurs during the days of winter, then consider that you study in the bowels of the bone on the fourteenth day according to all disposition.
And if it is during the days of summer, then consider that you have cuts exposing the bone on the seventh day, having that what has been left on the bone is corrupted by the fatty tissue, and that accidents occur which we have recounted.
And if the fracture has already reached the fatty tissue covering the marrow, and is broken into many pieces and is rough, then consider that you must incise the fractured part and smooth it out, according to what I have recounted to you.
And when you incise the head of the injured thigh, uncover over the bone according to custom and your method as is possible according to the shape of the injury, and let it be shallow over the thigh.
And if it happens to you that you must detect the bone, flux of blood or abscess cautery, then you press against it with what fits, and you fill the place with cloths infused in wine and rubbed oil, and make the wound rest until the abscess is sedated, and you are sure of the flux of blood; and then begin in the circuit of the bone and in its excision.
And this is according to one of two ways of operation.
And one way is that you incise the bone with an incisor straight down, and this is its form: And then administer another incisor here, a little more lateral than the first; and this is its form:
And then administer more the incisor more lateral than the second.
And make sure that you have the number of different incisors, some of which are more lateral than others; and some of them are shorter than the others and are at the rear of their extremities in acuity, and be made of iron or steel.
And use their assistance in percussion over the incisions to prevent them from contracting and leading it there.
And if the bone is strong and hard, first drill in the circuit around it before you make incisions with the probes, which you call shallow probes.
And they are thus called so because they do not reach the end of the bone's length, but rather to what is close to it. Therefore, the probe has a round extremity or edge resembling a small margin or circle, which you prohibit from being submerged and passing through the thickness of the bone.
And it is convenient that you use a large number of probes, each suitable for the thickness of each bone. While the head of each probe should be sharp at its extremity, the length and shortness in quantity should correspond to the thickness of that particular bone.
And this is the form of three types of probes: The quality of drilling around the broken bone is to place the probe on the bone and rotate it with the needles called such that you know the bone has been penetrated; then move the probe to another location, and ensure that what is left behind takes the quantity of the size of the ray or surrounds it.
And then incise with the scalpel where it is between each tendon of the bone, and make that small opening subtle which you can do at the end of levitation, as we have said, while excavating the bone, or by your hand, or by some other cause through certain instruments which you will apply to it, such as forceps and subtle scissors.
And see that you be careful that the scalpel does not touch any part of the joint.
And so, after you have circled the bone and perforated it, and if it is to be separated from the joint, continue with it, and extract that part. See that you rasp and smooth it out to match the roughness of the bone with another instrument resembling a scalpel, but see that it be finer and more subtle than other scalpels.
And if any small part of the bones is broken and fragmented, then take that with ease using one of the instruments; then cure the wound with lint and ointments, which we have said.
And the other method of operation is lighter, far from fear, which he named Gualia and left by great laud; this is its saying: at the beginning it is necessary for you to start uncovering the part of the bone in which the fracture is most intense and most evident, when you have uncovered that part and placed your hand gently but happily on the extremity of this incisive instrument of which this is the form:
And the lens-shaped part is round and does not incise for any reason, while the acute part divides into two lengths forward, as you see; so that the lens-shaped part is adjusted to the chisel along the face of the acute part incident on the bone.
And then strike on the incisive part with a small hammer as you incise the entire bone with ease, and you be certain of the panniculus that it does not occur in the accident you fear in any way, and if the medicant was the most fool of all men and the most ignorant of them; certainly, and if he were asleep.
When some cause within the bone of the patella in certain places of the bone, it will incise that part at the extremity of the incised lenticular one, and deliver that part with ease, for it is relieved of its harm and fear.
And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the patella, and what is absceded or remains from the bone is its surface, and it remains in that roughness and subtle layers, then you must rasp that roughness and eradicate those layers with fine razors which you have prepared in various quantities so that you can administer of them the most convenient parts for each location according to where you are conducting your operation on that broken bone and its figure.
And you must administer with your judgment by which you rasp the bone at the beginning using the broad edge of those razors, and then use more of their subtle part, and do not cease to do this continuously until you reach administering the coarse part and the subtle part of all.
In any other small fractures or subtle fractures, you must administer care according to where you are leading towards correction of it.
And it is because they are not eased on all those who have studied that art. And place ourselves above what we have written about in great fractures.
And if the bandage is cut when you excise the bone, then take a piece of cloth according to the size of the wound, and submerge it in olive oil, and place it over the wound opening; then take another piece of folded or triple-folded cloth and submerge it in wine and olive oil, and place it over the first one; do this lightly enough that you do not weigh down the dressing. And administer ointment on top, but do not press it so strongly as to weigh down the dressing.
And leave it to this treatment for one day or two until you are sure of the abscess; then remove it and administer medicines that have excessive dryness, such as linseed and wheat flour, and powder of thyme and of myrtle, and similar.
And you make of these medicines a powder that is sprinkled over the wound, such as being dry; generally, administer to it all medicine of the property of which cleanses and does not irritate.
And guard thy virtue that the wound in thy cure be clean; and not surdicious of ointment or other; nor layst thou to add virulence therein; for when adjusted upon the linen of the brain, corrupt that and spoil it, and incur about the malady nearby this malignity.
And thou incurrest in the sinciput of the head, as from it is modified the bone and especially when the cure thereof is neglected, and blackness appears on the surface thereof; and therefore consider when thou incurrest in the malady the accidents that we have said, know that it is pernicious to him altogether.
And if no blackness arises but from the medicine that is applied above, and is by virtue of that medicine that it causes that blackness, then take part of honey and three parts of rubbed oil, mix those lines on a cloth, and place it over the sinciput; and cure it with the spices of cure that are suitable until it is healed.
Third chapter.
For the restoration of the nose when it is broken.
Know that it is not broken but split into two parts, or one of those few cracks, because in the nose there are two bones; the part you see is cartilaginous and is not broken, so do not damage it but rub, soothe, and apply gentle pressure.
But if one of the two parts is broken, you must introduce the little finger into the nostril and equalize the fracture inside according to your diagnosis, and externally, so that the nose returns to its natural figure. And do this for you with ease, and guard yourself that the pain does not worsen due to your operation on the patient.
And if the fracture is in the cartilaginous part of the nose, and your finger does not reach there, then you must equalize it at the end of the bone where there is a slight swelling.
And if the fracture is in two parts, then you make it appear as such.
And apply you to the restoration of it on the first day of the fracture, if possible; otherwise, shortly after the seventh or half day, provide it with the rest of the apothecary.
And insert into the extremity of the nose a piece of linen cloth, if the fracture is in one part, or two cloths, if the fracture is in two parts, and let them expand fully to fill the nose.
And some of the ancient restorers say that the cloths should be soaked in honey, and changed throughout the day, but this is not seen by me; instead, use a piece of linen cloth soaked in honeycombed powder. And allow the cloth to remain until the bone is set, and the cartilage becomes hardened.
And sometimes insert into the nose instead of a cloth, pure honey wrapped in linen cloth; and when the nasal fracture is severe enough that breathing is not forbidden.
And this cause is not necessary for you; and if you wish, do this, and if you wish, use cloths.
And if another abscess occurs, cauterize it, plug the nose with a cork or woolen cloth soaked in vinegar and olive oil, or with a diaphoretic.
And if no abscess occurs, when it is necessary to plug it from the outside with sesame seed flour and pine gall powder in honey; then place your hand on the patient's forehead, and do not plug the nose for any reason.
And if the nose bones are broken with a small fracture or are reduced, when it is necessary to split those bones, and extract them with instruments suitable for those; then at the site of the incision, treat that with what encases and consolidates, and with plasters as appropriate.
And if a boil occurs inside the nose, when it is necessary to treat that with washes and administer lead canulas until it is completely healed.
Chapter IV.
On the restoration of the jaw when broken.
When the jaw is broken and the fracture is not displaced, examine whether the fracture is only superficial and not broken into two parts and bent inwardly, in which case its prognosis is mild.
And thus, if the fracture is on the right side, you should introduce the left hand index finger into the mouth of the patient; similarly, if the fracture is on the left jaw, then introduce the said index finger from the right hand; and push the yellowish matter of the fracture inwardly with ease to the parts outward, with your other hand from the part outward of the bone; do this properly as much as necessary.
And if the fracture of the jaw is already separated into two parts, then you should administer extension to both parts according to the right alignment so that the healing of them is possible.
And if you encounter loosening of teeth with disruption, then strengthen those of which you expect to lose on the edge of gold or silver or copper; and place a cautery over the broken jaw, and place it over the doubled cloth, and place it over the large star-shaped stake decently made, or one piece equal in length to the jaw; and place that above as appropriate for your ligature and the application, so long as it is not destroyed.
And command the patient to rest and be tranquil, and pause his meals for lion's share.
And if you estimate that the figure has already been altered in any manner, then on the seventh day you should apply it; and then correct what has already been altered in it and plaster it with powder of moly, or with ash of hyssop, or with flour of cumin, provided that you have scraped off the cerot of it, and place woolen cloth over the plaster.
And when this plaster is applied and adjusted to it, and the position of the bone is not altered, leave it as it is, without removing it until the fracture is strong and healed. For major fractures heal in about three weeks.
And if another time an abscess occurs, then administer what we have said previously in the treatment of it until it is healed and drained.
And if the fracture is displaced, then consider whether it is a serious separation or displacement. Then you should carefully examine these displacements and treat them as required for their removal.
And if the wounds' openings are wide, then enlarge them according to the quantity of your necessity by means of bloodletting.
And soon after you have completed those stages, and from there it will no longer be necessary to do so, then enlarge the wounds' openings if they are wide; otherwise, place one of the dressings that you prepare over it and cover it with flesh until it is healed.
Capitol V.
For the restoration of the furcula when it is dislocated.
When the sternum is fractured, in the middle part you must break the muscle, and that fracture is made in one of three ways.
When it is fractured, separated, or separated into two parts without going through stages, the restoration is easier; when such stages occur in it, the restoration is difficult; or when the fracture is through the wound.
And the operation in this case, when the fracture is through the wound, is that you have two ministers present, so that one holds the assistant and follows the broken sternum, and the other extends the neck at that part.
And then equalize the fracture by applying pressure where it is made according to its shape, and do not let it be in a prominence or depression.
And if you need more extension, when you place the patient's limb on a pillow or cloth, let it be the size according to your necessity; extend and elevate the femur and compress the pillow with your hand so that you equalize the fracture as needed.
And if you cannot extend the end of the femur outward because it is stuck in the pelvis, when you can have the patient lie on their side on a pillow, place a cushion halfway down the length of the muscle.
And the surgeon presses on the muscle at the sides until the femur is elevated to its place in the pelvis, and then you realign the fracture and equalize it with the bones mentioned.
But if you feel the roots of the femur and they are soft, when you can cut there and remove those roots with ease.
And if it is retained in the bone, then you skillfully incise it with one of the instruments you have prepared for this, after placing your hand on the furcula to hold the instrument that serves the chisel; and this instrument is made of wood or iron, of which this is its form:
And it resembles a spoon, of which this is its concavity; and its width depends on what you need of it, according to the size of the bone or its smallness.
But the length of it should be according to what is possible in the operation; it has two extremities thus like you see, and one extremity is broad while the other is narrow.
And if the disruption of the wound you have incised when you have extracted the fragment of the bone is large, and you are sure there is an abscess forming, then you adjust the two lips of the wound with sutures.
And if the disruption is small, or you fear an abscess forming, then you manage the wound with cloths and powders according to the extent of the incision of the wound.
And if an abscess occurs, then fill a cloth with vinegar and olive oil, heat it, and place it over that area.
And always ensure that the stick is not placed over the broken bone; so that you can see the wound every day, when the bandage becomes moist or you notice the stick has dried out, then you adjust this and strengthen the binding.
And then place the patient's head on their pillow, and place some padding under their neck so that when they lie down at night, a small cushion supports them; thus raising the assistant under them, and therefore the elevation of the fracture of the furcula is raised to the elevation of the muscle; or the arm attached to their neck.
And do not remove the bandage unless there is an occurrence at the site previously or abscess within twelve days.
And then renew the plaster if you see any change in its appearance, and adjust it to fit properly and restore it, allowing the fracture of the furcula to heal and coagulate.
And it is strengthened and made comfortable according to the need in twenty-eight days, and in some cases, it is done in less time than that.
Chapter VI.
On the restoration of the fracture of the shoulder.
The spatula tart is broken at the lateral side of the fracture and not from it, but along the edges.
And when the place is broken — and it is broken in the middle of the place — and is known only by touch, then according to the figure of the fractured bone, prepare it and reduce it according to the natural figure in every manner which is possible for you.
And then place powder of ground album of wheat and stoped lion on the area; and then place powdered duplicate cloth; and then place a thin slice of table wax according to the quantity of the spoonful, or a little more.
But if you leave the wax slice concave in some part of the spoonful, then level that concavity with stoped lion, and then place the wax slice according to equality.
And then strengthen on top with a well-constructed bandage and firmly place the wax inside so that it does not shift from its position.
And consider the bandage on each day; and every time it becomes softened, reapply another one and strengthen and equalize the wax if it shifts from its position.
And place the patient on their side.
And the spatula is restored in 20 days or in 25.
And when this number is completed, then you dissolve the bond, and know for sure that it belongs to the bones whose initial breaking was not feared nor their dissolution.
And if you proceed from the place of the bone to the ligament and tie it, then cut over it, and hold it, and do as we have said in the fracture of the furcula of satucket, if an abscess occurs here.
Capitol 7.
On the restoration of the fracture of the foot.
The foot sometimes breaks in the middle of its location; however, its ends move and heal and become united.
And the accidents when the foot breaks in its middledecline towards the internal parts and cause great pain, difficulty in walking, coughing, swelling, and fever; they are manifested in the cavity of the broken bone and are not hidden from sensation.
And the restoration is to have the patient lying on their back, place a cushion between their shoulders; then press on the muscles, adjust the spine against the ribs, and perform the operation with subtlety according to every possible and convenient manner until the figure of the bone returns as it should.
And then place the plaster and padding over it, and cover with a thin layer of wax or of tallow and similar in lightness, since you wrap that in cloth; then perform the application gently on the broken bone so it is not bruised; and bind it tightly but decently several times along the back, strengthening that binding. And consider the bandage at all times, and when it becomes softened, strengthen it.
And if necessity causes a suppuration or pus, or pain, or abscess to occur in that area, then you incise and drain it, and eradicate the plaster, and rectify what has occurred by the method of curing; then reduce the amount of plaster, if you see fit, and adjust the binding while it is healing.
Chapter VIII.
For the restoration of the ribs when they are fractured.
Know that a fracture of the ribs occurs only in large areas where they join together; and at their ends in front, such contact does not occur since they are cartilaginous. And the perception of it is not hidden from the senses through the examination of it with the fingers.
And the restoration should be such that you equalize the fracture with your fingers according to the possible method, while it is reduced as it fits, and then apply a plaster and strengthen the broken bone with splints, if needed.
And if the fracture of the ribs is inclining towards the internal parts, then it causes severe and puncturing pain in the patient, similar to the pain that occurs when an abscess has matured. For this reason, you place a dressing on the bone; and it results in difficulty in breathing, coughing, and vomiting due to spasms; and this is of difficult cure.
And already the Ancients were ingenious in such matters dealing with them.
And from them they say: Place the patient in a position where food generates inflammation and swelling, so that the abdomen becomes swollen and extended, and the fracture is pushed to the outward parts.
But let us consider this so that it is not a trivial cause for generating a carbuncle accidentally; and if an accident does occur, then help is already at hand.
And some of them said that it should be placed above the abdomen and close to where it might flow with strength; and this seems reasonable, but nonetheless it is feared that the abdomen might carry the superfluities to the place due to weakness.
And some of them said: Place the area covered with wool that is already submerged in caut oil, and let it be sprinkled with powders between the ribs until it is filled, which should be wrapped tightly like when you wrap something according to its roundness; and then treat the patient with a pleurosis of food and medicine.
And if the patient is greatly constrained causing him not to suffer, and you puncture the skin with a needle to release it, be careful about the patient, then cut over the place, uncovering from the broken rib, and place ourselves over that instrument which we remember from before, and incise the skin easily, and extract that.
And when we adjust the two edges of the wound, if it is large, with suturing, and cure that with plasters until it is healed.
And if an abscess occurs inside, then incise and insert powder in rosin oil, place over the area, and cure the patient with what is appropriate for the abscess inside.
And let it be applied on the lint over which he sleeps, until it is healed.
Capitol. ix.
On the restoration of fracture of the vertebrae of the spine and neck.
Sometimes when there is a fracture of the bones of the neck, and then apply friction and similar to the vertebrae of the spine. And when this happens to someone and you want to know if they will recover or not, then consider whether their pulse is already softened, numbed, and dead and cannot rise, extend, nor strengthen those pulses, and when you constrain them at the wrist or prick them with a needle and do not feel pain in those places, then know that they are not well. In such cases of symptoms, death is likely.
And if you feel pain in those places when you constrain them at the wrist or prick them with a needle, then know that the tip of the bone is saved and that the gout will heal through treatment.
And if you feel along the vertebrae of the neck and want to know if they will recover or not, then consider the pulses in their feet.
And if you find that they are already softened, feel along those areas where pain is felt in the pulses, and when pressing on their wrists, give them air and induce vomiting at their will, and sometimes lift them onto their sides and want to urinate but cannot, then know that it is fatal, and then do not attempt treatment for them.
But if none of these causes occur, the cause is better and lighter.
And the cure for this is to perforate to relieve the abscess by cauterizing where you place over the lower or lateral part of the spine, or with pieces of cloth applied; place this over that area for several days until the abscess is relieved.
And then place one of the comforting and existing plasters, and apply oil over that area; command the patient to rest and be tranquil, and not to sleep on the part where he feels pain until he is healed.
And if it happens that the friction of the bone socket or any separated cause touches it, then you must cauterize the vein and hold the bone; then adjust the two edges of the wound,缝合如果伤口较大；然后用一些肉色的药膏治疗那里，直到痊愈。
But if the lower end of the thigh bone is broken, and it is the end of the femur, then you must insert your left hand's thumb into the buttock, and realign the broken bone with your right hand as much as possible by second-order reduction; then apply a plaster and bandage, if needed, and support that area.
And if you feel broken stages in it, then operate on that, stop it, and treat the wound with a cure that is prepared before it is healed.
Capitol.
For the restoration of the thigh.
The bones of the thighs are broken, and if they break, then the fracture is simply communication at the extremities of those bones and are split in length and decline to the inner parts; and accidents such as pain occur in the area and puncture, and the leg is numbed when it fractures.
And the restoration of it is that you place your hand over that area while it is near the fracture, which has the shape of the bone.
And if the fracture is only at the extremity of the bone, then you align that part according to how it appears to you by equilibrium, aligning it so that it resembles its natural figure.
But if the fracture is in the length or already declines to the inner parts, then you set the leg on its belly while preparing the restoration of that fracture. And when you have equalized it, place a plaster over it, and then place the wooden or copper rod over that, and strongly bind it, about which fear neither puncture nor removal of the rod.
And equalize the cavity by placing what fills it within which that receives the binding according to equality, and command the patient to lie on his back or on his side.
But if an abscess forms, stop the extension of it and its restoration until the abscess is sedated. Then place something that sedates it according to what has been described; then return to its restoration and strongly bind it as appropriate.
And if there arises in the bone suppuration or is comminuted, then treat it accordingly.
Chapter XI.
On the restoration of the fracture of the humerus.
The humerus is that which is between the elbow to the shoulder blade.
And if it is broken, the restoration of it is in one of two ways, of which one is that you take a strip of thick leather according to this form:
And let two threads be at the ends, and then suspend them from the elevated area.
And place the patient on a席卾; and then throw its broken arm over the strip so that it reaches the midpoint of where the curvature of the strip is attached.
And then suspend it over something heavy, or the servant extend it to the parts left; and then the doctor place the fracture at its proper position, so that the fracture returns in the correct manner.
And the other way is that the patient be resuspended over its own neck, and suspend the hand of the shoulder with a thread; then command two servants that one of them hold what is above the fracture with their hands; and the other hold the rest of the patient; and each of them extend to their part.
And if you want the extension to be stronger, then strengthen over the fracture with one ligament and over that with another, and any of the two ministers extend to both their parts.
And so, if the fracture is near the extremity of the muscle, then place the middle part of the ligament over the tendon and leave the other part to cover the fracture.
And similarly, if the fracture is near the knee, then place the ligament over that location and over that knee.
Equalize that with ease and your work, and then strengthen it when it is equalized according to what is needed and applied properly.
But if an abscess forms, then leave the tension within for seven days, and place a pad of moistened wool between that and let it rest with oil rubbed between until the abscess subsides, and then strengthen it.
And the way to strengthen it is to place a plaster over the fracture, and then wrap a cloth around the plaster; then adjust the arm over that support, and place your hand open over its muscle.
And place the cloth firmly over the assistant's arm so that the arm is in the position of a brace, without prohibiting anything due to the broken bone.
And then use braces.
And you should place that brace over the fracture which is wider and stronger than the other braces; and place the distance of the width of one digit between each brace, with the length of the braces according to the breakage plus three digits in total.
And then firmly place the braces at the location of the fracture which I mentioned at the beginning of this chapter.
And ensure that your bandage over the location of the fracture is tighter. And when the fracture is longer, make the bandage less tight.
And so, if you adjust the position of the braces and the bandage as we have said when restoring the limb to its position, then you do this.
And if you fear the formation of an abscess, cauterize, then leave the bandage and braces in place as we have said.
And for three days consider the ligament in all parts to prevent accident or inflammation in the area; or is forbidden food to reach the member by disposition of excess stricture; and therefore correct all this according to what we have said.
If you are confident that no cause will occur of this, then do not loosen the ligature for at least three days or more.
And let the patient's body be on their back, and their hands on their stomach.
And place yourself over a bed of woolen cloth fully covered, and consider at every hour of the night or day that no figure of the broken member be distorted, or that the ligament be softened; therefore correct this entirely with your virtue.
And withhold food from the patient according to the order which we have mentioned before, assuring that the food is subtle at the beginning until it begins to strengthen; then gradually increase the amount of food.
For customarily the legs and their sides are strengthened within forty days; then they should be loosened and bathed, and a salve should be applied to them which corrects that.
And if the fracture is not yet healed, then do not loosen it for that until the ligaments and stitches are removed or after two months.
Chapter 12.
On the restoration of fractures of the arm.
The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the ulna and the radius; of which the former is small, and is that which we call the little bone, while the latter is large and is that which rests on top of the smaller one.
And if the large bone is broken alone, or the small one, and if they are both broken together.
And when the small bone is broken above, then the restoration of it is lighter, and its healing is even lighter.
And when the fracture of the leg is broken, I leave the fracture bad, and the healing of it is difficult.
And worse when they break two stable bones.
Therefore, if the bone that is broken is the small upper leg bone, then it is convenient for the doctor to restore it, which involves a slight extension to facilitate realignment.
But if the large leg bone is broken, then you must apply more significant extension.
And if both leg bones are broken together, then you must apply the traction more forcefully.
And you must place your hand figure to restore it and extend it over a cushion, while the wrist of the hand is above the upper parts, more so than the others, and the auricular finger is below the other fingers, and the leg be centered on a tilted chair.
And place a cushion in front of it at the height or straight, so that the leg does not further strain.
And then the minister extend the arm from that side and place it or bandage it, and another minister extend similarly above.
And then the doctor aligns the bone ends that are displaced according to the best possible alignment.
And if there are displacements in the bone fracture, then you must reduce the entire piece to its place with your virtue.
And if there appears a displaced piece that prevents the continuity of the bone and is not as hoped for in the restoration of it, then you set it aside and reduce it according to the manner we have said above.
But if the fracture is open, I have already treated this separately, and therefore proceed with the treatment of it.
And if an abscess occurs at the beginning of your restoration, then you line a cloth with a wick made of rouged oil and white wax, making it medium in thickness. You tightly wrap this cloth over the area between which the abscess can be drained; then remove the wick and apply a plaster prepared from powder of molybdenum mixed with honey, and place a bandage; then place the bandage over that fracture on the side and stronger.
And know that the number of the bones in the arm I saw in the major dispositions, or rather the fracture in one limb or in two limbs together.
And then place your compression firmly on the location of the fracture more strongly and more vigorously, and the greater the tension on the parts above or below the fracture, the more moderately you should apply the compression according to how the memory of it is recalled at the beginning of the chapter.
And the cloths that you wrap around the fracture should be moistened cloths, neither hard nor rough, and the fat and oil which is strengthened should be of the proper mixture between fine and coarse, as we have recounted.
And consider the limb and the ligament for several days. And if some cause arises for which a correction is necessary, as you foresee what happens to the limb, then make sure that you immerse the limb in water until that disturbance ceases.
And keep the limb from being compressed until it has rested, and then remove the compression.
And if the contraction is already softened and the bone is already set and appears like those, then correct all of this with your virtue.
And consider more if the nourishment is prohibited from reaching the member due to excessive contraction, for then you must soften that a little and leave it for some days until nutrition flows to that, and strengthen it accordingly.
And if to the patient none of the causes we have mentioned occur, then you must not let it slip for about 20 days or around those.
And place the patient's hand with its virtue of movement-agitating substances, and make it sleep on its back.
And know that this fracture is restored in 30 days or in 32 days, or lightly in 28 days, and all of this is according to the complexity and dispositions of the virtue.
Chapter XIII.
On the Restoration of Fractures of the Wrist and Fingers.
Know that at the wrist of the hand and the knuckles of the fingers there may be a fracture, and do not injure them but rub them gently.
And when a fracture or dislocation occurs in the hand, ensure that the patient remains lying down and keep the limb straight for about one hundred equal parts of time, then place your hand over the extended limb.
And then extend the broken bones and the doctor should align them with good reduction.
And then apply plaster and cotton, if no abscess forms use a cautery instead; then place a candle above according to the size of the area, and you have already wrapped that in linen.
More so if the rupture is in the interior parts of the palm, then make a semblance of a bunch of linen, and command the patient to hold that tightly with his ruptured palm; then have him hold it tightly with linen long.
And let the candle be held in linen which is light, so that the wax is applied to the palm; and hold it tightly as needed.
If the fracture is on the outer parts, then place another strip of cloth above the bone and another on the part, in your palm, so that your hand is open and straight; then place the bandage, as if you were turning your hand at a right angle between your fingers with grains of wheat.
If you accidentally fracture one of the bones in the fingers, then if it is the finger tip, equalize it according to its position and then strengthen it on the palm. If you wish, place a small strip above the right side so that the fracture is elevated and not displaced.
If the fracture is in the other fingers, as in the middle finger, or the index, or the ring finger, then equalize and bind it to the finger where the fracture is; or bind all of them according to their continuity, which is better; or place a small strip above the fracture, as we have said for the tip.
And consider, in your restoration, and nearby, the placement of cautery and opposition—during your operation—according to what is indicated when such a cause occurs, as detailed in the narration.
Chapter XIV.
For the restoration of fracture of the rib bone.
The rib bone, when fractured, is felt according to where it is displaced forward and backward.
And the restoration is done by strengthening the ligament over the fracture and placing another ligament below the fracture. The patient should be laid on his side and face downward.
And then the physician extends the ligament along its proper part according to the quality of the fracture, when the break is in the middle of the rib bone.
But if it is applied to the angle of the rib, then place the ligament along the groove of the lower part, so that the extension reaches there, and another ligament below the fracture.
And similarly, if the fracture is applied to the groove, then place the ligament along the groove, and the extension to the parts below.
And then the doctor aligns the bone by bringing his hands close to where you have reduced it according to natural form; the bone is joined by good articulation; then apply a plaster and a bandage, so as not to cause an abscess in the limb. But if an abscess does occur, then you let it be for some days until the abscess is ready to be cauterized, and then return to your treatment.
The bandage should be made as follows: first ensure you wrap a hard bandage around the fracture, fold it two or three times, and tie off any excess; then wrap the bandage until it reaches the ankle and the back of the thigh.
And insert a long needle between the thigh and the bandage near the fracture at the breaks, ensuring the ends of the needle extend well above both parts, then wrap the excess bandage around the bandage and thigh.
And then place something over the thigh at the location of the fracture, and place a stick over the bone of the leg.
And then fill the space between the waist and thigh with many towels, so that the tension is constricted.
And then begin with a strong bandage around the middle over the location of the fracture using three or four wraps. The closer you are to the site of the fracture, the tighter, more firm, and less soft your bandage should be.
And then extend the ends of the bandage to the parts where it reaches the foot's cavity, and tighten both ends of the stakes on the other side so that the plaster does not shift from its place.
And then place the bandage over it so that it does not cause corrosion, abscess, or inflammation and resembles those; if any of these conditions occur due to some cause, then apply the appropriate remedy, and correct whatever occurs promptly, as we have said previously.
If the bone is badly damaged, then try to equalize it as much as possible; if not, set it and immobilize it, and care for that which was preceded by the recollection until it is healed.
And sometimes this fracture of the hip is strengthened by another that is adjusted to it with stays, as we have said in the assistant and in the arm.
But still, in such a manner restored, no limp occurs in the patient; and if it is restored alone, or another leg is applied, then it is necessary that the other one limp.
And know that the hip is strengthened in about ten days or a few more weeks, and all this depends on the diversity of the complications and other arrangements.
Capitol.xv.
On the restoration of the fracture of the tibia.
Know that the fracture of the tibia occurs less frequently, but it often results in multiple days of atrophy.
But if the fracture does occur, it is often only a crack or a break in its parts, which can be one or several cracks, and above all, it is accompanied by pain.
And the restoration of it is attempted to be equalized what is broken from the parts of it among the fingers so that it may be added and conjoined according to what is possible by equilibrium, ease, and fabrication.
And then place the plaster and your hand on that round stake, if you need it; hold firmly above at the stricture to that which is appropriate.
And then consider all the dispositions which we have recommended in other fractures, thus as for abscesses, cauterization, and appearance to those that arise when one opposes it to any accident until it is healed.
Chapter XVI.
On the restoration of the fracture of the ribs.
Know that in the ribs there are two bones, one of which is large and is named the rib bone; the other is thin and is named foible.
And accidents of the species of fracture occur to the ribs as they do to the two bones of the arm, and for this reason the restoration of the rib is done in the same way as the restoration of the arm, and the operation is one.
And if you break two bones together, the fracture will be set in all directions.
And if the finer bone is broken, the fracture will be set in front.
And if the thicker bone is broken, you find the fracture, and it is one of those conditions that is not under your control.
And then administer extension, equalization, and ligature of the tendons accordingly.
Nevertheless, if the fracture of the bone is lined with black spots, let the extension be lesser and more gentle, and may your virtue relieve it.
And in the bone, if there is any cause for an operation on the arm, and when you equalize the tendons and complete your entire surgical procedure, then take pieces of pine bark which are placed under the causes that are stopped up in soles, and make them thus from palm branches; leave aside those with little grain, and not of rough texture, and let their length be according to the length of the bone, and of the depth within the flesh.
And then wrap each one in two layers of cloth according to the length of the foot, and place one layer over the part of the leg on one side and the other layer on the other side, and let them be below at the base location of the foot.
And then place the two stakes in three positions of both extremities and at the middle position, for in this structure the leg is prohibited from leaning towards the right or left side, and it should be in good alignment.
And then a brace of wood is administered according to the length of the leg; and the leg is placed in it so that it conserves its movement.
And especially make sure you do this in fractures, for when there is a fracture, it is properly called so.
And then consider the leg on each day and study it for any sign of infection, or swelling due to other similar causes; and if any cause from those occurs, then immediately apply what is appropriate until it is healed.
Chapter XVII.
Of the fracture of the ankle and the bones of the foot and toes.
An ankle does not fracture completely; more often fractures occur in the bones of the foot; and fractures rarely occur in the toes of the foot, and do not fracture but are rubbed in the appropriate place.
And if the bones of the foot have a fracture and sometimes those bones need to be elevated above each other, then place the patient's foot on the prepared ground in this manner.
Then place the other foot on what is elevated under those bones, and compress, press, and align those bones back into place.
Then apply a plaster and cover it, and place the abdomen of the foot on a small table with two raised ends.
Then tightly wrap the foot with the bandage in a straight manner, after you have wrapped that area with cloth and other materials as needed.
And when three or four days pass, then you untie the bandage, for you will find that the bones are aligned, or are broken, or are dislocated, and the operation in those cases is as you know.
And if some are said to be broken, then restore those, and align them as I and have shown you in the restoration of the fingers of the hand. And place the broken finger straight according to the length of the finger, and slightly crooked at the end; then lay the skin on this table which you have prepared, and tightly bind it properly.
And if what is broken of the bones are two or three or more, then you place each broken part straight according to its quantity wrapped in a linen cloth, and strengthen the table at the base of the foot, and standing on one of the table's ends, stitch the sole of the foot to ensure it has good retention.
And you should remember that not all causes mentioned to you in the other fractures of the accidents we have discussed are relevant here; and you should adapt your approach to the specific case at hand.
Chapter XVIII.
Of the fracture of the thigh bone and the patella bone and the groin of the man.
When the thigh bone is fractured, place that part in a crooked position to allow it to heal, and then slightly incline it towards the side of the wound, keeping it stable behind.
And then the midwife fills the thigh with cloth, and this is done in the thigh as she wishes; and then the woman is supported, and her leg is slowly elevated little by little, for all of this must be done carefully so that it is aligned with how she wishes and the broken bone returns to place.
And then place powders on the leg, and when she wants to urinate, moisten the cloth to facilitate it, and then have her urinate. Then return the leg according to the manner in which you adjusted it at the beginning, and finally return to its original powder.
And do this for seven days or so, for it will be restored.
And if you wish, take a bladder of sheep and strengthen it with a cannula of cane; and insert the entire bladder into the wound, then blow through the cannula with virtue until the bladder inflates inside the wound, so that the fracture returns.
And it should be filled with cloth and kept for some days according to our recommendation, until it is healed.
And when the bone of the thigh of a man or woman is broken, then administer in the restoration and knitting of it what we have recommended for the bone of the hip.
And what is right is not hidden in these nearby fractures and those that rarely occur, especially to one who has some study and use and understands this my free will; for that fracture means to you through the major dispositional virtues in the restoration and construction of it, and therefore understand well.
And in the case of the thigh bone of a man when it is broken, protect it from infection, and insert the thigh into it; then place your hand over the wrapping of cloth, and let it be wrapped, and let it be left for three days or about that time, and be healed.
Chapter XIX.
For the restoration of bone fractures when they are displaced.
It is convenient to apply this method to those upon whom a displaced fracture occurs, especially if the bone is large, such as the femur or tibia, or similar. You should set and trepan the area frequently, provided that the conditions for trepanation permit, as we have said above.
And if the displacement exudes pus, then apply your set to retain it and attempt to sprinkle on it a sieved trissa, if another cause does not prevent this.
And then begin to restore the fracture on that first method day, and do not prolong this if an abscess does not occur.
But if an abscess does occur, then you leave the restoration of it for the ninth day, until it is lanced, and do not approach it on the seventh and tenth days, for then you will cause worse accidents.
But if the bone is broken and prominent over the knee joint, then you must probe to reduce it and align it with your hands with as much ease and little extension as possible.
But if the extension is not to your satisfaction and the alignment with your hands is difficult, then you must reduce it with this instrument; and this instrument is made of iron, its length being seven or eight inches and its width according to the size of the wound; for which reason it is necessary for the doctor to take three or four of these according to the quantity needed in the treatment for any type of fracture.
And it should be round, and of small thickness so that it does not bend during the operation.
And it should have sharp ends, each with a margin at the sides; and be thick on the underside, but thin within.
And this is the form of it:
And it is named in Greek as "labre volentz atelarem," so it is a small spatula.
In order that the extremity of the patient be raised above the end of the bone.
And draw it back in one motion so that the bone returns and is aligned with some equation.
And strive to align the extremities of the fracture with each other. If the broken extremity is fine and does not take hold with the instrument for a good reason, then you must insert the extremity of that bone where the instrument has the power to do so.
But if you cannot reduce the bone completely as we have recommended, then incise that part according to what is suitable for it among the incisors which we have mentioned; it may be in one of the grooves in any manner that is possible for you.
And then clean the bone of roughness and small scraps.
And when the bone is reduced, and after the reduction, if the patient experiences severe pain in the bone, then you should know that the bone has not returned to its natural place; then do what you will confer with the patient for great relief.
When your restoration of the mouth is completed, and then immerse a cloth in vinegar that is tightly wrung out, and properly during summer, and do not stay over the wound with charcoal or any other cause involving oil, so as to prevent it from occurring putrefaction and corruption.
And then administer steams at the hour of the full moon when the restoration of the bone is completed, and leave the wound uncovered so that it can dry, using clamps and dressings according to the size of the wound.
And guard yourself with all caution that you do not strain the wound near the fracture, for many times doctors have caused this to happen to their patients, and brought about their death or a severe and corrosive illness, which is unhealthful. And if your slight, moist condition is different from the strictures of other fractures.
And if the wound is large or a bad wound, and you fear certain harmful accidents that we have mentioned, and find pain in the area, then do not stay over those points. Instead, place hard cloth bandsages there instead of steams and support it with those.
And when about one or two days after the wound begins to heal, a blister appears in it, then you lift the cloth which you had placed over that area, and immediately apply blisters, ointments of which we customarily use to treat wounds, thus applying tetra-pharmacon and resembling it.
And you should remove the bandage and examine the wound at midday and evening each day until it is consolidated and closed, and ensure that the limb is prepared in such a manner that the pus drains from it with ease.
If the wound passes many days and is not consolidated nor has the blister been drawn from it, then you should know that here the small blisters are stagnating. You must examine the wound by piercing it. And of those stagnations, those that are separated remain and are extracted, while those that do not separate and cause pain in the limb, forcefully incise them according to what is possible for you.
And if you notice pus or bad humors in the wound, it is a sign of stasis or another form of corruption and putrefaction. Then you must know that this is preceded by a narration of the treatment for such conditions, which is detailed in its own chapter.
And from that in which the main speech is contained, you make present your presence: when the large bone is broken, you stand over the member thus as the bone of the thigh and of the helper and resemble those of the large members, and do not presume extraction of it, nor the introduction of motas, for if such accidents happen by this there will be death; having left that which can decay, for strong it will fall by itself in about 20 days or 30; and then cure the wound if you see fit, and if not leave that.
Capitol.xx.
For the cure of a node that occurs in the area of some fracture.
Motas visible occur in this node in the area of the fracture's healing, and more so as it is near the joints, and they distort the shape of the member; and strongly you prohibit the member from its natural operation.
Then consider if the node is recent and administer those medicines that have constricted thus with aloes, enses, mira, sercacollo, acrassia, and resemble those; try which of them you take some or all, and confirm those as astringent, or made from white oak, or made from vinegar, and place those over the node in wool, and constrict those upon it by good constriction.
Leave the compression bandage in place for several days; then remove it and replace it with another, during which time the swelling should subside; or strengthen the lead sheet hanging down, as lead has the property of reducing anything that is swollen in the limbs.
But if the swelling has already turned into a boil and is hard, and necessity dictates to incise it, then cut through the more superficial part of it, and incise the superfluous and projecting part, or lance it with a small hot instrument until the swelling subsides; and care for it until it heals.
Chapter XXI.
On the restoration of fractures when restored and subsequently allow the delicate member to heal according to its natural course.
When a bone fracture is restored, and subsequently allow the delicate member to heal according to its natural course, this is done for several reasons: one reason is due to the insufficient dissolution of the membrane and the improper healing process; or due to excessive compression of the membranes, hindering nutrition from reaching the member; or due to excessive ointment application; or due to unnecessary movement at inappropriate times; or due to a lack of strength in the body of the patient and weakness.
And the treatment for this is to give the patient something to eat and make his heart tender while the disease multiplies within him; give him baths; and insert hope and joy into him.
And place your hand over the member, so that the hand draws in nourishment, or continue the wet compress with vinegar, allowing the nourishment to flow and return to its natural form.
Chapter 22.
For the treatment of fractured bones when they are reduced tortuously and the operation is prohibited from that which causes pain.
When the member is already reduced near the completion of its reduction and healing of the fracture and protrusion in the broken bone, and this is due to the deformation of the member, yet the member does not prohibit its natural operation, then you should not receive the word from someone who thinks that member is newly fractured.
Yet there are many skilled surgeons and reducers who have done this in our land; this operation is greatly reproachable, leading to great fear from the sign of which is fatal.
If claudication and nodulation are recent, then soak them in a liquid of white wine in which are infused soft herbs, such as hyssop, rosemary, and melilot, resembling those; and prepare for it an ointment of ointment with well-prepared glycerin; or that is prepared with mucilage of herb of age and is mixed with wool gray or olive oil, and is applied with that; or that are prepared with fatty figs and are tied with goose feathers, resembling those of the medicines named armenian consolidation.
And sometimes it is dissolved by gentle friction that is applied to the more humid areas, and movement of the limb should be administered at all times in all hours.
And if tortuosity has already gone before and is made strong, turning into a stone, and requires treatment, then it should be incised above the cecum and the continuity of the bone should be dissolved and divided. That which is superfluous from the nodulation of that method should be removed from the bone with sharp scissors, and facilitation should be administered in that area with solicitude and study.
Chapter XXIII.
On speech concerning dislocation.
Dislocation is the displacement of any joint in the body, which prohibits movement and distorts the shape of the limb, causing significant pain and injuries.
Therefore, when a dislocation occurs, it is important to immediately try to reduce it as soon as possible. If delayed, the area can become infected and make the reduction of the dislocation much more difficult.
And for this reason, one should neither be too tight nor too loose during the infection period, as tight or loose bands can cause spasms and severe pains.
When this occurs, you should immediately perform a flail amputation of the foot, and allow it to rest until the infection subsides; then, apply hot water and oil to the limb, and try to reduce the dislocation with ease.
And each limb should be treated with the remedy of which its location will remind you.
And I have already arranged the chapters of dislocation according to what is preceded in fracture; from the part of the body upwards, then downwards, and thus.
Chapter 24.
For the treatment of dislocation of the jaw, proceed.
When both jaws are dislocated without fracture; and the dislocation of both is caused in one of two ways: either they are slightly moved from their places with a small movement and slightly softened; or they are completely dislocated, during which they are softened at the joint where saliva flows from the patient's mouth and cannot have that nor can close their mouth, and their tongue is wrapped in a cloth.
More often, when the dislocation is slight, it returns to its place in major displacements by itself due to minor causes.
More often, if the dislocation is complete and thorough, then you must apply a gentle reduction immediately, and not delay it entirely.
And the minister should hold the patient's head, and insert the doctor with one hand in the cavity of the dislocation inside the mouth, if the dislocation is on one side; or that he insert both his thumbs together, if the dislocation is on both sides, and the other fingers of his hands be outside aligned with those; and command the patient to cease moving his jaw and allow those to return from any part; and the doctor align the jaw and enclose the jaw inside as it returns to its place.
And if the reduction is difficult, especially if both jaws are completely dislocated, then administer evaporation with hot water and oil, while performing a light reduction of both and not delay the reduction of both entirely, as we have said before.
And when returned and aligned, and the mouth of the patient is closed and not softened, then place it over those powders of cloth with cerot, made of wax and oil rubbed; and soon apply it with facilitated ligaments many times.
And let the patient sleep on his back, with his head standing between two pillows, so that it does not sweat at the right or left side; and do not force him to vomit for any cause; having his food stopped until when the pains subside and the jaws are relaxed, then let him vomit what he wants.
And this should be given for easy administration, and you should not trouble the opening of the mouth with eating, drinking, and speaking until the jaw is relaxed and healed.
And if the reduction of two jaws when dislocated at any time and cannot be returned to their proper places, then moving and shaking accidents will cause fevers and frequent swelling. And the belly of the patient is greatly swollen, and there is much vomiting of pure bile.
And when you see this, then know it is fatal; and shaking treatments may occur to those upon whom this happens in a few days.
Capitol.xxv.
Of reducing the dislocation of the furcula and the extremity of the muscle.
The furcula is not dislocated from the leg inward by its continuation to the foot; and sometimes it is dislocated outward, and this is declared by the sensation.
The restoration of it is that the patient lies down and extends his arms. Then apply your palm to the area with firm pressure, for it will return.
Then place your hand over the area with the plaster and powder, and strengthen it.
More so, the extremity of that which is connected to the thigh does not get dislocated in any day; then it must be reduced and aligned as we have said and as you are able.
Then place your hand over the area with the plaster, powder, and compress, and command the patient to adhere to tranquility and rest until it is healed.
And in this treatment, the extremity of the muscle is reduced when it is separated from its place.
Capitol. xxvi.
Of the reduction of the dislocation of the muscle.
Know that the muscle is not dislocated but in three ways, of which one is when it is dislocated from the tendon to the bone.
And the second is that it is dislocated from above the muscle, which is called tart; and it is not dislocated at the back parts by the shoulder; and it is not dislocated at the front parts by the nerves.
And chiefly it is dislocated outward and off the bone at the back parts of the tendon, especially in those where the muscles are few, it is slightly dislocated; more so in those where there are many muscles, it is outward with difficulty.
And sometimes it happens to some men due to a blow or impact, and the muscle of the affected area becomes infected with an abscess, and is damaged because it is already dislocated.
Then proceed that you treat this especially well, and then proceed in the cure of it.
When the dislocation is in the shoulder joint, you must palpate; so that you can distinguish between the displaced muscle and the normal muscle, for which you find a clear difference; and you find a concavity at the head of the muscle. By palpating the head of the muscle, it should feel like a hole, and the patient cannot bring his hand to his ear or move it in any direction.
If it is dislocated, you must palpate the foot or ankle, and then you find a clear touch, and it is not hidden.
And for this dislocation, a light reduction is made when it is fresh and the patient is in pain.
And the reduction is that the minister raises the patient's hand above the shoulder; then places his fingers on the sides to palpate, and elevates the joint with strength at its location. The minister then raises the patient's hand and extends it properly; then holds the area so that it returns lightly.
If however it does not return through what we have said, and the dislocation began with a swelling, for several days, then let the foot be bathed in cold water and an application that softens and liniments be given thus as if of roots of althea, fenugreek, and melilot in water, and be applied.
And then the foot is to be laid on its back and placed in the fleece that is equal between levity and stiffness, and the doctor places his hand on the spica, elevates the head of the muscle by virtue, and pulls the foot with his hand so that it is not injured at the joints, and another minister holds the head of the foot, so that it is not injured at the joints, for there it quickly returns to its place.
And if you wish, return the other as follows: and this is that you have a person who is longer than the foot, standing on the side of that sole, and insert his muscle under the sole's fleece and elevate the sole's fleece to the joints above while the foot is suspended in air, and another minister pulls the foot from the joints below its belly. But if the patient is light, then see that something else is suspended, for fear that the gravity will cause the dislocation to return soon.
And it is reduced by another method: and it is that a long pole be placed on the ground with its head round in shape, like the brim of a mortar, neither thick nor thin, and then the patient is laid down over the head of the pole; then cover his body from the other side with lion skins, and let the patient lie according to the length of the pole, and extend your hand to the parts on the other side; and extend the body from the other side with strength, for the joint returns to its place quickly.
And if the reduction is difficult due to all the causes we have said, then use this cure: and you should take a pole whose length is about two cubits, and its thickness is four fingers, and its size should be enlarged at the tip according to this form.
And place lion skins over the round head to ensure the pole does not dislocate the patient.
And then place the patient's head, and extend your hand or arm into the parts, and tie the limb to the helper and the arm and the extremity of the hand.
And then place the arm on a step of the ladder according to its width, and the hand extended to the parts, and the other limb be suspended from the other side, so that the joint may soon relax.
And when the instrument for him is completed in any way that is possible, then cover the head with a woolen cloth of equal quantity; and place a plaster prepared from powder of molten wax and albumen of egg over all the muscle, thus thoroughly applied, and tightly bind the head with a bandage; the limb should be wrapped around the plaster, and the hand should be attached to the neck, and let it be left without moving the hand for seven days.
And ensure that the food for the patient is light, until the limb is comfortable, which is better for the recovery of the limb.
And then the food should be given more seven or five times and exercise should be performed; and thus if it is closed and not softened, then it is already healed.
And if the joint is dislocated due to numerous attacks by humidity that affect it or for another cause, then it must be treated with a cautery three times, as stated previously in the chapter on cautery.
And if all this is done and after seven days the ligament and joint are not healed, and the plaster and stricture remain over it for several times, yet still not healed with cauterization and cannot lift that arm above the parts above, then you should know that the nerves of the muscle at the head of the muscle are either incised or extended or softened, and you should know that the joint will never be placed in its proper place at any time.
For the dislocation of what is caused, you should lift the foot and thigh or the parts behind, and the reduction is performed by impulse and extension with the hands, while it returns.
And it should be administered in the other stricture, and care that within it be healed.
And if there happens to be gravity in the member and tardiness in its movement, then the patient uses warm baths until that gravity is alleviated and returns to its original nature.
Capitol.xxvi.
On the cure of dislocation of the knee.
Know that the joint of the knee is dislocated with difficulty and seems to return with difficulty; it is dislocated in all directions, especially forward and backward. The dislocation of the knee cannot be concealed; whether you see it quickly or touch it according to whatever shape it is dislocated, when you adjust the dislocated knee into place, this is clearly evident because the joint is concave and cannot bend the leg nor touch its own muscle.
And note the swelling, and reduce the dislocation as soon as possible before it comes to an abscess. For if it comes to an abscess, reduction becomes difficult, and even with great effort, it is not fully cured; especially when it is in the back part, for it is worse than all other types of dislocation, causing more pain, and hot baths often bring about death.
And the restoration of it, when that is possible to reduce, is that his hand be extended by two more, and his arm be stretched out, and the hands of the doctor be on his knees, and let him push the joint with the heels of his hands or between the palm of his hand as it returns to its place.
And if the dislocation is in the front parts, then return it thus by bending his hand against his own hand, striking the knee with the palm of his hand.
And if the dislocation does not yield to reduction, then administer violent extension and strong manipulation.
And let two ministers stretch out the arm, and hold that posture with two ministers so that it is not pulled back during the extension.
And then rotate the arm completely, as it is wrapped in a long folded cloth around his hand, or bandage.
And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, anoint that area with some oil so that it helps in the lubrication of the joint for ease; and then push the joint vigorously as it returns.
And after the reduction of the cavity, place it over the bandage in which there is a clot and exudation of white pus, and extend it with a downward traction, and the arm be suspended from the neck, and let it be left for some days.
And then release it; and so if the joint is formed in that location, then you release the ligament and leave it.
And if you see the joint not well strengthened, then repeat the application of the plaster and ligament, and leave it for some days until it is extended; and then release it.
And if it happens that there is gravity near the reduction of the joint, and its position is in movement, then administer moisture in bath and gentle friction, and compression, until it is alleviated; or pause over the joint for a while, so it is a matter of rapid motion; and then bind it, and leave it over the bone day and night. And then apply that in bath; and when soaked, then friction the joint with gentle friction, and then repeat over it for a while, so it is a matter of rapid motion, once, and the second, and the third. am intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.
And if you wish, place your hand over that wet and weathered groove on the edge and press strongly upon it; do this several times, for that is wet and allow it to come into its proper position.
Capitol.xxviii.
For the treatment of dislocation of the shoulder, it is the joint where the arm meets the shoulder.
Shoulder of the arm is sometimes dislocated, and the reduction of such dislocation is easy. The opposite is true for other joints; however, more importantly, there should be speed in the reduction of it at the hour when it is dislocated, before the area becomes inflamed or an abscess occurs.
And the reduction of the dislocation is that you place the shoulder of the patient on a table and instruct them to extend their arm. The physician then places his hand or palm over the vicinity of the joint and gently push it back into its proper position.
Moreover, however, it must be considered if the palm is already placed on the abdomen of the hand, then the patient pauses the two fingers of his hand on a table to extend and reduce; and if the dislocation is precedent, place the two fingers of the hand, then the position of the hand of that intrinsically on the table, so that the hand of the doctor falls over that potentiality of the joint.
And so, if it returns quickly, that is good; otherwise, then strengthen that and wrap the abscess, leaving that alone; and do not repeat this, for if you do not, you should neither suffer nor be able to proceed with the reduction of it until days pass.
Moreover, however, the joint is to be treated according to its tortuosity; and do not note any cause to the patient, but rather that the hand is mollified and cannot strengthen any cause; then you know that the nerves are torn or stretched, and then there is no harm in it so long as you strengthen it with a cautery near the site and fortify it with this providing some cause.
And since the gout has returned, then pause over the dressing which we have recommended, and let it be strengthened for five days; and then release it and leave it, and exercise the hand.
And if the movement in it has been obstructed and some gravity occurs in it, then apply that which is cold and with friction several times, until it is alleviated.
Chapter XXIX.
On the cure of dislocation of fingers.
For some time, reduce the fingers completely.
And when one finger is dislocated on the side of the palm or in the palm itself, hold the finger and push the dislocation back with your fingers until it returns.
Then support the head of the finger, and suspend that part which is dislocated, and leave it for two days.
Then suspend that part and extend it until it is straightened in that day.
And when it is night, bind it according to that narration, and do not cease to loosen it during the day and exercise with movement, and bind it at night; and do this for several days until it is straight.
And make it seem as though you are doing so, if it is dislocated in the belly of the hand, and hold that at that part and do with this your first operation, until it is healed.
And make it seem as though you are doing so when it is dislocated in the other parts.
Capitol.
For the cure of dislocation of the spine in the back.
When you encounter any of the vertebrae in the back or neck completely dislocated, and multiple vertebrae are displaced from their places, then there is no cure, for death ensues to the patient.
And the sign of this is that the patient's excretion escapes against their will, and they cannot retain it; many times, the muscles of the patient or their legs or their arms, or one of those, become softened. Or a vertebra is displaced from its place, for multiple vertebrae are displaced and multiple vertebrae cause the removal of those to four parts.
Then that is relaxed at the rear parts and is named jaundice.
May the cure of it be that when you consider whether jaundice arises from biliousness, then in that case there is no cure and neither does it heal completely.
May it be that in those cases where it comes from congestion or percussion or resemblance to those, the Ancients have spoken at length about the methods of cure, detailing which returns most effectively. But I shall now abbreviate what is necessary from their teachings, for my own closeness to understanding allows me to explain this clearly and format it into various instruments from which I will show and expand upon them.
And of those, only jaundice arising in both sides properly as I have described is cured.
And in such a way that the patient is laid out on his back close to the wall, and is spread out so that his feet are well apart.
And place a straight stake upright, inserted into the ground at the head end of the patient, and another stake vertically through the feet of the patient at the other end of the stake.
The minister hold the stake, and it is not fixed in a hole; another minister holds the other according to that form.
And wrap around the head of the patient and tightly bind it with a firm ligature; extend the end of the ligature to the stake which is fixed at the head of the patient, and tie that there; and firmly bind another ligature around the hips of the patient under his armpits, and hold his legs; and adjust all the ligatures and tie those to the other stake which holds the feet of the patient.
And the minister should extend the ligature to the part of the stake, and do not move the two stakes and the ligatures in which they are inserted, but they should not be fixed thus as we have said.
And the doctor places his palms on the spine with strength until it returns, or places one hand on a table and adjusts his feet on the table as it returns.
And if it does not return in this way, then take a table of which the width or length is about three braccia, and cut into the wall where we said was near the hernia a place at the edge of the table. And then place the majority of the table on the spine, and the doctor places his feet on the other edge, and compresses well so that the spine is compressed and returns to its place.
And if you wish, open a turn which is revolving in your hand; and when you stand on the ground, place the patient's head at the end of the fingers of two sticks, the length of each being one braccio, and place the patient's head at the end of the fingers of two sticks similarly; and let the distance between each stick be a palm, and then in each stick thread a cord, and let each be firmly fixed to the ground so that they do not move.
And there should be a round stick for the turn, and it should be rotated in the two grooves of the two sticks.
And at the end of it is a groove in which the stick is placed, the length of which is one palm's breadth as it is rotated; and in the other two sticks it is similar to that.
And then strengthen the ligaments you have stretched in the feet of the patient in the groove in which you place its head, and the ligaments you have stretched in the thighs of the patient in the turn in which you place its legs.
And then you should place each turn and have a minister that twist the turn with his hand, and the doctor hold the spine according to what we have said.
And when the spine is returned and the area is held, then cover it with a paste of honey, and about wool; then place a strip of tablecloth over the paste, whose width should be about three fingers or almost that, and its length such that it covers the area of yellow bile, and over the part of the spine.
And then apply the litharge which we have mentioned, and use the patient for subtle nourishment until it is healed.
And if there is any danger at the site where healing ends, then ensure that medicines that moderate and soothe are administered gradually over a long period, which we have recommended; and already a sheet of lead is being administered in that location.
And sometimes accidents occur at the very end of the vertebrae, and are caused by that dislocation; and it is that bone where you already suspect that no suspicion should be allowed to arise about it with this medicine, for it will greatly cause your accident to lead to death.
Chapter XXXI.
On the cure of dislocated hip.
Know that the joint of the hip and the joint of the muscle should only occur due to dislocation alone, and do not occur in those cases where other small movements and cavities are involved.
The joint of the ankle is dislocated according to four manners; it is dislocated to the inner parts, or to the outer parts, or to the front parts, or to the rear parts.
It is mostly dislocated to the inner parts, and little to the front or rear parts.
The sign of dislocation to the inner parts is that when you adjust the footband of the healthy side against the injured side, the latter appears longer and the sole more prominent than the healthy one. The injured foot cannot bend its toe; this is the location where you should cauterize the lengonar, so that the head of the swelling is already reached here.
The sign of the one to which dislocation occurs to the outer parts is that the injuries of the foot are contrary to this dislocation.
The sign of the one to which dislocation occurs to the front parts is that you expand the footband according to need, but it cannot bend the toe that is in pain. If forced to go further and it cannot do so toward the front parts; his urine is retained and his swelling is apostemat, and you should treat his ambulation on the sole.
And a sign of dislocation in the parts behind is that the leg does not expand, nor can it bend what should bend, and the thigh is shorter than the other, and the bent part is softened, and the knee is deviated from that location.
The main reduction of this dislocation is that you consider, at that time, if the dislocation is old and already degenerated, you should reduce it as soon as possible according to its position. However, this is not part of the entire treatment; then, one should avoid making assumptions about it.
For the case where the dislocation is recent and one of the four types of dislocation, you should reduce it by returning the joint to its position and extending it inward and outward, then manipulate it to the right and left sides, as it will naturally return with force and does not require further treatment.
Moreover, if it does not return in this manner, you should prepare a strong counterpoise and extend the thigh from that side, or on its hands, or with linseed which is soaked over the thigh above the buttock; another minister should extend his hand from above to ensure his hands touch the tickly parts of the patient; then apply strong linseed paste to the back of the knee, and have another minister press the extremity of the linseed.
And it is the extension from the root inside the angle to the part of the fork, or from the back part to the side of the thigh.
And it is the extension of all those in one go, so that the patient's leg is elevated from his body and hangs down dangling.
And this type of extension is common to all four.
And therefore, if the dislocation returns as we have said, it will be good. Otherwise, for every type, what I say about its own treatment is necessary.
In the reduction of its own, when dislocated, and the dislocation is on the inner parts, ensure that the patient's leg is flexed towards his side; then place the ligaments over the groove of the thigh in that area where it lies between the head of the femur and the location where the angle is placed; and extend the ligament from above the part of the angle to the next part of the fork.
And then another minister firmly holds the thighs, compresses the thick part of the thigh, and extends to the outer parts with a strong extension, for then it returns to its place.
And this species is of a lighter cure for which this member is reduced compared to other species.
And if you excuse me and do not follow the training for this species of cure, then ensure that both feet of the patient are tightly bound together firmly, loosely over both the ankles and both the toes.
And let the length of each be the quantity of four fingers, and let the patient's leg be extended more than the other by the quantity of two fingers.
And then let the patient be suspended over the stake's head, and let the hand hold it; and let the length from the ground be the quantity of two braces.
And command a strong youth to hold down the patient's thigh, and let another strong youth suspend the patient, while the other holds down the thigh with force, so that the joint returns to its place quickly.
And in the reduction itself, when dislocation is at the outer part, ensure that the patient lies on his side according to what we have recommended for the lying position; and strengthen the bandage over the affected leg and around its foot.
And then two poles are placed aside, one on the foot and the other on the head; and then poles adjusted in the middle of the fire laid over which wet cloths are wrapped, so that the patient is not burned because the pole is between the thighs of the patient, for you must allow the extension from the parts left undone to be felt.
And then each minister extends to his part, and the doctor with his hand equalizes the reduction according to the art.
And when the dislocation is in the front parts, then it is good for the leg to be extended slightly, and this is according to this method as narrated for the foot; and the doctor places the palm of his right hand on the injured part, and then draws that with the other hand, and at that drawing, he extends the leg from the parts left to the front part.
If the dislocation is behind the parts, then do not extend the patient's legs, but elevate them above the ground; you should place them on a hard surface as if the width of the leg were dislocated outward, according to what we have said about its positioning between two widths; and their face and limbs should be extended, as we have said, without much difficulty.
A compress should be applied on the area where the joint is displaced.
So, when the reduction is completed as it should be — and you notice the sign of the joint's reduction, which is that you can extend both legs and when you test them they equalize and the leg returns to its normal position — then you place two cushions and wrap tightly with bandages so that the width is not altered in any part; and adhere the limb to rest for three or four days.
Then remove the bandage, and compare one leg with the other.
When you see equal signs in the wound, then know that the dislocation is already closed, and then let the patient go.
And if you see any cause of swelling, then return and apply a plaster to that area, and extend it according to your original structure, and leave it for three days.
Then remove that, and let it gradually heal over each part for some days until it is comfortable.
Capitol..xxxii.
On the treatment of dislocation of the shoulder.
The shoulder can be dislocated in three ways: it can be dislocated to the outward parts, to the inward parts, and to the back parts more than to the front parts; and it is not dislocated to the front parts.
And the sign of shoulder dislocation is that when you command the patient to apply their hand to their waist; then you know that the shoulder is dislocated.
And the restoration of all manners of it is that you make a direct incision in the malade, essay that it already extends its leg over this; attach your two fingers to the face of it, and place his foot between your feet; then make attach your sole against the palms of yours, and keep those between your named fingers against the sole of him with strength, and another minister extend his leg so that the sole returns to its place.
And the sign of its submission is that its leg adheres to the thigh lightly without effort.
And then apply that and attach the leg to the thigh, and place those occasionally with a bandage for three or four days, and then remove those.
And do not use the malade for ambulation for some days until it is healed and comforted.
But if the reduction of it is excused to you, then administer strong extension to the limbs of which in the cure of the hip the preceding narrative was narrated.
Capitol.xxxiii.
Of the treatment of the dislocation of the ankle.
The ankle is sometimes reduced by a small movement, and sometimes dislocated according to the complement, and the dislocation of the ankle is performed either internally or externally.
And the sign of the dislocation of the ankle is that you see the ankle swollen proceeding from the part to which it is dislocated.
More the treatment of the reduction of the ankle is by gentle restoration, and it is that it be extended with ease and returned to its normal position.
More in the treatment of the ankle when it is dislocated according to the complement, make sure you do it right, and have a strong and brave assistant behind the foot at the midpoint.
And then place your right hand on the top part of the foot, and your left hand on the bottom part below the foot at the location of the heel.
And then draw the foot to your right hand, and toward the left for two passes, and extend the left; and push the foot on the right should lower the leg thereby.
And do this for two passes as we have counted.
And then push the foot towards the third pass on the leg, and you are at the knee.
Then if it returns in one or two passes according to this manner, and if you can hold the foot still, that is good; otherwise, then iterate the operation, for if it does not return.
But if reduction of the foot is forbidden as we have advised, then let the patient lie on his side on the ground, and place a firm pillow under him, so that it lies between the patient's thighs, and you have wrapped a cloth around him to prevent the foot from slipping.
And then the minister hold his thighs, and another minister extend the foot with his hands or with cloth tied around the leg; and then each minister extends himself against the length of his part, and the pillow is placed between the patient's thighs holding him, so that the body of the patient is not pulled to the sides as you extend your length.
And then the doctor equalizes the dislocation with his hands, while another assists by holding the healthy thigh at the points left, so that the dislocation returns easily.
And then as the dislocation returns and its reduction is declared to be healthy, then apply a strong paste there, and bind the foot with lint to the leg.
And take care to avoid the nerves behind the talus, for the lint over that area should not be strong or severely irritate them.
And leave it there for two or three days; and if the lint becomes moist, replace it.
And remove it on the third day or the fourth, and prohibit the patient from walking for forty days. But if it is necessary to walk before that time, be sure that the dislocation has not become dissolved and corrupted, and that it does not receive treatment.
And if an abscess occurs at that site, then take care to administer in the extraction of it what we have described in our narrative before, in another location for treatment and fomentation, until it is ripe.
Chapter 34.
For the treatment of dislocation of the toes of the feet.
First, ensure that what is dislocated can be reduced with slight extension; and what is not difficult, beforehand is easy.
But if the dislocation is in several bones of the big toe, then you must place the foot on a slightly elevated surface or on a table, and keep it thus as if walking.
Then stand on your feet, and place your foot over the area where the joints are located. Gently press that part with your foot to encourage it to return to its proper position, and observe if it has been reduced and no prominence appears in the area.
Then place the abdomen of the foot on a table that can accommodate the entire foot, which has two supports. Gently maintain this structure firmly for three days; then remove it and allow the foot to rest by walking for several days until it strengthens and its recovery is assured.
Chapter XXXV.
Of the types of displacement that occur from injury or fracture or any combination thereof.
When any of these causes occur, and you are involved in the cure of that and its restoration, mishaps may lead to death.
And for this reason, you must not presume in the cure of it; but rather, one who is wise in the art, long experienced, merciful, and pious; who waits, not rash, nor presumptuous; and who uses at the beginning of medicines that cause blisters only temporarily, leaving the disease to divine judgment, but to those to whom you hope for a cure, for alleviation of the illness, in which some hope appears. And then strive to perform the reduction at the beginning of the cause, before blisters occur.
And then, if the limb returns as we wish, proceed to administer treatment that causes blisters only and heals the injury with what is appropriate for it from drying ointments.
And if dislocation is accompanied by fracture and accidents in the separated bones, then you must realign their joints, doing so as we have said in the simple ailments that precede here in those places.
And guard and avoid according to your virtue that of the instrument in the ways of fear according to which my preaching precedes you; for this is better to you from your Creator, and more permanent to your glory, and more greetings to your true conscience those in your time. Thus you finish the words of Albucasim perfectly of which may God bless. Amen.
