Oh, children, now that I have completed this book, which is the last of the science of medicine, for the completion of which I have labored to its end, and through its explanations and declarations, it is clear to me that I have fully covered those matters in this treatise, which deals with surgical operations.
Since the operation of surgery is proscribed in our region and our time, it has been almost entirely abandoned; yet, this science is important, and its methods are well-known. Only some brief descriptions remain in the works of the Ancients, which have corrected many errors and hesitations, but have left the understanding of it incomplete and have extended its practice.
And it is clear to me that I should revitalize that order in this treatise according to the way of explanation and declaration and abbreviation; so that it can include the forms of the cautery tools and other instruments of the work through the addition of declarations and preparation, which are necessary causes.
More the reason why a good craftsman does not apply his hand in this our time is that the art of medicine is lengthy, and it requires one's actor to be exercised beforehand in the science of anatomy, which Gualia knew well, knowing the youth of the members and their forms, as well as their conjunction and separation; and had knowledge of the bones, nerves, and sinews, their number, and their disease; and of the veins pulsatile and quiet, and of their places of effusion.
And for this Hippocrates says that in the name is small, more in the work itself, and especially in the art of the hand.
More however we have already spoken of that in the introduction to this treatise; for who does not know what we have said about anatomy, will not be cleared that he does not fall into error through which many men will die, as I have seen too many of those, for some are formed in this science and venture from that other science and its experience.
For you saw a doctor who, having fallen ill, incurred an apostema scrophulous in the neck of a woman, and injured some arteries so that great blood flowed until the woman died among her distresses.
And there was another doctor who, when the patient passed a stone from his bladder, and the stone was large, came to him and removed that stone with a piece of the bladder, so that man died on the third day.
And I have already called for it to be extracted, and I saw that due to the size of the stone and the position of the patient, he would die.
And there was another doctor who took payment from a duke of our land for surgery, and he came upon a black servant who had suffered a fracture in the thigh; and because of the doctor's ignorance, he removed the fracture, over the wound, with pillows and splints of strong structure, and did not allow the wound to breathe.
And then the dressing according to his desires, and then the rejoining, and then the letting it rest for some days and commanding us to remove the bandage; and thus we remain until the thigh and foot recover, and then proceed to our detriment.
And I was called to him, and prepared to remove the bandage, and peace and an attempt to alleviate his pains was achieved.
Moreover, however, corruption was confirmed in the member, because I could not prevent that, and did not cease to allow the corruption to spread within the limb while the illness persisted.
And there was another doctor who perforated an oncotic abscess, and it became ulcerated for several days, during which the evil increased greatly in him and affected his lord.
The cause is that the pain is purely from melancholic humors, and does not affect the whole body, but rather affects a member that suffers from everything being hostile to it.
And for this reason, my son, it is necessary for you that the operation be devised in two ways: one is in an operation where health is associated, and one where danger is present in the major dispositions.
And I have already existed here in all parts of this treatise where the operation involves error and fear; therefore, it is necessary for you to keep this and leave that, so that the leaves do not find a way to speak ill of you.
And therefore take your weapons with diligence and protection of God, and the patient with facility and firmness.
And use the best way by the grace of God seeking salvation and glorious success, and lay aside the terrible diseases of difficult cure, and uphold your weapons against what makes you fear, so that sitting in your faith and in your name you are not overcome: for more remains to your glory, and more in the world and beyond to your sanctity.
Gout is already dissected in some monastic texts: Do not treat the bad disease, lest bad doctors be named.
And I have already devoted this libretto according to three chapters.
Begin the division of the libretto, and first with the first part. The first chapter ordered of the head into the foot, concerning the forms of the instruments and the tools of the cautery, and what is necessary in the operation.
The division of the second part. The second chapter, on drying and piercing, and on cups, and on plagues, and on the extraction of arrows and similar, all categorized and organized by the forms of the instruments.
The third chapter, on restoration and dislocation, and on the cure of sprains and similar conditions; a chapter organized by the head between the feet, and by the forms of the instruments.
First, let me describe the quality of the metal of that cautery and its ingredients, and in which condition cautery use is prohibited.
Therefore, I say that the discourse on the quality of the metal of the cautery and its ingredients is long and tedious, subtle through science and a hidden secret; much has already been said about it by wise men, and they are in disagreement. For me, it suffices to mention a small part of their sermons, lest I become too lengthy.
And thus say that cautery benefits all compositions universally which are of flesh or bone material, except two compositions, which are compositions of sinew material.
In the sinewy and dry composition, the flesh will desiccate; for some said that cautery is beneficial for that, while others said the opposite, that cautery is not appropriate in malaise which is due to quality and dryness, for the nature of fire is quality and dryness, and it is inappropriate that a malaise sinewy and dry be cured by what is cautery and dry.
And say that those who say the opposite, that by cautery one is cured in all sinewy and dry malaise that comes in men's bodies, for when you compare the body to its humors to the composition of fire, you find the body to be dry.
And I say according to his speech, for I have already experienced this several times myself.
But I do not consider that it comes to me who has already been experienced and exercised in the capital of cautery through recent exercises, and who knows the diversity of human composition and the disposition of maladies in their various forms, and the causes of those, and the accidents related to them, as well as the space of time for those.
In other complications, there is no need to fear, especially in wet and inflammatory diseases, for all doctors agree on these and are not divided in youth regarding the use of cautery in such cases.
And understand, sons, that the secret of curing by cautery with fire and its goodness, concerning the burning cautery in medicine, is that the fire is simple, its action reaching only the member being cauterized and not affecting other members touched only minimally.
Yet the action of the burning cautery reaches that part in the members where it touches, and strongly brings to the member illness of difficult healing and strongly expels it.
Yet the fire, by its subtlety and the goodness of its substance, does not cause anything but to dissipate superfluous matter. We are already familiar with this through experience and long service in studying the art regarding the causes; and for this reason, I am excused for the length of my discourse. If it were not that this is not written freely in this pause, and that you do not know the secret of the fire, concerning the quality of its operation on bodies and the way it expels illnesses, I would have a philosophical demonstration, which would be beneficial to your minds.
And know, sons, that they differ in the time when it is convenient to make a cautery and the best time is during spring.
And I say that a cautery is convenient at all times, because the damage due to accidental weather changes is submerged in the youth of what is burned by the cautery, and especially if the cautery is for pains or necessary pains, strong sores, which do not suffer delay, for fear of those that come from evil intentions, which are greater than small damage entering through time.
And this is not done on your feet, sons, for they do not esteem it except by the common people and the foolish doctors, since that illness which is cured by cautery does not occur at all times, and they delay that treatment.
And the reason is not thus because they care for this, for a cautery is not but in place of a medicine which alters the composition and dries up the humors which are the cause of the wind and pains.
But nevertheless, an excessive cautery over medicine for the swiftness of its virtue and the efficacy of its operation and greatness of its lord.
It is possible that the patient's illness may return at some point in time, depending on the complexity of the ailment, its location, the virtue of the person, and what is prepared within the body due to the accumulation of superfluities, and what is acquired through food and similitudes of those causes; but if the illness where a cautery is administered is a subtle illness in a member with few superfluities and humidity, such as a tooth cautery for pain and similar to that, it is possible that that pain will not return, more so when this is done in small amounts.
It is more commonly said that cautery is the last remedy of medicine, and it is the saying of surgeons, not what we understand by it, for I believe that it is not a cure that helps either medicine or any other cause near cautery.
The cause is the opposite of this; and the understanding that cautery is the last remedy of medicine is so only when one administers the methods of cure in some ailments, and those medicines do not help, and near the end of the illness, one administers cautery, which then helps. And then from here, let the cautery be the last remedy of medicine, not according to the understanding which I understand vulgarly and too often by the foolish doctors.
And the ancients said that a gold cautery is better than an iron one, and they did not say this only because of the equality of gold and the subtlety of its substance.
And they said that the place for cautery does not blister, since it is not absolutely burned, for I have already tried this and found that it does not burn in all bodies as much as others. A gold cautery is good and better than iron, as they say; but when you make a cautery with fire of gold, it is not up to you, for it ignites according to the quantity you want due to the corrosion of the gold, and prepares to receive heat; and if you adjust over this ignition, the gold melts by the fire, and remains in the fire some sheets so that the craftsman can cut through its occupation.
And for this, when you make a cautery with iron, you should touch it more lightly and more precisely to the right position.
And I have already ordered this chapter concerning the cautery according to other chapters, and I have ordered those of the foot within it, so as to delay the patient what he wants from him.
The first chapter.
This cautery addresses the cold and humidity over the servant condition of which there are two causes, which cause soda (likely a typo or mistranslation, possibly meant to be "soda" meaning wind or gas) and much traumatic flux, called corissa, from the head to the parts of the hollows and ears that flow, and much drowsiness, and tooth pain, and colic, and universally all illness that comes from coldness, thus as paralytically, windy, apoplexy, and resemblances in those illnesses.
The form of this cautery is as follows: Primarily, you command the patient to be evacuated with a mild medicine for three or four nights, according to the nature of the patient, their age, and their habit.
And then command those who shave his head to do so with a razor, and place that razor between your hands on a sloping bench and have them rest their hands on their feet.
And then place the razor from the palm of your hand near the toe between his heels. Moreover, since the proper location has been determined, mark that location with a tent, and then heat the olive cautery, the form of which is as follows:
And then place that cautery over the marked location with a tent, in such a way that it descends gradually, and you rotate it.
And then lift your hand slightly and look at the location. If you see any part of the bone uncovered by even a grain of sand, do as if it were a drop of oil, then lift your hand. If not, return your hand to that cautery or another, if it is cooled, so that what I have said may be visible on the bone.
And then take a bit of salt and dissolve it over the area and leave it for three days.
And then place your hand over the wound where the pus is exuding and leave it there until the scar of the fire is destroyed. And then cure the area with ointment containing tetrafarmakon until it is healed.
And we have already said that when the wound is opened wide, it heals better, because it is better and more beneficial.
And some of them say that the condyle should be cauterized inside the bone, and that the cautery should remain until a part of the specified bone is adhered.
And then scrape what is adhered to the bone, and then cure it.
And others say that the cautery should reach the marrow, pressing strongly on the bone until the bone cracks, and this is the method of Alphectus. And they assess from that place the exhaling of the vapors from the head.
And the wound should be kept open for a long time, and then cured once it is consolidated.
But I have not seen these two types of cautery for all cases, only in some men according to fear; and leave that one, I advise you, it is better for health when it is necessary; for the head is developed by solution of continuity of the sun as we have testified in other members, and especially when the head of the patient is of cold nature.
And the first type of cautery is safer and better, I advise you; use that one and do that for health.
Capitulate second.
On the cautery for the head.
When in the whole head there occurs chronic and long-lasting pain that has been prolonged in the patient, and the patient uses bandages, pillows, head purges, plasters, poultices, candles, gauzes, and similar remedies, and especially if the head has already been cauterized with a cautery which does not improve the condition due to any of those causes; then consider whether the head of the patient is of strong constitution in its nature. If it is not cold and there is no great need for fomentation, then that cautery should be replaced by another. And then cauterize that on the top of his head between where the vein is divided. Incise the vein and the quantity of the mouth which we have counted, and cauterize that with a cautery at the back part of the head in the place which is called vesicle, â€” and this is the place where suction is applied. And lift your hand here, and do not expose the mouth, for the patient finds great pain from this different from the pain of all other head cauteries.
And I will say this cautery in its place, for I know that the cautery with which you cauterize the horns of the head and the occiput is finer than that with which the middle part of the head is cauterized; and this is the form of it.
Head, top.
On the cautery treatment for new migraines.
When there is a hard pain in the part of the head or an extended pain between the temples, the head should be evacuated with medicinal fluids that purge it, and the other treatment should be administered, which I have described in the deviations of diseases; and if this does not help, then cauterization in the head is done in two ways: either with a sharp medicated cautery that burns, or with iron.
May a cautery of burning medicine be that you take a blade of aloes, incinerate it, and extinguish the ends of both its edges. Then place the point of the lancet over the location of the pain in the temple, and set aside the needle to be hidden.
Then apply strength to the one stopped by descent compression, and leave it for the space of three hours; then remove the aloes, and leave the wound for two or three days, and place your hand over the spot submerged between that the area swells.
Then apply ointment to it while it is healing.
And if you choose, do so with some burning medicines which I have written in the second treatise of burning medicines.
May the cautery be performed in this manner: heat it with fire, for which this is the form:
and it is called a key clamp, for the head of it is thus shaped like a key, and in the middle part there is a small protrusion.
And then place your hand over the location of the pain, in order that the artery which is left is not adhered, and turn the small iron little by little with speed.
And if the quantity that is adhered by the cut of the cord is as much as its size, and raise your hand so that the artery is not adhered which is left, in order that there be no flow of blood.
And then soak it in salt water and place it over the area, leaving it for three days; then place something warm over it, and apply ointment until it heals.
And if you do, cautery it at the tip of the knife blade according to the cautery, and guard yourself from cutting the artery in this not-so-old migraine.
Capitol quarter.
Of the cautery for old migraine.
When you cure migraine as we have said in the previous treatment, and as we have said in the divisions of diseases, and the treatment is not effective for the illness, and sometimes because the disease does not allow what we have said about the first cautery with medicine or the cautery with fire, then you must ignite the knife cautery until it turns white. Place a line over the location of the pain that corresponds to its size, or mark that place; then remove your hand for a moment and strongly apply that area to ensure you do not incise the artery and penetrate into the bone.
But you must guard against the continuity of the jaw, which is used for chewing, and ensure that the skin is not adhered and the nerves which supply it are not affected, and that no spasm occurs.
And if it concerns the care and caution of the flow of sap in the artery that is amputated, for in its amputation there is fear, especially for those who ignore what they do and are not studious and hesitative; and leaves the operation to chance.
And I will recall the regimen of the flow of sap in cases of accidents to the artery according to its manner, in the place of this free text.
And if you see this illness has not reached this cautery and you find the patient's condition tolerable, cauterize it in the middle of the foot as we have recounted, and cure the wound until it is healed.
And if you see, administer the cautery which we have said in the chapter on strengthening the artery with a cautery, using two knives. This is a better and more effective cautery.
Capitol V.
Of the cautery treatment for ear pain.
When there is pain in the ear due to cold and it is treated with lacative causes and another treatment as I have said in the division, and the pain does not subside, then apply the cautery, which is called puncta. This is its form:
Then place the puncta near the beginning, and let it be moved around the entire ear as if it were rotated, or in the course of any part where the pain is located. Gradually apply the cautery along the edge of the ear, little by little, after you have tested the location.
And if the cautery of these points on the entire ear, and quell it there, then apply the treatment to the areas between where they are healed.
Capitol VI.
Of the cautery treatment for tortura.
The torture which is cured and treated with a cautery is nothing but by the species of those pains caused by phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of diseases.
Avoid cautery of the species that occurs due to drying or spasms of the nerves.
When you cure that species of torture by making incisions, trephinations, and guarapurgms, and if you are not satisfied with your cure, then when you cauterize the disease, you should use three cauteries: the first on the root of the ear, the second a small touch to its temple, and the third at the junction of two lips.
And place your cautery opposite the affected part of the disease, for softening occurs only in the part that appears healthy.
And the method of cauterization is to place the cautery at the right extremity of the ear, just above a small point on the top of the head, and another on the temple, the length of which should be according to the length of the designated part, and then place your hand over the area until the quantity of the species of the scorpion is burned.
And this is the form of the cautery, and it is specific to the butcher, the form of which is shown below. But more subtle is that one sees only a slight mark; and it is good to use a blade to remove just a little of the superfluous flesh.
And then treat the area as shown until it is healed.
Capitol. vii.
On the cautery treatment for ancient apoplexy.
When the apoplexy is ancient and you have treated it as we said, and if the patient does not have fever, then cauterize it with four cauteries: mainly on all the horns of its head; and with a cautery in the middle of the head, as we said; and on the scrotum. And the method of the cautery is made according to what was said above.
And the stomach's mouth has already been cauterized; it is more rearward; and then it is treated as you proceed.
Chapter VIII.
Cauterization for oblivion performed by flame.
Place cushions under the patient at the beginning; give him large stones and pills for purgation.
Then wrap the head of the patient completely and place a plaster at the center as described in the treatise on plasters.
Then place it for several minutes; this is the method of cautery. And do so according to that method and order as I have already said.
And therefore if these bring good relief; and if not, then make three cautery marks on the back part of his head, which are descending from the upper part of the head to the lower part of the neck. And wait for the size of the finger between each cautery, then proceed with the next cautery.
And if you add more heat and the evil is lifted, then make a cautery in the middle place; and if you have greater addition, then cauterize that above the two horns.
Then cure that within which is healed; and let the cautery be olive-shaped according to the form given above.
Capitol. ix.
On the cautery of the parotid gland and the mollification of the entire body.
Begin by processing the mollification of the head with powders and as we have said; then place your hand near the patient's head, and then cauterize that with a cautery in the middle part of the head, and with a cautery over all the horns of the head, and with a cautery over the back part of it, and with three cauterizations over the vertebrae of the neck.
And if it is necessary in the illness of mollification of the body to make more of that and the evils are lifted and the illness is strong, then cauterize that with four cauterizations over the vertebrae of the back, and behind it with a cautery where it is completely combined from the spine of it, and raise your hand. And then cure that which is within until it is healed, and let this be an olive cautery.
Capitol.
Of the cautery treatment for epilepsy.
Not the epileptic is cauterized, but rather the epilepsy is due to phlegm.
And therefore, modify the brain of the patient at its beginning and in the other cure which we have described in the division when the illness is large and tolerates the exclusion of medicines.
And if it is a child who does not tolerate the medicines, then administer guar gum and chewing substances to the servant to modify, in advance of this for several days, with improvement of the food.
And then place on the head of the patient, and proceed to cauterize that with a cautery in the middle of the head according to the previous method, and another cautery at the back of the head, and over each horn of the head, he cauterizes. And if the patient is strong and tolerant, then cauterize those areas with a cautery as mentioned, while keeping the body in a relaxed and softened position over the vertebrae of the neck and the vertebrae of the back.
And use an olive cautery as previously described.
And if the patient is a child, then use a fine cautery in this manner.
Capitol.xit.
Of the cauterization for melancholy.
When the causes of melancholy are wet and gross flame, then cauterize those areas with the cautery we have mentioned while keeping the body in a relaxed state.
And if the cause of melancholy is excess moisture turning into melancholy, and the patient's body is wet, then have them drink what purifies their brain as previously described in the division.
And place the patient's head, and properly make a tortora (a type of cauterization) on them around the circle, and then pause that over the middle of the head.
And if the patient is lying down, and is held from all parts.
And then apply a liniment; it is more worthy to be rubbed on the backs of sheep. And heat it over the fire for tempered warmth by measure, which the patient suffers when more is applied. And then place it in the middle of his head in the circle, and let him remain until it is rubbed.
And do this for the patient every week once, and use the other regimen until he is healed; or if you wish, cauterize it by making small points according to its size. Otherwise, keep your hand on a properly arranged cautery: this is a special cautery which wets the brain in equal measure.
And then place that poultice on the affected area using wool or strips of cloth.
Capitol.xii.
On the cauterization with water flowing down.
When the onset of water in the wound is declared by the signs which I have said in the division, then begin and give to drink to the patient what modifies the head of it, and keep the other part free from all moisture.
And make that paste in bath with dew for several days.
And then command him to shave his head, and cautery that part with a cautery in the middle of the head; and also cautery that part with two cauteries on the temples if the onset of ysemint of water in two wounds, or on one side if the onset is in one wound.
Cauterize all the veins and arteries which are left by the chain; and let the cauteries be in that length along the temples.
And keep away from flows of blood when it is cauteryed; and if you see flows of blood, apply some medicine which is within your reach.
And I will come with wisdom which is in the extraction of arteries and in the cutting of those, as well as the caution regarding flows of blood.
And sometimes the neck is cauterized leaving two bones thoroughly produced.
Capitol. XIII.
Of the cauterization of ancient tears.
When tears from the feet are ancient and through the veins and arteries, which are in the obvious place on the head above, it is verified that these are superfluous phlegmatic humors, then cauterize that with a cautery as we have recounted in the Capitol of beginning to discharge water from the feet, and with a cautery in the middle of the head and with two cauteries in the neck leaving two temples, and with two cauteries in the neck leaving two bones. And if you need to add, then cauterize that at the entire length of the socket of the foot on the tip of the supraorbital ridge with a small cautery.
Capitol. XIV.
Of the cauterization of nasal odor.
When you treat that patient as we have said in the division and your treatment is not effective, then you prepare and give to drink the chickpeas to the patient for three nights; and apply a cautery on his head, and cauterize him with a cautery made of half willow and half olive. And apply that cautery with two cauteries on the two supraorbital regions, leaving the hair slightly singed.
And be careful not to burn that area.
And the willow cautery is applied in this manner.
Capitol. XV.
Of the cautery for the softening of the eyelids of the heels.
When the eyelid of the heel is softened due to gout or humidity, then cauterize that eyelid with a cautery made from this lunar cautery; and this is the form of it:
And if you, cauterize that on the two supraorbital regions a little with two cauteries in total, making them long from the temples. And the length of each cautery should be according to the size of the sore.
And do not press too hard with your hand on the cautery, but according to the amount that the lower part of the eyelid is burned.
Capitol. XVI.
Of the cautery of the eyelid when the skin is converted to the inner parts and fistula.
When the skin of the fistula is converted to the inner parts, one must prick the fistula. The cautery in such cases should be performed according to two methods: either with a cautery or with a burning medicine.
If the cautery is made with fire, command the patient before doing it that he expose his skin as those who are bathed, entering when they are thoroughly wet and enveloped; and if you prick him, note the place of his birth. Then strengthen the fistulas on him with a bandage so that they do not get infected until the skin is regenerated.
Then, when they are born and equalized, place the head of the patient on your lap, and hold over the eyelids of the patient with a sign, which should be in the shape of a leaf of mint, and is the beginning of the sign proper to the skin.
Then place the head in a pillow of cloth or a moist cloth over the eye.
Then heat the cautery of which this is the form.
Then apply the cautery in the shape of the sign, marking it little by little with small dots until the surface of the wound is burned, which is done like a leaf of mint, entirely apparent properly.
The sign of the patient's recovery from this operation is that you see the eyelid of the eye begin to contract and the skin around it to elevate after the puncture of the eye.
Then lift your hand and leave it there for three days, and place it over the head between the eyebrows until the scar is healed. And then care for that which is oiled until it is healed.
And if it returns through the skin for some cause near their origin and the eyelid is softened, then make another time the cautery over that area just as you had done first.
And if the skin is on the eyelid, then cauterize it while it is elevated to its natural place and equalized, so that the skin does not heal wrinkled.
And the cautery should burn medicinally; this is that you command the patient to stretch and equalize the skin while it is still warm, and then make a form of it with parchment cloth like the leaf of a mulberry.
And then take a known and good swab of wax and, or if not, and then mix these materials well, and do so for application so that it is not rubbed; then spread this over the parchment which is made thus like the leaf of a mulberry, and place that over one nostril or both; and place the other end carefully immersed in an egg white, and the patient's head be in this position.
And place the said part on the medicine and press it slightly but do not wet it inside so that the patient feels the biting of the medicine, for the biting is like that of fire.
And so, to verify that the atrophy is biting, when you let the medicine go and wet it as you said; then when the biting ceases, remoisten the medicine with hot water; and then consider if the eyelid has risen as if washed; if yes, apply heat or incision, for then it is good; and if not, return to the place where no pressure was applied and do not neglect until your operation is equalized and contracted completely.
And then place it on the scar between the areas where the adhesion is to be removed, and then treat that with a deep ointment or something else so that it heals.
And if necessary, you should keep your operation with careful vigilance so that the medicine does not fall off, and if the eyelid becomes softened in a few days or some cause affects the skin on the wound, then reapply your medicine to that area where the eyelid has become softened, and do it precisely as you did at the beginning, and then cover it until it heals.
And this is the form of leaf of mirtle.
And know that the leaves of men are diverse according to their size and smallness, and therefore according to this your contraction is made.
And the way of the straight path shall not be hidden to him who studies in this art.
Chapter XVII.
On the cautery treatment of a fistula in the leaf (eye).
When you cure a fistula as we have said in the divisions of the maladies and do not apply your treatment, then when you cauterize it according to this manner: command the patient to place his head in cold water, and have some minister hold his head between their hands in such a manner that it is neither too tight nor agitated on his head.
And place the cautery on the forehead in hot oil or over the eye.
And then heat the cautery of which this is the form:
which is curved, as is the form of a cane or a vuelto (a type of hook), from one end of which the cautery is made.
And if you wish, insert it into the other end. And if you wish, let it come out as it enters.
Yet, however, that which is curved is better for your work.
And then press the fistula if it is open, and keep it clean and dry. And if it is not open, then open it and extract the pus from it.
And then place the hot cautery on it, and hold your hand a little above the nose, so that your hand does not err or hit the patient, and then place the cautery on the nostrils to destroy that area.
And so if at the beginning of your cautery it enters into the hole, that is good; and otherwise, then iterate the cautery one or two times, as needed; and leave it thus for three days, and place your hand over that spot to keep it warm and apply an ointment drying agent until it heals.
And if it has passed seven days and it is not healed, then place the sharp corrosive medicine over it until the bone is exposed and scraped as you see fit in your chapter.
And another way to cauterize a fistula, which some first doctors would say: Place the cautery at the site of the fistula and immediately apply it along the thin fissure that is its form. Apply the quantity of one pennyweight of melted lead in that area; hold your hand there with good retention, so that the bad humor does not enter through that place as the melted lead does not penetrate the wound. Ensure you keep your hand over the wound until it cools down like in album or water, for the lead adheres to the site of the fistula and heals it through marvelous healing.
And if the fistula is healed as we have said concerning the cautery and cure, that is good; but if not, then it is necessary to administer drops through the nose and reduce the fistula to the nasal cavity according to its proper place.
Chapter XVIII.
On the cautery of the pore wound.
Small cuts or cracks occur in the lips, especially in children's lips.
Then, since you cure those cracks as we have said in the divisions and your cure is not effective, then heat the small cautery blade according to this form that is shown:
And let its cavity be according to the thickness of the blade.
Then place that hot cautery blade into the cracks until it reaches the base of the cracks.
Then cure it with cerote once it is healed.
Chapter XIX.
Cauterization of a fistula in the mouth.
When an abscess forms in the uvula or on the palate or around the teeth and eventually breaks, and when it heals improperly forming a fistula, and you have already treated that condition without fully curing it, then you should ignite a cautery according to the amount received into the fistula. Place the ignited cautery at the entrance of the fistula, keeping your hand there until the hot iron reaches the bottom, and do this one or two times. Then treat that with what we have said about the cure once it is healed.
And if the ulcer is healed, well and good; but if not, then it is necessary to expose the location and cauterize the corrupt bone as will be detailed in its chapter.
Chapter XX.
Cauterization of the teeth and softening of the gums.
When the gums are softened by humidity and the teeth are decayed, treat those with medicines and do not delay. Then place the head of the patient under your thigh, and nearby heat the cautery to the form which will be shown below. Try that you pause the quinula (a type of medical tool) over the tooth and insert there the heated cautery forcefully, and hold it a little so that the patient feels the heat of the fire at the root of the tooth.
Then lift your hand, and repeatedly apply the cautery several times according to your desire.
Then make the patient spit out salt water and hold it for an hour, then stop, as the decayed tooth is sealed, the softened gum is tightened, and the corrupted humidity is dried up.
Chapter XXI.
On the cautery treatment for tooth pain.
When tooth pain is due to cold or worms, or if the treatment with medicine does not alleviate it, then the cautery treatment in that area is done according to two methods: either with a cow's horn cautery, or with a fire cautery.
With a pointed cautery, you should take horn from cows and boil that in the iron pot, then cut it and wrap it around the tip of the tenta, then immerse that cut part, and place it over the toothache area urgently before it is cooled down.
And then repeatedly apply that several times until the virtue of the fire permeates to the root of the teeth.
And if wool or wood is placed in the horn mentioned above, place it over the painful tooth, and hold the ignited iron over that until the iron reaches the root of the tooth.
But the cautery with fire is such that you wait for the ember or iron to become hot, and there should be some charred part in it, and the heat of the fire does not reach the root of the tooth.
And then heat the cautery to the form it will take, and place it over the tooth while your hand is ready until the cautery cools down; and do this several times so that the pain may be alleviated on that day or the next.
And ensure that when the cautery, which the patient opens well with good edges, has it for an hour and then remove it; this is the form of the cautery.
And cauterize wherever you feel necessary according to what is possible.
And this is the form of the cannula:
Capitol.xxii.
Of the cauterization of exostoses.
When exostoses are of phlegm and humors that are not responsive to digestion by medicines, and you perform the digestion of those lightly, then you should ignite the cautery in the form of which follows: having two open extremities so that smoke exits from one end, place the cautery over the apostema for one minute, and another if you find it necessary until it reaches the root of the apostema.
And if the apostema is small, then place the cautery according to the quantity of the apostema, and let it remain for three days, placing it over the root affected by heat until what the fire has consumed is fully remedied.
And then take care of that ointment and dressings until it is healed.
Chapter XXIII.
On the cautery for sore throat and the construction of a ligature.
When moisture humors affect the channel of the lung, and especially when this is due to a complex composition, it is necessary that the patient be treated with medicines that promote evacuation at the beginning, and then cauterize the vein in the swollen area.
And be careful that you do not apply the cautery to the vein nor burn along its length but only a little.
And cauterize the other with a cautery at the junction of the neck and at the rear vertebra of the patient. The cautery for the neck should be applied according to the previous method.
And after take care of that which was preceded until it is healed.
Chapter XXIV.
On the cautery treatment for lung illness and cough.
When cough and lung illness are due to humidity, and the patient does not have fever or consumption, and it is an old illness, then apply a cautery with two cauteries on the furcula in the lower regions of the lion's and bull's hearts; and another cautery in the middle region of the foot between the two mammary bones; and let the cautery be pointed according to the previously mentioned form.
And if you wish, let your cautery be punctual with the cauteries that are called puncta, the form of which you precede in the punction of ear pain.
And make points between the cracks for those; and after take care of that which you apply until it is healed.
And let the cautery have three ridges; for this cautery, you can make three cauteries in one pass according to this form:
Capitol.xxv.
Of the cautery for titillatio which is the head of assistance.
When the head of assistance is dislocated due to lubricous humidity and is not fixed at the time of its return, you must reduce its dislocation while it is about to return to its usual place, and by a small movement it is re-dislocated so that it strives to return, as we have testified. First, reduce the dislocation, and then lay the patient on their back or on their side; raise the knee which is in the inner part of the titillatio above your left hand fingers, if the joint is dislocated towards the inner part.
And then heat the cautery having two heads; this is its form:
And then cautery the knee between when one head penetrates the other side; and the figure of the cautery will come when of two heads the cautery is used.
And sometimes the cautery is adjusted according to this count and because they are eighth.
And then place it over the cautery for coagulation with salt, and then make the affected part adhere to coagulation, so that it is not wounded for some time until it is comfortable.
And if the dislocation is above and the thumb is affected, then apply the cautery over the muscle with a cautery on the wrist or with pointed cauteries on the fingers, so that the joint is confirmed and the humidity is reduced and the patient is healed.
Capitol. xxvi.
Of cautery of the stomach.
When cold and humid miasmas enter the stomach before it is extracted from its composition and multiply there, if you continue the methods of cure and do not confirm it, then know that the patient will breathe heavily, extend his hands and limbs, and soon apply cautery to that area with three cauteries: place one cautery on the foot corresponding to the width of a finger with a wrist cautery, and two more on the sides of the first cautery, so as to form a triangular figure; leave space between those not adjusted to promote healing.
And if the depth of the cautery matches the quantity of the two thirds of the thickness of the sole.
And let the shape of the cautery be as in this addition. If you wish, make a large cautery in the middle of the stomach as in this form; this should be a cautery according to the circular shape as in this form:
And let the stomach be cauteryed with punctures at that which is frightened by this cautery: and you hold over the stomach with a puncture according to the quantity you desire to test, and then cautery the puncture; and then cure it with the cure that precedes its healing.
Capitol.xxvi.
Of the cauterying of the thigh wound.
When there is pain in the thigh due to coldness or humidity or excessive windiness before it returns to its normal structure through superfluous egress, and the patient is treated with what we have said and not improved, then you should cause the patient to lie on their back, and place three cauteries according to this form and quantity over the thigh below the hypochondria, and position them over the iliac crest.
And let the space be which is between each cautery according to the size of the hand, and let the cautery be according to the length of the body straight.
And do not burn too much with the cautery.
And if the quantity that is applied equals the size of the sore on the foot, and it is not too tight; and if the wound is standing on the feet of the patient; and if not standing, then lying down, which has already spread its parts, and raises its heels.
And with your subtlety and prudence in the art, you may apply these cauteries using a surgical cautery.
And take care that you do not over-burn in the cauterization, so that the entire wound of the foot is burned to ensure the whole body is affected and does not penetrate into the intestines, for the foot here is subtle; know this.
Chapter XXVIII.
For the perforation of an abscess on the foot, use a cautery.
When there is inflammation or an abscess on the foot and you want to know if the abscess is in the flesh of the foot or in its skin, observe that if it is in the flesh of the foot, the patient will experience a greater degree of swelling and acute pain.
And if it is in the skin of the foot, then the pain will be acute and often so severe that it exhausts even the doctors treating it.
Then ensure that the patient is lying on their side; and closely examine the location of the abscess; and heat the cautery, which resembles a strip of wood, the shape of which was shown in the previous page. And cauterize it, ensuring that the entire chain of tissue is charred, reaching the capsule, until it becomes healthy flesh.
And treat it with the method for curing other abscesses until it heals.
And you should use only that cautery of which the study in the art of medicine is well-extended, and in most cases they have known ill-health from it; yet this one has been experimented with a few times over this operation, yet still leave the other to us, and it suits better.
Capitol.xxix.
Of the cautery for pleurisy.
They said that the ancient cautery for the ribs in pleurisy should be rubbed according to this manner to make it, and this is what you should do: take from the ribs of aristologia a long narrow piece of wood, which is found, and let its thickness be like that of a finger.
Then immerse that in oil and heat it over the fire. Then cauterize with a cautery in that place which is between the continuation of the furcula and the neck; use two small cauteries to guide, one slightly inclining towards the side where the beard begins, and two more cauteries in what is inclined between the fifth rib and the hip bone, inclining slightly towards the rear sides. Place another cauterization in the middle of the foot; place another on the stomach, and three cauterizations at the rear sides; place one cauterization in that place which is between the two scapulas, and two cauterizations on each side of the foot, placing the cauterization between the two scapulas.
And do not hold your hand on the cautery, but rather at the back of the foot to work.
And some ancient doctors said that certain men use a cautery resembling a ray and ignite it, placing it in the location between the ribs until we reach the abscess and it is healed, as we have said about the abscess of the thigh.
In this puncture, there is no fear with the cautery; for if it happens so quickly in the location of the fistula that does not heal.
Capitol.xxx.
Of the cautery for the ulcer.
When you cure the illness of the ulcer, as we have said about the treatment in division and do not alter your cure, the cautery for it is according to three methods, all of which are proper. The first method is to make three or four lines according to the length of the ulcer, following the figure of the cautery for the thigh, the figure of which has preceded.
And let the thickness of each cautery be that of a finger or a little more, and the manner of the cautery be the manner which we have said for the cautery of the thigh equally.
And do not hold your hand on the cautery; and the patient be placed on their back.
And another manner of cauterizing, so that you ignite the cautery having two wicks, which we have said in the chapter of dislocation of the muscle, and raise the lamp which is in the line of the flame to burn the jet of the patient's left side.
And let your elevation be such that you raise the lamp according to the length of the body, so that the cautery is made according to the breadth of the body.
And then insert the two wicks together, light them, in that place where you penetrate the lamp from the other side.
And then remove the cautery; and so he makes four cauteries.
And if you burn, use a cautery having three ventilation holes.
And then you treat the cautery more when it has been burned for too many days, as this is more painful than other preceding causes in the treatment.
Chapter XXXI.
On the cautery for dropsy.
Cautery is not used for dropsy but for the ankle properly.
When you treat the dropsy, use the methods of treatment that we have described in the division, and do not deviate from our instructions. Then, when you need to cautery, use four cauteries around the ankle and one on the stomach, and another on the flanks, and another on the back, and two between the vertebrae of the spine, and one on the right side of the foot, and another on the stomach. And the depth of the cautery be proportionate to the thickness of the skin.
And then leave the cautery open so that it gets cool for a long time.
And you do not evacuate the ill part for the cautery to be placed in such a way that two intentions are added to it, and it will be sped up by the aid of healing.
The shape of the cautery used to cauterize the abdomen should be shovel-shaped according to the form described above, and it is with this shape that the two olives are cauterized according to the form described above.
Capitol..xxxii.
On the cauterization of feet and thighs.
When the feet are swollen and filled with yellow water, place the cautery on the sole of the foot over the bone where it is between the heel and the toe, and lift your hand with the cautery without twisting that area; then lift your hand further, and do not return to touch everything, as the yellowish water retracts.
The cautery is to be done in this form: Then place two cauteries on each thigh, and on each buttock make the cautery at the extremity of the surgical blade. The cautery is to be done according to the length of the buttock: I leave one end high and the other low on the buttock; on each buttock, two cauteries.
Leave the wound open for a long time so that any water exudes from it.
Then treat the wounds which we have mentioned.
Capitol. xxxiii.
On the cautery of the abdominal region.
When the abdominal region is affected by cold and humidity penetrating through the thin walls, this condition is due to the digestive and retentive virtues, which are located in the stomach and intestines. This is treated according to the methods of treatment and you do not refer to any other treatments, although sometimes the patient suffers from a cauterization of virtue exhibiting, so cautery that part above the stomach with a large cautery according to what was previously described in the cauterization of the stomach, using the ring cautery and four cauteries around the circuit of the fine veins, using a subtle clavilh cautery; or use one large cautery on alcatin alozis, or two cauteries.
And if you encounter excessive moisture and the malady is tolerating it, then cauterize that on the perineum and on the intestines, and strengthen it by applying two cauteries over the stomach and near the inguinal regions, which is a perfect cure from which you will not err.
Capitol.xxxiv.
On the cauterization of ancient hemorrhoids.
When they are in the nature of ancient hemorrhoids or one due to large humors or corrupt moisture, and are cured as we have said in the division and do not apply our hot cure, then cauterize three cauteries on the base of the two small and slightly triangular parts, and with a single cauterization above the navel extending for two fingers.
And if you suspect that the stomach of the patient is inflamed and the food they ate was not digested, and their face appears feverish, then cauterize that on the stomach with a large cauterization as previously described; and with one cauterization on the groin, and another on the armpit with a pointed cauterization. Let the cauterization remain open for some time, and cure them once they are healed.
Capitol. xxxv.
Of the cautery on the thigh near the amputation.
When you amputate the thigh, then apply the cautery that is similar to a branding iron. Then insert the ignited brand into the amputated thigh, and keep your hand there until the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which the bleeding comes.
And do this one or two times. If there are more, then cautery each one as we have counted, and apply the ointments to them until they are healed.
And if you use a large cautery on several places, it is more effective in healing.
Capitol. xxxvi.
Of the cautery of fistulas that arise in the natural passages of the body.
When nature does not obey the work we have recommended in its place, and the patient is frightened by this, it should be treated with a cautery.
Then when there is an old fistula in nature behind, and it is corrupted with bad humors, and therefore what is most worthy that covers it is that you try a fine thread under it, and then know the depth of it with the previously mentioned thread.
Then heat the cautery that resembles a ray. Then place the heated cautery in this fistula, according to the quantity in which you insert the thread.
And iterate over that with the cautery until those corrupted humors burn up completely, one time or two or three, according to the quantity of your need.
And guard yourself from burning the nerves and veins; or if the fistula goes to the body of the bladder or the body of the intestine, then guard yourself from all those areas; and do not do this except when the fistula is in a fleshy location and you perceive that it is not penetrating.
And then care for the area until it is healed.
And if the area is sealed, and the substances are separated from it, and remain this way for a long time, then you know that it is completely healed.
And if the substances are not discharged from it, then you know that they are penetrating or in the process of corrupting the flesh, or have come about due to those causes which will be remembered in their place.
Capitol. xxxvii.
On the cautery of warts.
When warts are painful due to friction or excessive dryness, and as a result the patient's pain is diminished, then you should cautery each wart with a cautery point. The specific method for using the cautery point will be remembered later.
And cautery it with a slight touch the second time, for three linear cauteries will follow, and thus they will be more effective in healing.
Chapter XXXVIII.
Of cautery of the bladder.
When the bladder becomes weakened and softened by inflammation and humidity, such that the patient cannot retain urine, then cautery the area where the skin of the perineum begins, using a cautery on the right side and another on the left side.
And the length of each cautery should be according to the size of the toe; then cauterize that with a cautery on the lower part of the big toe, or with two cauteries if necessary.
And the thigh cautery should be done according to how it is performed.
Chapter XXXIX.
Of cautery of the groin.
When there is venous congestion and inflammation in the groin, pregnancy is forbidden, and her menstrual cycle is disrupted, with delayed induction of labor, and joint pain occurs due to this condition, then the area should be cauterized with three cauteries around the navel circuit, as we have said in the bladder cautery; and a cautery on the lower part of the big toe, or with two cauteries, and the thigh cautery should also be used.
Capitol it.xl.
Of the cautery for the dislocation of the ankle.
When mucous humors infiltrate the region of the ankle, and are causes of displacement in its place, a sign of this is that the swelling extends over the other foot when compared between them. And the place of the dislocation is applied to the back of the foot.
Then, cautery the ankle of the foot with a circular cautery, as you will have marked in the circuit of the region as it is turned, so that the region falls in the middle of the circle.
And the form of the cautery mentioned above is used in the cautery of the stomach.
And if this cautery is not present, then use three large olive wood cauteries.
And the cautery should be applied according to the intensity of the pain in the entire leg; and then cure that which remains after it has healed.
Capitol. xli.
Of the cautery for the sciatic vein.
When pain is in the sciatic nerve and its cause is cold and humidity, the patient is cured with what we have said and you do not apply, and this is ancient practice. Then, let the patient be treated of thick humors by stinking pills or artificial ones resembling them; and then cauterize it.
And the method of cautery for it is according to two methods: either with burning medicines, or with fire.
Sir according to two known methods, of which one is to make three triangular cauteries on the sciatic part of the foot in this form; and do so with good depth. And let the space between each cautery be the width of one finger, and whether the cautery is small or large.
More often, apply the cautery in the middle of each location on the heel, as there are four cauteries.
And if you wish, cauterize the circle around which the form precedes in the cautery of the dislocation of the ankle, and let it be a circle that burns the entire circumference.
And this is the way to cauterize for gout when pain is localized in the ankle and not extended into the thigh.
But if it is extended into the thigh, then cauterize there with two cauteries on the thigh over the area through which you will pass the gout, which causes the pain; and with one cautery on the heel, a little should be applied to the tendinous part.
And if the surgical cautery is used, the depth of the cautery should be according to the extent of the circumference.
And if the gout passes through causing pain near the base of the feet, then cauterize there where you will pass the cautery with three or four points or more if needed.
And if the gout passes through causing pain to be felt in the knee, then cauterize there with a surgical cautery.
And in all cautery procedures, ensure that you do not complete the cautery to such an extent that it burns nerves or major artery, for thereby you will be badly injured or cause paralysis.
And I have seen others who cauterize the cavity and the last part of the cautery procedure, and the bed is filled with smoke where the tumor reached the skin, and fire perforates and corrupts all the skin. And soon after a strong convulsion of the abdomen, and soon after death.
And if the pain is in two parts, cauterize each one according to this method.
And the wise will say about the cautery for water: this is the method: make it resemble a circular iron ring, with its circumference being the width of one palm; and let its holes be according to the size of an index finger or at most a little more.
And inside that circle, there is another third; and let the space between them be the quantity of a foot; and may those circles be opened in two parts; and let the length of those grooves be one foot or two feet, and make on those iron edges decently fitting into the circles; this is the form of it.
It is heated in the fire until it turns red and gives off sparks, and then placed on the part of the ankle, with the sore foot over the leg. And then cauterize it with three round cauteries in one go.
And then leave it for three days; then apply a plaster with bread and leave the wound open for many days; and cure it by anointing it until it is healed.
Albucasis says: Oh, son, of this kind of cautery we have used little because of the fear of its appearance, and because we have found few that concern it.
Yet for those who suffer from good cautery, he finds the place for it.
More effective for medicines that adhere is to make two circles having a perforated instrument in which the smoke from the iron door passes through; let the length of the walls where they will be two nuts or half as much.
And if the space which is between each of the patient's thighs due to the size of the swelling; and have been opened and downwards, and should contain themselves among them according to this form:
And then place your hand over the area below the abdomen where the patient is lying, and hold your hand over the area below the water; and then take some hot water and pour it between two circles, and the quality of that water should be as hot as fire gradually, and have that for the quantity of one hour, and let the patient feel the biting and tightening effect â€” for that contraction is like that of fire â€” until the biting stops.
And then lift your hand with the instrument and remove the hot water from all around the water with cold water.
And then let it be for three days and place your hand over that border until the blackness of the tightened contraction subsides, and let this be for some days, after which the redness will fade; this is known in youth.
And then cure it by applying ointment until it is healed.
And if the pain is extended to the thigh or hip, apply a statue in it that contains water according to how it is done in water.
And this is the way of water cauda, and I have already written that in the treatise on the rectification of medicines. Recipe for alkali and caustic not extinguished from both parts one, and three fold them in a new bowl of which the part left is perforated by a small tube, according to the quantity that enters it.
And place the bottom of the bowl in another boiling water bath, and get over that live alkali and caustic water slowly until it covers them by a digit, and then with your hand apply good compression to those, and let the bowl that descends from the sharp water into the part left in the boiled water.
Then adjust all that water, and pour the live caustic and renewed alkali over it, for then it will have great acuity, which is administered in most operations of medicine and in the cautery of other members, for the operation makes use of fire.
And of some medicines which are cauterized wide, such as tincture of tin and honey mixed so that they may be applied.
And Gualia recounts of an ancient man who underwent an operation and a cure for water pain and sciatica, greatly magnifying the method because it was so good. He said that no other treatment was necessary, and that he was cured in one session as recommended, for he immersed himself in hot and cold baths and we know about this from him.
And it should be placed near a willow branch, and if no willow branch is available, a fig tree branch should be used; it should be tied with a few grey threads and placed on the water in which the pain is, or on the thigh, or on the chest, and should be bound.
And it should be left for the quantity of three hours or for the amount of time the patient feels the effect of the application.
And then place it in hot water. When the patient's body is warm, insert it into the soil, for the pain ceases and the patient is cured.
And be aware that no cautery should be used with these medicines except near the body's evacuation.
May I say that when making a cut in the stretched vein, it will heal better if cauterized; and the cautery should be used in this manner: take wool and soak it in old oil, then place it between the toes of the foot and on the heel.
And then take a dry vein and incinerate it in fire until it turns into charcoal; and place it on the wool and let it expand as it cools. And then repeat this, and continue doing so until the sensation of the bite reaches the water and relieves the pain.
And this method of cautery is called the cow's cautery.
Chapter XLII.
On the cautery for joint pain.
Sometimes pain in the two places is caused by multiple factors, such as inflammation or percussion or excessive evacuation, and by causes similar to those, through the infiltration of wet matter.
And the cautery is not used to cut, but only in this single species which is caused by the effusion of wet matter.
Therefore, extract, and then evacuate the patient's groin with pills that resemble them, which are made over both sides where the pain is three lines according to the width of each, then prick or more with cautery in any line five times, according to the quantity that comes from the tolerance of the patient and the virtue of the cautery.
And perform the cautery with a pointed cautery.
And if you wish, cauterize with three or four cautery pricks using a medial cautery needle in this manner:
Capitulum XXXIV.
On Cauterization at the Beginning of Gout.
Motions observed when this illness affects small children; and the sign of the beginning of it in children is that they experience discomfort in their limbs during play, elevation, and movement.
You find in the lower vertebra of the spine and the nearby ones that are beginning to protrude over the other vertebrae.
And when you see this and want to treat it, then cauterize that area with a cautery in the shape of a circle according to this form: place the cautery over every part of the spinal vertebrae equally.
And if you wish, cauterize around the spinal column with a pointed cautery in two or three lines. And let the points be close to each other.
Then cover the area until it heals with what we have said.
More importantly, ensure that the cautery is not applied in haste due to nerve spasms.
Capitol XLIV.
On the cautery treatment for gout and joint pain.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
And thus, gout caused by cold is treated with a method of treatment and not just alleviation of pain, but also with cautery.
And you cautery the area around the foot's joint with a pointed cautery for evacuation.
And the olive-shaped cautery, of which this is the form:
And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. And if the pains rise into the toes or other joints, and you see this swelling, then cautery the area around each toe with three or four cauteries of this olive-shaped type.
And if you need to use a cautery that these cauteries are necessary for you, then cauterize it and do not press your hand too much on the cautery before, just around the size of the tip of the needle.
And if the pains penetrate to the elbow and knee, then apply the cautery which we have said in our chapter.
And if the pains are only in the bladder and it is called stranguria, then puncture along the course of the nerves as they twist, puncturing in those two lines.
And if the pains remain in the fingers, then puncture along the course of the nerves over each knuckle and over the base of the hand.
And if the pains remain for several days in the knees or the muscles, then cauterize the areas around all parts of the joints.
And if you do not evacuate the bladder properly and with the right reception of medicines, for if it is done properly and inflamed, the evacuation will be healthy, God help us.
Capitol XLV.
Of cautery for ruptures.
When there is a rupture in the groin and intestines are seen in front of theè…¹è‚Œè†œ at the inguinal region, and this begins to close, then when you order the patient to abstain from food on that day and use mild remedies so that the opening in his abdomen decreases.
And then place the patient's hand between your hands over his groin, and command him to hold his hand there until it is properly stitched or theè…¹è‚Œè†œ or intestines appear.
And then return those points to their places and test the rupture over the bone of the thigh, marking the extremity of which appears similar to the size of a circle in the upper parts of the body.
And then heat the cautery of which this is the form:
until it be hot and emit sparks. Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
Then place the cautery over that mark on your hand where the cautery is straight, and there where you can get to the bone of the foot between the toes; and repeat with another pass if you have not reached the bone in the first pass.
Observe wisely the condition of the hernia during your cautery, that you do not burn the hernia so that it does not come to the patient's harm or another great mischief.
Be aware that when you use the cautery, do not touch the bone, as it would compromise your operation.
Make sure that the cautery for children is subtle according to their size and measure.
And for three days care for the area of the cautery by keeping it between two layers until the wound from the fire heals.
And care for that as with other ointments until it is healed.
And the patient lie on their back for ten days until the area and wound are sealed.
And ensure that you maintain the nutrition of the patient according to the length of the healing time of the wound which closes the abdomen, and that the intestine does not come out with the effort to heal.
And when it is time to lift after ten days, then apply a proper ointment, and maintain that for another ten days.
And let him rest and replenish his food and drink, and avoid loud voices, for when he uses this regimen of healing entirely, he will recover.
And I will say the healing of ruptures in other parts of the abdomen. At the beginning, and if they do not tear, then cauterize the rupture with a round cautery according to its size; what is extracted from the codena should be done similarly to the tender part of it. Then care for that as we have said, and it is not stitched.
And some first ones have said that a rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery according to this form, rather than with forceps.
And pause a line that is by the latitude in the slashes and rises above the rupture, and another line on top; then place your hand with a cruciform cautery, but the first cautery is lighter and better.
Capitol XLVI.
Of the cauterization of the torchio.
When pain in certain members persists due to congestion or percussion and does not respond to medical treatment over a long period, then you should cauterize with a pointed cautery.
And the cautery should be of the size and shape appropriate to the member, its nature and intensity, and the location and pain of the torchio.
Then if the member is healed by the first cautery, that is good; but if not, then repeat the cautery on it; for customarily, those pains are punctured from one member to the adjacent member, so that you may achieve healing of the pain through cauterization before the malady is cured.
Capitol forty-seven.
Cauterization for leprosy.
Lepers are sometimes cauterized with a very hot cautery, especially if the species of leprosy is caused by the putrefaction of flame and melancholy.
And therefore, if you want to cauterize that area, consider whether the leprosy is common and as we have treated it in the division, neither here nor there. Be wary of the malady that corruption may encompass his entire body and all its composition; then cauterize that area on the head with five cautery marks: one in the middle of the head, leave one space from it, shave the forehead to the end of the hairline; two over the horns; and one behind, on the neck or servant.
And finish your hand with the cautery a little inside where it creates a small impression in the mouth, so that the expiration of thick vapors is alleviated; and cauterize over the cheek as needed.
And if leprosy is already extended over the patient and clearly manifest, then you cauterize that area as well as those cauterizations which we have said in the head; and a cauterization on the tip of the nose, and two cauterizations on both hands, and two cauterizations on two vertebrae of the neck, and six cauterizations on the vertebrae of the back, and one large one near the coccyx, and one on the spine, and two on the hips, and one on each hip, and two on the knees, and one on each knee, and two on the elbows, and two on the muscles, and two on the tendons of their feet; cauterize that on all joints of the fingers of the hands and the feet, and on each heel of his feet, and on the bones of their hands.
And guard the nerves which are over the heel that you do not burn those.
And sometimes cauterization is done with one cauterization on the os pelenilh and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the liver.
And know that the more tightly you adjust the cautery, the more beneficial and effective it is; and know that the patient does not feel pain in the cautery, as they do elsewhere, since the body of the patient is already numbed.
And know that the cautery should be large or small according to the limbs and joints, as directed by the nature of the instruments.
And then cure the cautery with a mixture of ground pepper and honey, as well as other treatments until it is healed.
Capitol. xlviii.
On the cautery for stupor.
When some limb is numb or asleep and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, and does not heal, then you cautery that numb limb with cautery according to the size of the limb or its smallness.
And let your cautery penetrate the thickness of the skin slightly. And then cure that which is ointed until it is healed.
And in some cases, certain spots are cauterized. This affects more areas and the feet, and the vertebrae of the back, and one sees the inflammation of the nerves which run through that member, and the swelling is reduced.
But do not assume this for yourself, but only for one who is skilled in the anatomy of the members and the exit of the nerves throughout the moving body.
Capitol. XLIX.
On the cauterization of ulcers that become mortified.
When ulcers are old and do not respond to any of the medicinal ointments, then cauterize over that spot with a cautery, using just a little according to the quantity of the cochenil involved. Let the white and color of the ulcer change.
And then cure that which is treated with a mixture of lentil flour and err flour in rubbed oil and leaves of arnica, or pigeon excrement or turtle dove excrement, taking one part of each, all mixed together. Then cover the area with a cloth until it is healed.
Capitol I.
Of cautery for the groin.
When cancer begins and you want to stop it, then cautery it with a circular cautery in the circuit of the tumor as it is revolving.
And the wise will say that it should be cauterized with the last cautery in the middle location; but to me, this is not visible, for I fear it might be ulcerated, and I have seen this several times.
And it is more proper to cauterize it in the circuit of the tumor with a circular cautery as we have said, or with several cauteries.
Capitol II.
Of cautery for adenitis.
When some adenitis is delayed in maturation, this is either due to excessive fluidity making it so, or due to the patient's condition, which might be old age in decrepitude, with little strength, or due to time itself. If you want to hasten the maturation of the adenitis; then cauterize in the circuit of the tumor with several small puncturing cauteries; and leave the one that will naturally mature.
If you want to make the puncture with a cautery, then heat the cautery of which this is the form: and place that in the middle of the affected area so that the probe penetrates.
And if you place the cautery in that location, let it be, for the arm shall be relieved; and then cure that which shall be healed.
Capitol. lii.
Of the cautery for corrosion.
Corrosion is a wandering decay in the member, which corrodes it as fire consumes dry wood.
Therefore, if you find the corrosion in a location where you plan to apply a fire cautery, then heat the cautery with several small and large coals as is appropriate for that location where the corrosion exists.
And then cautery the entire area until you have eradicated all the corrosion and do not leave any cause of it.
And after that let it be for three days, and place a hot oil mixture over the cauterized areas until all the scabs are removed and all the corruption is gone.
And after that cure it with an ointment producing flesh.
But if after three days the flesh grows healthy in that which is not corruption, that is good; but if not, then re-cauterize the areas that are rotten in the corrupt places.
And after medicating with some sharp medicines several times, use half the amount of cautery. But however, a mild fire cautery has more benefit.
And I have already said the cure with sharp medicine in the division, so use it when you need it.
Chapter 53.
On the Cauterization of Wounds and Other Similar Conditions.
Small blisters appear on the afflicted side of the foot where gout is said to occur, and this is a large cause, entering through the foot; in these, cautery is performed according to two methods, one with fire and one with water-cauterization.
The cautery with fire is when you heat the concave cautery tip resembling a turning poker, which is made of iron according to the quantity it should contain for all parts, and it has thin edges.
Then place that heated cautery on the blister, and quickly move your hand with the cautery in a circle around the blister while the cautery reaches the depth of the blister. Let it remain on it for three days until it begins to scab. Then apply a poultice to it with wild thyme boiled in salt water, and let the poultice remain on it for one night until the blister is eradicated by its roots.
Then treat the area with an ointment of flesh-generating medicine until it heals.
And if sores or blisters occur on the surface of the body, especially on the back and feet, then when you administer cautery with water, take a quannula of copper or iron or needle, place it over the bone; then pour a small quantity in the quannula of water and withdraw your hand, and you will revolve that with compression of your hand from all sides, and press the margin of the quannula against the root of the bone, and you will find the water flowing through the passage of the root of the cautery; and wait for the patient a little by the bite of the flowing water for an hour, then withdraw it, because the bone will have been softened.
And do the same for those and then for the other until you have treated all of them in the body.
And do likewise cure those ulcers where the roots of the bones have been softened by the ointments which cause the flesh to rot.
Capitol. liiii.
Of the cautery for trembling.
When there is a tremor due to friction in the nerves or from fever of that cause, or from another similar cause, then you should cauterize it with four or five cauteries on the spine, placing one cautery between each vertebra; and one cautery on the foot, and above the stomach, place an olive-shaped cautery.
And the tremor subsides, and the recovery of health from the illness follows.
Capitolium.
Of the cautery for diseases affecting the body.
When in the body abscesses have formed and pustules are present, which are made of largeè…è´¥çš„ç‰©è´¨ï¼›å› æ­¤åœ¨è„“è‚¿å¼€å§‹å‡ºçŽ°æ—¶ï¼Œåº”ä½¿ç”¨ç»†å°çš„ cauteryæ£’çŠ¶çš„è¿·è¿­é¦™æžï¼›å…¶æœ«ç«¯ä¼¸å…¥ç«ä¸­ï¼›æˆ–è€…ä½¿ç”¨é•¿å½¢æ ‘çš®ï¼›æˆ–è€…ä½¿ç”¨æ‰åœ†å½¢çš„ cauteryã€‚
And sometimes a cautery is applied additionally at the beginning of its expulsion according to this manner; and they believe, and when the superfluity is ruptured, it heals them.
Moreover, ensure that this is done near the expulsion through phlebotomy.
Capitulum LVII.
On the cautery treatment for flux of blood from an injury due to an arterial incision.
Often, when there is a flux of blood from an arterial incision that has been made in the wound or from the incision for an apstema or cautery on the member, then the swelling appears, and it is difficult to reduce that.
Then, when such a case occurs, hold your hand over the opening of the artery and place it firmly there. Keep it there until the flux of blood has stopped, then remove it without allowing any more to flow.
And then place the olive cautery sticks over the fire for a few moments, and blow on them until they are well heated.
And then take one small or large according to the place and the wound where the artery is broken, over that vein vigorously press after you have warmed as I said, and with the cautery cut and restrain that bleeding.
And if the blood is expelled from the opening of the artery when you warm as I said and draw the cautery, then take another cautery cooked among the cauteries which are prepared in the fire, and therefore do not cease to do this one after another until the bleeding is restricted.
And be careful that you do not burn the nerves here, and that no other evil comes to the patient.
And know that when blood flows from the artery, it is not possible to restrict the bleeding with a cautery in those cases, especially when the artery is large, unless one of four methods is used: either with the cautery as we said, or with extraction when it is not extracted, or when it is extracted, the ends of it are cauterized and the bleeding is restricted, or with ligature with pitch or with a strong bandage, or with pressure over medicines of which the virtue is to restrict the bleeding; and they should be tight with a poultice and proper compression.
But he who administers a decent restraint to it with flax and by stricture of cloths or by the position of causes burning and similar, does not conferre only tart.
But if he needs to do this for someone and neither the doctor is present nor medicine, then open it slowly with his finger on those openings of the vein as we have said, and understand the large constriction within which the scab has been from the upper part of the wound, and over the archery let the said not be rubbed; and over the archery should be sprinkled with cold water fomentation while the scab is congealed and thickened; and more cossire on whether it needs a cautery or medical necessity.
Of incision and perforation and venting and of bloodletting and of wounds and their appearances.
We have already said in the first chapter all illness in which cautery with fire is convenient and medicine burning, and the occasions and causes of it, and the instruments necessary for those cauteries; and I have ordered the chapters of the subirance of the head between the feet.
And I will proceed in this chapter in that manner, so that the one who seeks this may be relieved, concerning what he has requested.
And before I begin this, know, sons, that in this chapter we treat of what is done in the first chapter on cautery.
And so, know that you must be in great caution, for in the operation described in this chapter, multiple evacuations are made, which if not handled correctly can lead to serious consequences. You must ensure the aspersion of the vein or incision on the abscess or ulceration, or the preparation for excision or purification of the wound, or extraction of an arrow, or incision for pus discharge, and similar procedures. And in all of these, there is fear and trembling, and in the most severe cases, death.
And I warn you that this applies to you in the position you are in, for at times you may have to handle conditions caused by bad habits. And from them some you will go to his illness and if it is slight you should let him die, and this because of the vehemence of what he finds of his illness, and for the length of his illness, and in the illness is fear which signifies death.
And from those who give you their advice, you waiting for that health, and his illness is pernicious.
And therefore you must ensure that you agree with him who comes to you from whom this manner is; and your caution be greater than covetousness and your greediness; and do not presume any cause over it but rather certain science which verifies what you should do, and to which by succession a praiseworthy success will come.
And use in the cure of all your patients by prognosis and indication of him to whom health is converted, for in that you have aid in the acquisition of fame and memory, praise and glory.
O, children, God imparts His own understanding to you and does not take away your direction and protection, for this is in His hand.
And I have arranged this chapter distinguishing it by chapters as preceded in the chapter of cauteries, concerning the cure from head to feet, so that what you ask about this and which you need may be alleviated to you.
First chapter.
Of the cure of water that is contained in the head of the child.
Know that this illness often appears in children during childbirth and when the mother's body strengthens the child's head, it causes fever.
And sometimes appears for hidden causes which are not known.
But I see this illness only in children; and for all those whom I see succumb to it, therefore it has been left to me to work on them.
And I have seen that a child's head was filled with water, and its head was always swollen until it could no longer support itself due to the size of its head, and more so because the humidity increased inside leading to its death.
And this humidity or is added between the ligament and the bone, or is added by placing the bone on the cushion.
When the operation is in that case where the humidity is between the ligament and the bone, and the abscess is small, then cut in the middle of the locum with a fissure in the width, and let the length of the fissure be two fingers wide so that the humidity flows out, and this is the form of the spatium:
And so, if the humidity is much increased and the abscess is larger, then here make two fissures in this manner:
And if the humidity is on the bone, the sign of this is that you see the edges of the locum open from all parts, and the water flows out when you compress it with your hand on the inside parts; this is not what you want to hide. And cut in the middle of the locum with three fissures in this manner:
And drain all the humidity with the incision; strengthen the fissures with bandages and feathers; on the fifth day, pour oil over them; remove the bandage and dress the wound with cloths and ointments, strengthening the locum with equal parts; let the patient eat dry food of little humidity until the member is comfortable and healed.
And another way of making an incision, which consider as having regard to the size of the abscess and the collection of the water; for sometimes it is more in the occiput, or in the anterior part, or on the right side, or on the left; and therefore attend to the incision where the abscess appears and the filling with water, and do so according to what seems best to you.
And observe that you do not incise the artery and endeavor to flow of blood and let the patient die from this flow of blood as an evacuation of humidity.
Chapter II.
When an acute catarrh or wound occurs in the ears or the foot, this is an ancient method, and you do not apply the treatment of medicines to it; rather, the proper treatment for this is the incision of those two arteries.
And when you want to incise where the disease's root is, then rub the area with a coarse cloth so that the arteries appear, and tie the neck of the disease with some cloth; and consider where the pulse of the vein is; and the areas above those are approximately over the ears pressed, and they are hidden in most people.
And then press over the artery with your finger, and incise each part sharply with the blade of the knife entering into the mouth, and do this for the width of the head.
And if you want, insert the blade leaving the artery and cut it at the points above the parts.
And let the length of the incision be two digits long, for when any vein is cut, the bleeding occurs at the pulsating exit, which jumps frequently through it.
But if the artery does not appear at the incision, then measure from the ear the quantity of three digits' space, and press there with your finger, and cut into the mouth.
And that which escapes from the wound is a quantity of blood one uncia, and more or less of it falls, all of this according to the quantity which appears from the virtue of the malady and from the fullness of the artery of his.
And then consider the wound, and therefore if there remains on the bone any cause of suppuration, then incise it so that no abscess forms.
And then strengthen the wound with down feathers and cloth lint, and then treat it with ointments until it heals.
Chapter III.
On the extraction of the arteries which are in the temples.
When an old or acute headache occurs due to dampness and the quality of the vessels in the temples, or if it is a strong old headache similar to those, and is treated according to the methods of medical cure, but this does not relieve us, then we have resorted to the extraction of the arteries in the temples, or cauterization of those as we have shown.
And the manner of the operation and extraction is that you raise the skins which are on the temples; and understand the apparent artery in the temple where it is shown to you by your own pulse, and is concealed in few men due to the strength of the cold.
And if it is concealed, then lift the neck of the patient with some cloth; and then rub the area with a rough cloth or evaporate the place with hot water until the artery becomes clearly visible. And then you take the spatum of which this is the form: And then you incise the vein with it as facilitated until you reach the artery; and then anoint it with oil and extract that from the superficial parts until you remove it from the vein and uncover those of the tunics, leaving that, from all parts.
More if the artery is fine, then encircle it with the end of the forceps, and then incise a part thereof according to the quantity for which the ends of it are elongated and contracted, and there will not be a flow of blood, for if they are not incised, the blood will not rise up.
And then evacuate from the wound three ounces of blood.
And if the artery is large, then you should divide it into two places with a ligature twice as strong of that or with long cords, and do not allow it to become putrid before the consolidation of the wound and ensure a flow of blood.
And then incise the excess fluid between two ligatures; and do so at that time or shortly after another time.
And if you wish, cauterize it with a cautery on the bone and with a surgical cautery between the points where it has been incised, and this will take the place of that operation.
And it is better to do this operation unless the patient has fever or is from a chill; for the cautery helps with the final humors, and therefore it is better in recovery.
And then you should ligate the arteries that you place at the proper site, and tie them over powder properly made, and afterwards treat it with dry medicines to promote fleshing and with hot poultices until it is healed.
And if during another operation you encounter a flow of blood from the artery, then you tie it to restrict that blood, or with a cautery, or what you fill the place with cloth and strengthen your hand so that the blood is restricted. And if any cause of this is not at your presence, then place your hand there between the blood and congilat it, and apply the area with water of vehement friction until the acuity rests, and strengthen it as needed.
And for what is lighter in the extraction of an artery, you cauterize the vein with this cautery having two knives, after you have marked the two areas with hot pincers, and place two sticks, ignited, so that they reach the bone and incise the vein in two places, so that what is between the extremities of it is lengthened, which are not fully consolidated by this cautery.
And this is the form of the cautery:
And the sharpness of the two knives is essential. But if the pain is acute and sharp like two knives pressing against each part of the body, and it does not subside quickly, then it is better.
Therefore, when there is any swelling, keep the heat of the fire on those areas and the flesh is incised slightly.
And this method is better in all works and more gentle.
And let the space between two knives be equal to the size of the swelling of the finger.
Capitol quart.
Of the cure for bodies affected by sharp and acidic tears from the eyes.
When the tears are acidic, and the body is affected by those veins which are on the forehead, and you find no cause for the cure in medicine, and sometimes the face of the patient turns red and feels a crawling sensation on their forehead as if it were being infested by ants, and the eyes become weak, softened such that the skin around them seems thin, and the eyelids are scalded due to the sharpness of the tears, they use ant juice in the cure for those of this kind, and they number this cure among the difficult ones.
And you command the patient to stretch the skin that is on his forehead, and then incise in the forehead three equal distances according to the length of the forehead. And if the length of the incision is two digits: one incision should be equally distant from the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second according to the length of a small movement of the tears which are in the lacrimal, and the third from the other part.
And guard yourself from the beginning of the arteries which are in two branches, and extend your hand from the continuation of both jaws. And if the space of each incision the quantity of three digits adjust.
And if you have a piece of sponge equipped or dry cloth at hand, place them over which to absorb the blood.
And then insert the tip of two sharp instruments, of which this is the form of the incision: that is from the opening between the temples into the second incision. Excise all the tissue that is between two incisions along the saphenous line which is over the bone, and then do this of the middle incision into the second incision. Then stab this space and insert it into the first incision. Another time use another instrument called a cutter, sharp on one side and blunt on the other.
Then place the sharp edge to detach the surrounding flesh, and the blunt edge into the bone. Push it in so that it reaches the middle crack, and cut away all vessels that descend from the head to the heels.
More than that, continue the incision to where the tissue appears, and then do this in the middle crack between the other crack.
And after the bleeding has equalized, express the areas of the feet with the congilat.
And then place your hand on any gouty crack in the old skin, and place it over those powders mixed in wine and oil and vinegar, ensuring that no abscess forms.
On the seventh day remove the bandage and administer a large fomentation of whey or honey water, and then cure what was applied with basil oil and others so that the wounds may heal.
Chapter V.
For the cure of tears due to catarrh and those flowing from the inner parts of the head.
When there is an acute and continuous catarrh, and the tears from the eyes are diminished and weakened, and their gaze shows weakness, and the eyelids are ulcerated and the skin around them affected, and in the forehead there is severe pain and subsequent swelling, then you can infer that these conditions are due to matters and catarrh originating from the inner parts of the head.
And the best cure for these conditions is this: you should command the patient to rub their forehead, and then incise a small crack in the middle of the forehead, about the width of a finger (beginning between the left temple and the right temple; within the bone; extend your hand from the temples where they are broadest, ensuring good penetration), until the bone is exposed.
Dry all the blood with sponge or dry cloth and then insert between the two lips of the fissure a piece of lint or a cloth. Strengthen above with powders mixed in wine and oil so that it does not become an abscess when cauterized.
And when you remove this and see that the abscess has already diminished, then wash the bone where it begins to grow flesh, and then cure it with an exsiccative regimen that causes the flesh to mature, as if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony and mix them, and from them make a plaster and administer it to these wounds of the flesh's nativity.
Capitol. vi.
Of the cure for what enters the ears.
All cause that enters the ears is of four species: either it is mineral stone or a cause similar to stone, such as iron and vein, or it is from plants such as cypress or bean, or it is a fluxible cause such as water and sour wine and theirç±»ä¼¼å†…å®¹ä¼¼ä¹Žè¢«æˆªæ–­äº†ã€‚è¯·ç»§ç»­æä¾›æ–‡æœ¬ï¼Œä»¥ä¾¿æˆ‘èƒ½å®Œæ•´åœ°ç¿»è¯‘æ¯ä¸€è¡Œã€‚
And when a wart appears in the ear or another cause resembling those causes that do not affect or enter the ear, and you expose the ear to the sun, and if you touch the wart, then it distills into some cause of olive oil or sesame, then proceed with its extraction, and make it sneeze according to condition, and plug the nostrils to prevent sneezing. And place some pieces of cloth or wool in the circuit of the ear, and extend the ear to the parts above, where motas (small particles) are frequently found due to these causes.
And if it is not removed, then proceed with the extraction using the instrument called gesti epicicarios, of which this is the form:
And if it is removed by the gesti, that is good; otherwise, then proceed with the extraction using a fine, doubly folded hook.
And if it is not removed by this, then make a cannula of wire and insert the end of the cannula into the tract of the ear and close around the cannula with wax and with oil softened so that it does not open except the cannula. And then extract the thigh muscle with strong traction, for too many times as we have recounted.
If it is not torn in this manner, then take a hot flaxen cloth or a warm compress with which the thighs are placed in contact for a quantity of time, and place that at the extremity of the thigh, and then wrap around that part decently. And then insert that into the meatus of the ear with ease, and then dry the ear of its moisture.
And therefore if it is not torn by all the causes which we have recounted, then you cut to drain that which tends to become an abscess or spasm.
And the way to cut it is that at the beginning you mark the thigh of the femoral vein and extract the cord according to the manner of its virtue, and then make a incision between your hands and turn the ear towards the parts above, and make a small fissure in the bottom of the ear, and place its greys in the well-compressed area. And let the fissure of lunar shape reach to the heel, and, if the heel is infected, obstruct it if possible with appropriate instruments; then apply velocity to the fissure in that hour, and cure it while it is healing.
And if the cause attacks the ear is one of the boils that swell and are inflamed, then administer the cure and extraction of it; but if it does not obey to your treatment, then take pure thin pus according to this form: And administer to that the abscess of that boil which has attacked the ear.
And do not do this when you think that it has already been moistened by the vapor of the ear, and place it on fine wicks, and then extract it in those areas near the edges or with subtle touch, or by incision as we have said, for this makes the extraction easier.
But in the water which has entered into the ear cavity where the disease uses sneezing to start its condition, and fills the ear with a little old wax, and pour this wax over the ear in which is the water, and if by this it is washed out, well; but if not, then take small pieces of flax or wool according to the length of your finger, and heat these in the fire for a little while, and the patient insert one of these into the passage of his ear and shake over a part of that piece and beat with another stone on the stone which is inside the ear. Do not stop applying heat until all the water has been expelled.
Do not stop applying heat until all the water has been expelled. And when the water has been fully expelled, take a piece of paper or cloth, and put one end in the ear and extend the other end into the fire until the paper is burned.
And put another piece of cloth and do this several times until all the water has been expelled, then squeeze it with a suction device as previously described.
In the extraction of a small foreign body entering that ear, do this more gently and as it appears. Treat it as we have said in the division. But if it is a larger object causing immediate pain, then perform the extraction quickly and firmly, and the cause of it is less severe than all other causes that occur in the ear.
In the extraction of a worm generated in the ear, when you treat it as we have said in the division and in the tractatus de distillationibus, and if your treatment is not effective, then look into the ear in the sunlight.
And if there appears any cause of worms, then extract that with forceps or fine tweezers, but if no cause appears, then take a cannula and stretch it open above. I introduce the subtle extremity into the ear according to the quantity that the patient can endure; and then suck it out with a strong suction, and do this several times until all the worms are expelled.
But if they do not obey to your assistance, then you insert and close the circuit of the cannula with wax as we have said; then administer distillations which have already been prepared for the treatment of worms, and you will find this in the treatise on distillations.
And let your application be with that which you will pour the medicinal oils into the ear with this instrument, which is its form. And make that of silver or copper, stretch it out, in which there is a small tube, and with a flat surface above.
And thus it must be done so that it is in the cavity of the catheter here where it will be necessary. And if you wish, take the reed and wrap it around the extremity of the catheter decently tight, then place oil in the cavity of the ear, or the juice of some herb, or any medicine you choose into the catheter â€” that is in the ear â€”, and then insert the reed tightly above and squeeze with your hand a compressive pressure on it until the oil is expelled into the cavity of the ear and the illness feels the oil inside.
And what is infused into the ear should already be heated over fire for a little while. And make sure that the medicine you will distill into the ear is not too hot, for ear medicines do not tolerate that.
Capitol. vii.
On the cure for ear abscesses.
Sometimes children are born with abscesses in the ears of their unperforated parents, and this occurs in some adults as well, with an abscess forming in the meat of the ear due to infection or without any apparent cause; sometimes these abscesses form in the preauricular region which does not become visible immediately, and sometimes they occur in the outer parts.
And that which occurs in the abdomen of the patient, which does not easily allow for visualization, is in the major disposiciones of difficult healing.
And in that where you can see it, have the patient turn towards the sunlight and look at it. And if you see an apparent accumulation, open the small incision under which this accumulation is located:
If the end of it where the width is small, and one part is acute while the other is not; and the incision be two fingerbreadths wide so as not to irritate the ear.
And if the obstruction is in hidden flesh in the ear or in the meat of the ear, then make small incisions and cut deeply enough to remove all the flesh.
And if the obstruction is in the abdomen of the ear, then take a thin pointer and heat that for a little while in fire, and then place it in the flesh of the ear.
And if you sense an abundance of fluid where the patient complains with ease due to heaviness of breathing, relieve the oppression with ease; and be careful not to injure the nerves of the ear.
And place the cloth in the ear according to the amount of fluid you have wrapped in Egyptian ointment. Do this for several days until you are sure of the consolidation of the wound; or soak some and apply it to the affected area, then sprinkle with dried trisact powder and use it. If you see that the ear is already swollen, then change the dressing and substitute another one which you wrap in a cloth soaked in olive oil, before the abscess ruptures; and cure the area until it is healed.
And if a flow of blood occurs, then submerge the sponge or cloth in cold water and apply it to the ear, and use the other treatment which restrains the flow of blood, as described in the treatise on distillation.
Capitol. VIII.
Of the care of abscesses which occur on the eyelids.
Abscesses which occur on the eyelids sometimes are humid, and some times are dry.
Then ensure that you have those lancets or spoons, and incise those with the foam of their roots, and place your hand over the areas after trisecting.
But if there is pain with a flow of hot blood, then cauterize those with a thin cautery lance.
And the best cauterization is near the incisions and the sores return when there remains any cause of their roots; and when they are cauterized with fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
Chapter IX.
Care of the swelling that hot blood causes on the eyelids.
Swellings sometimes occur on the eyelids of the eye due to some cause which is similar in its strength and hardness, and hence is called swelling.
And it is an addition of large humidity in the eyelid below and above.
And in their operation, you must consider whether the swelling is present in them beneath and above the eyelid; and the cause of it is slight.
And make a slit there for the width, and then probe it thoroughly with an instrument to facilitate drainage, and suspend it and cut it.
And if the wound is large, then you adjust it with sutures; and care for it so that it heals.
And if it is small, you will not suffer ill from it because the ointment restores and heals it.
And if the swelling is subsiding inside the eyelid, you should reduce the inner surface, then probe and lift the eyelid with an instrument, another for incision, and press it from all sides. If the eyelid is elongated by incision, then this is not a cause for concern.
And at the beginning, wash well with salt water; and cover the area with water until it is healed.
Capitol.
For the cure of excision in the upper eyelid.
Excision is caused by gray substances that are generated in the tissues of the upper eyelid, especially in children, aggravates their illnesses and leads to their death; and they cannot look at the brightness of the sun for this reason, causing tears to flow continuously.
And for this reason, they often have tears streaming down their faces all the time, and sleep with tears on their faces; only on the eyelids of their eyes are the eyebrows moist, which are already covered by inflammation, and the impending need for excision is apparent in the eye; and when you press on the area with hot compresses, you can feel the excision between them.
And some method of operation is as follows: the patient places their head on a hot compress, then covers them with a cloth and ties it securely. A circle is made according to the quantity that contains arthronach from all parts, and this is placed over the previous one, pressing with hot compresses so that excision fluid aggregates in the center of the circle. Then, in the center of this moisture, incise along the width, ensuring the fissure is no larger than the incision made in a flap operation.
More in the preceding cavity where you open the chain entirely until you reach the artery, for in the later complications you proceed with the artery through a fissure according to the form of whiteness.
Therefore, extract those from the cloths which you have wrapped around your feet and mix them between your right and left hand until they are dispersed.
And make sure you do not press at the fissure so that the spatum does not reach the vein and lest it cause damage.
More if no artery appears at the beginning of the fissure, then press a small amount of facilitation into the fissure before proceeding with the artery; and then extract those as we have said; and further immerse cloths in water and vinegar and place them over the area to strengthen those with powder.
And so rub with salt and place it in the cavity of the fissure to remove what remains of that humidity.
And further cure it until it is healed.
And if an abscess occurs in that place, then cure it by applying caustic plasters until it is healed.
Capitol. xi.
Methods of palpation of the whole body.
When in the eyelids of the eye sooted dyes are applied to the natural skin and it becomes hardened, then those nothings of the eye become signs of illness such as continuous tearing, softening of the eyelids, and tissue that is a cause of destruction of the eye. This condition is called tactinir of the eye, and it is cured in four ways: by cauterization with fire; by acute medicine as previously described in the Capitol on cauterization; by incision and suturing; or by cannulas as I will explain later.
And thus cover the head of the eye with your left hand; then turn the eyelid of the eye with your right hand. If it turns, good; otherwise, insert a needle into that where the thread is tied from the part where the eyelid ends, and make the needle penetrate with thread above, and this should be â€” near the margin of the eyelid where the skin begins â€” next to the skin, and pull the thread to the parts above the eyelid, then turn it back.
And then place the skin tightly against the surface of the inner eyelid, between the major lacrimal gland and the minor lacrimal gland; next remove the fat and dust the eyelid with fine powder of cork or cloth, and cover the eyelid with a tent, as illustrated by the shape of a mirt leaf.
But I must observe that the shape should be according to the amount of eversion of the eyelid, for which varies in women, for those in whom a large amount of the eyelid is to be evaginated according to the degree to which it is relaxed.
And then place the surface on the two lines you have marked, and begin between the major lacrimal gland and the minor lacrimal gland. And if your incision near the natural skin is as thick as the king's thumb.
And then place the probe in one of the angles of the wound, and excoriate it completely, and then suture the two edges with a needle or fine woolen thread, and cleanse the wound, and apply what remains of the threads over two bone ridges for some viscous causes, if you wish to do this, otherwise, you are done.
And after that, let the stitching of the veins be left in for three or four days, and then cure this.
And if you wish, leave the wound open without stitching, and cure it by what dries and constricts, for when the eyelid is swollen you should apply the closure of the wound and its addition; but stitching is better. Therefore say this to the ancients thus.
But if the patient is diligent about the illness, and it is of good operation, and not out of fear.
And another method of treating it is to figure the eyelid like the leaf of a myrtle, and then elevate the eyelid by three inches separating and joining according to this form:
But if this is not possible, take the pins, and as it is unequal, then take a needle with thread and put that in the middle of the figure, and insert the other thread near the major lacrimal gland, and the other near the minor lacrimal gland, and adjust between the ties said threads to equality, and then raise your hand for elevation equally, raising the entire codena over which it is marked as we have recommended.
And then adjust the two edges of the wound with stitches, and cure that which is within until it is healed.
And if you make an incision or a fissure, suture that apostema with thread and in the same manner, and apply ointment to it.
And in some cases on the eyelid, let its edges be converted. Then use the incision that we have mentioned for this purpose; but suture in such a way as to be more natural.
To treat with canes is according to this form: And you convert the eyelid and split the figure that is inside according to what I have recounted; then, with art, make two canes or two thin strips whose length be according to the length of the eyelid and their width a third of the width of the space. And you have incised at the extremities of some parts, where you have the threads.
Then add any subtlety over what you have excised from the lid of the eye, and compress the canals of various parts with strong constraint, and leave that for a few days, for the clot will die through the constraint and be denied, and it will fall out when it can by itself come down.
If it is delayed, then cut the edges of the wound, and proceed to cure the sore until it is healed.
Then since it is solidified, the lid is elevated and the skin does not hurt.
And this is the way of two canals which you will make according to this form: and has neither more nor less in the length and width.
Chapter XII.
For the elevation of painful skin on the eyelid using an awl when the skin is tough.
When they are unnatural, hard, rough, and painful eyelids, the operation for them is that you take a fine awl and place it on that fine fiber of each eyelid, and then adjust the ends of the awl in a very subtle manner. And let the length of the threads be the width of one palm.
And then prepare another thin thread and place it briefly under the affected area, using the ends of that one if you want.
And then place the patient's head in a warm bed, and expose it to the sun so that your work is effective, for it is a delicate and intricate operation.
And then insert the needle into the cleft of the tightly adjusted skin, adjusting it with your hand, and let that penetrate deeply into the eyelid between the time you withdraw it from above the natural skin.
And then pull the skin tight above and insert that into the incision, with the skins being one or two or three, but not more.
And then pull your hand there so that the skin is tightly adjusted in the incision on the eyelid with the natural skin.
Otherwise, if the skin is tightened with the cauterized thread and the skin does not come out, tighten the cauterized thread at the points where you placed the thread, so that the excess from the wound will be drawn in.
And when you tie the ligament of the heel, then you will straighten and pull it, stretch it, and close the heel, and leave it closed for two or three days until the hair adheres to its place and grows over that good flesh.
And if the hair is shorter, then you adjust a longer piece of skin from the natural hairs, elevate it at that place, or leave it until it stretches somewhat to fill the space, and then you elevate that.
Chapter XIII.
For the cure of ahceratitis which is in the upper eyelid.
When there is ahceratitis in the heel, and it is a contraction of the eyelid when it contracts towards the upper or lower part, due to poor consolidation of the wound or section or cautery, it is called leporina. This ahcerati can be either natural or accidental, caused by the consolidation of the wound or sections or cauteries, or resembling them in their condition.
May the manner of the operation on him be that you make that consolidation and separate the lips of him, and place in him in what is between those one cheek of cloth, and tie those together until they are healed.
And know that you should use the cure for those causes which dry up, as they constrain; for if you do this, it will return to aggravate worse than it was before without your attention.
Use for those causes that mollify thus as with fenugreek, and soak the cloth in water in which it is boiled and its seed, or a unguent of yarrow, which be liquefied by some of the oils, and submerge the cheek in that, and cure with that.
And the treasure of your cure is that you perforate with all means that are not consolidated according to the form that was at the beginning.
And this operation which we have said is nothing but some correction of gout that does not return the form of the place as it was before.
Chapter XIV.
For the treatment of hemorrhoids that occur in the eyelid, proceed.
This hemorrhoid that occurs in the eyelid, which is named vertere generally, and it can be either natural or accidental.
More accidentally, it is caused by injury oråˆ‡å‰²æˆ–çƒ™ä¼¤æˆ–å…¶ä»–ç±»ä¼¼åŽŸå› ã€‚
For the operation of its treatment, you should take a needle and make a double thread, placing that needle in the flesh, and make it pass from the left lacrimal to the right lacrimal, so that the thread reaches the two ends of the flesh.
Then extend the flesh at the upper parts above the needle and sew that with a thick blade. And therefore, if you return the shape of the eyelid as it should be, that is good; otherwise, take a needle and place it in the divided figure, then with that convert the eyelid, and make the two fissures on the edge of the eyelid.
And if the ends of the two cracks at the corners of the incision, which you have made where they converge, are to be made into an angle such that when they come together a figure is formed.
And this figure is the Greek letter: lambda.
And then place the flesh there for the quantity that is the length of the sharp edge left from it, what we call the eyelid.
And then adjust the separated parts with the wool thread; and then treat those with what we have said about the moistening medicines and the plaster until it is healed.
And if you incise further for a crack or suture or cautery, then cut a flat incision on the skin of the eyelid according to what has been previously described. And then separate with the plaster between two lips as we have said.
In the end of the discourse on curing incisions when they are above or left over, let it run in the operation according to how it is prepared in the form of the incision, and that is in the form of various speckles.
And the skilled craftsmen always prepare tools in every manner that is possible for him to return the figure to its natural form or near it, and that malade according to what suits him from the operation and the instruments in the major arrangements.
Capitol XV.
Of the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
When this consolidation occurs in men, one attempts to solidify the eyelid above on the white of the eye, and to prohibit its ease of movement and its natural actions. Therefore, you should introduce the outer corner of the ray, leave the eyelid, and elevate it or extend it to the cheek.
And then you incise the adhesion with a fine blade, which should not be of sharp incisions, having a slightly obtuse edge so that the patient is not disturbed by the operation, and leave the fluid to maintain its sharpness.
And let your incision be such that it causes the adhesion to separate easily as the eyelid returns to its natural form, and may all the adhesion heal.
And then you put in the full salt water with which you wash; or distill in it zuni dissolved in water.
And then separate between the eyelid and the full salt water, and place over the eye wool infused in bile of hen, and after the third day use conservative causes until it is healed.
Chapter XVI.
On the incision of the gland and the prominence of flesh of the lacrimal area.
Know that the gland can be of two manners: one is nervous, and it resembles a thin hard chip; the other is non-nervous, resembling white congealed moisture. When you touch it, if it is necessarily taken up, it is incised and the moisture is not inserted into it.
And both species do not begin but from the major lacrimal gland, which gradually covers the eye and prevents light and full movement.
More specifically, the manner of acting in the incision of the gland is that the patient places their head in the crook of your arm, then opens their eyes, and elevates their eyelid with your hand. Then, collect the gland in small pieces and extend it to the upper parts. And then take a needle and insert into it a hair of horse or ox or cow, or similar, or strong thread, or gradually double the tip of the needle little by little and place that in the middle of the nail, and penetrate that with the needle, and tie the nail with glue; and extend that to the parts above, and scrape off the skin the liquid from the nail which cures the pupil. And then follow that into the depth of the eye with the hair.
And then incise the duct in the corner of the eye with a fine spatum or small forceps, and leave the natural flesh of the eyelid so that by incision of that it will not cause continuous flow of tears.
And sometimes the nail in the socket when extended or with glue, as we have said, and then scrape off with a lion's tooth of which this is the form:
And be careful that with the spatum you do not touch the corneal membrane, and even if there is a rupture in it, and that the pupil is not perforated.
Near the incision make a small cut on the skin with a needle or knife made of iron, and leave that there for another day; then cure that as what comes between should be healed.
And if the wound is not nervous and you cannot put the needle there, then sprinkle this kind of powder on the wound; it will be cured with medicines and healed as recommended in the division.
And if you want to incise it, then open the wound of the patient and take fine dust of sharp iron according to this form: with subtlety. And if you see that it is rarified and congested and pressed into the razor, then distill from your mouth into the wound of iron made of steel or of charcoal or of salted iron, and plug the wound with another piece.
Then repeatedly perform the operation until all that is from it is removed, otherwise if a carbuncle forms in the wound, then leave that, and cure the carbuncle as it heals.
And then repeat your operation as much as necessary until it is healed.
The gland of the tear duct, if noted for great discomfort, should be suspended with an onion; and incise a part of it, ensuring not to cut off the flow of tears.
And then let the tear duct drip with a hot cloth and keep it moist until it is healed.
Capitol. XVII.
On the incision of the guardardenic and what arises from flesh pressed against it.
In some cases in the eyes, new flesh presses against it, and is covered over until it covers the pupil, or strengthens near the eyelids, making them lift the parts outward and adhere to the edge of the orbital bone.
First, the patient's head is placed in cold water; then open the eye, and collect all that flesh with convenient incisions using forceps or a clamp. Then incise the flesh at the beginning, ensuring it is complete with the scalpel, and keep the area covered to prevent any part from escaping during your operation.
And let your incision be where you cut those or through the spine which we have recommended in the finger incision, or through small pincettes with which accebels are gathered according to the form it will take near this chapter.
So when your incision is completed and the entire flesh is thoroughly moistened, then fill it with dry salt, or sprinkle in powder resembling that of corrosive medicines, and place something like a walnut shell around it until an abscess is formed.
And if there is any cause for retention and it is seared with cautery, and you fear an abscess, then leave the wound open and treat that abscess as one would treat that abscess, and repeatedly perform this operation until it is healed, and similarly do in the flesh adjusted which you encounter in the wound of this kind.
But you must ensure that all healing of the wound by natural means or by accident occurs through iron, and do not place your hand in any of these operations until you see that the limb is suffering from this operation.
Chapter XVIII.
From the collection of knowledge in the whole.
Knowledge of veins that are thick in the whole and prohibit their operation, and expand the whole for days.
Therefore, at the beginning, you must consider if the pain in which knowledge is applied is strong and if there is no other ailment than the pain, then you gather that knowledge.
And you command the patient to place his head in cold water, and then suspend those veins for one or two minutes according to your prudence; and let that minute be of subtle duplication according to this form:
or two minutes gradually in one breath according to this form:
And let those veins be gathered with subtle forces, by subtlety, and cleanse the wound hour by hour, while observing that those veins are drawn from the pain and are revolved.
And take care that you do not cut through the full thickness of the skin; and if your operation is in the morning before the sun, and you are firm in your operation that you enter only those veins.
And when you have completed, then distill in the full green vitriol or rouge so that its acidity corrupts what is rusted on the knife.
But if this is not possible for you to collect in that hour, then plaster it all with what relieves its pain, and let it be for a few days until the pain subsides and an abscess is secured.
And repeatedly work on it according to the nature of the wound as it heals.
And this is the method for abscesses:
Capitulum XIX.
On the reduction of hernias to the nose.
When you cure hernias with a cautery or with sharp burning medicine, according to the narration of its preceding events and if it is not healed, then do not engage in it but instead incise over the abscess and allow it to mature. Remove all the humidity within it and the pus until the bone is uncovered.
And since the bone and sinews in them are corrupt with blackness when uncovered, then you rub it with a tool of which this is the form:
And it is called an aspre cap, and is made of iron, and is the round head such that when gripping it, it is made punctuated by hammering or smoothed by fine puncturing (as in the form following).
And place it over the corrupt part of the bone, and then rotate it between your tongs, and press your hand gradually into the area until you know that the corruption is superficial.
And do this several times, and then restore the area caused by drying and constricting agents.
Then if the area is consolidated and has good hidden flesh and the body is cut from the pus and remains sound for 40 days, and does not reappear or putrefy and no accident occurs, then you know it is healed.
And if not, then reduce the fracture to the form of the nose, and according to this manner: and it is that you uncover the bone with iron or sharp medicine, and since the bone is uncovered, then you take a strip according to this form:
Let the extremity of the tool be triangular, and the stem thereof be thickened at the extremity as you see.
And then place that [tool] on the bone, and let it be close to the lacrimal; extend your hand a little towards the length, and then move your hand within the groove until it penetrates the entire bone, and that which feels the pain perceives the air flowing through it when you place your hand there.
Then restore the area with medicinal astringent substances as you have seen fit.
Then since the flesh and the area are hardened, the material which was exuding to the surrounding parts returns to its place, therefore this is lighter for the pain.
Capitol.xx.
For the reduction of the prominence of the hernia.
When the hernia protrudes completely and there is no damage or diminution of the covering, then you should relax the pain, subsequently apply fomentations to the neck for scarification and drainage with good suction; then place liniment on the hernia made from acacia, aloe, ensifera, and ichthammol, and firmly apply the poultice over the hernia with pieces of cloth.
And the method of powders is that you take linseed cloth, and each cloth be folded into four parts; and make use of those cloths.
And then place them one over the other according to the quantity that it has to be used. And then tightly bind the cloths around them; and repeatedly apply the suction cups with several scarifications; and then place the suction cups and leave it in place for the day and night.
But if meantime the ligature becomes softened, then make it quite tight.
And then keep the ligature in place day and night as we have said.
And if the swelling has already subsided, that is good. Otherwise, then repeatedly apply the plaster with the powders and the binding and suction cups until it is healed.
Capitol.xxI.
Of the incision of the prominence of the uveal membrane.
When there is a disruption in the sclera, it protrudes and you can see the form of a man through this, and if you want to incise it, then the operation on it is as we have described, that you insert the needle into the slit of the sclera from one side and over from the other side with a doubled thread from the lacrimal part, and make the latter penetrate while leaving the first needle in its position; then incise the place where the doubled thread passes and lift the portion of the sclera around the needle's circuit, and strengthen that movement.
Then extract the needle and place it over the heated woolen cloth infused with honey, leaving time for the thread to cool in the eye.
Then apply a warm cloth to this, so that it comforts the area while the wound heals.
And sometimes gather all parts in a circle of cloth around the heated surface, and then perforate with a fine needle that comes from the center of the heat, allowing the humidity to flow and descend, and cool the area quickly.
And then strengthen as it is healed.
Chapter XXII.
On the cure of alopecia.
This disease called alopecia is nothing but leprosy, which affects the skin and resembles water descending, and it is not that [kind].
The method of treating it is to place the patient on a prepared seat and straighten them. Then, take their head in your hands at two parts and hold it there until you see the leprosy reach the extremities, ensuring it dries up and does not descend further, and keep the light nearby so that the patient can see the causes as if they were visible.
And if it does not descend to the feet, you may know that it is water.
And if the descent of the leprosy is not prepared as we have said, then place the patient on their back and hold them firmly. Then take a fine spatum and apply it over the conjunctiva, letting some drop onto the cornea (in the area marked), so that the leprosy is driven out.
Then, as it is forgotten, when you distill the amount of water in which you have mixed honey or water in which you have already steeped fenugreek and honey.
And then cure the other causes once it is healed.
Chapter 22.
Of the cure for water descending into the bowel.
We have already mentioned the types of water in the division and which ones require piercing as we declared, and then proceed according to health.
Then you must tie the patient's legs together on a stake and hang his body there, applying a strong ligature.
Then place your left hand near the eyelid of the affected side, if the side with the water is the left side; or place your right hand, if the side is the right side.
Then place your right hand on the pillow, if the side is left; or place your left hand, if the side is right.
And then place the extremity of the thumb near the crown for the swelling of the vein in the white of the eye from the blockage of the tear duct, and then apply the thumb with virtue and rotate your hand there.
And then penetrate into the white of the eye and feel that the thumb has already been applied due to the swelling.
And mark the size of the path of the thumb when pressing the size of the space which is between the pupil and the edge of the black part, for this is the crown of the eye; you will see the pupil through the clarity of the corneal membrane with the vision of the eye.
And then place the thumb in the location where the water is, and then draw it down a little bit, and then if the water descends quickly, you see that the patient under which its sight is located also experiences relief quickly, and the thumb in the eye.
And then rest for a moment; if the water has descended, then you continue with another slight movement forward before the thumb is fully inserted.
And when it is drawn out and does not descend, then you extract the matter with ease, and turn it with your hand little by little, and then dissolve a little of clear gemstone salt in water and with that wash the whole inside; then place outside the whole cloth or stop or infused wool in olive oil and egg white and tie it with that.
May this also be done by those who in our time come to treat such cases with olive oil.
And if the matter does not yield to your extraction through the opening because of its hardness â€” which is common in some men whose matter is very thick â€”, then seek that you take the spume which is called albergid, and this is its form:
And then puncture that joint, and do not bring your hand to the tract, but rather make a way to the opening for the matter.
And then introduce the matter as we have said.
And you should complete your work, by preparing a resting place for the patient decently made in which they lie on their back in a dark house, and prohibit all movements.
And pause at his nature there so that it may be lined, and do not wet its head to the right or left side of the whole.
And let the stitch be according to its disposition on the third day.
And then remove that which is in the darkest part and expose the frozen sight, and make the eyes some causes, and then return the stitch on the seventh day.
And do not perform this at the hour of the remedies or very soon after the infusion. And you should remove this for the sake of which the water may flow slightly freely and vigorously through regard.
And if an abscess occurs, then remove the pus on the seventh day, and correct that with this to prevent an abscess.
And when you close the wound, pause over the face of the patient's mouth so that it may heal, and let the patient remain in the darkest part for some days.
And gradually withdraw that hand and change in its position.
And know that in surgery it is not excuseable for the apprentice to miss a few views, and then you should be vigilant about the operation.
And we have been informed of some cases where the condition affects the Artichoke, and some say that fire is made in the Ayrac with a large perforated instrument through which water is poured.
But I have not seen anyone in our land who is perfect at this, nor is it mentioned in any of the ancient books; and it is possible that this is new.
And these are the forms of the species of perforation so that he who ignores them may know them.
And they should be made of ivory or iron properly, and their ends should have this subtlety in the form of a triangle, with one end sharp like the other.
Capitol.xxiv.
Of the cure of flesh nothin in the nose.
When in the nose there arise various growths from which arises some cause that is akin to a scorpion of heavy weight or a polyp of the nose; this illness is called polypus and is in resemblance to that nose represented. And of it is flesh cancerous, dark in color; and of it is that flesh lion-like not in dark color.
Therefore, in that which is in these lion-like flesh not fraudulent nor cancerous, you should open the patient's nostrils and expose them to the sun, and rub the nose with a piece of onion in those flesh areas. And then extract it to the superficial parts, and carefully divide what you have grasped with a sharp thin instrument from which you know that all the flesh has been reached; if any part remains due to some cause for which the division is possible, then quickly use one of the fine instruments to facilitate its separation. If there is a pain or an accident involving a boil, then pause at that which fits; if it is from malignant boils, then incise and cauterize that within where the blood is removed and all cavities are drained.
And then set it on the nose near the incision and apply either wine or water. If the nose is already opened and the process involves humidity entering the palate, then you can see that it is healed.
If the humidity does not penetrate as expected, then you can see that inside there is no cartilage in the pus; instead, there are bones of the nose to which incision has not been applied.
Then when it is necessary to introduce the gall of the animal from which there is any lump, use nuts in its place, and pause between each nut the width of a finger or less, and extract the malady and introduce an extremity of the gall into the nose either through the ray or through another cause which is possible for it.
And after he has done this, he should inhale the scent within so that it reaches the nasal channels, and sit on his cushion; for often children at schools mock such actions, and it is a light matter for anyone who wishes to do so.
Then place the two ends of the cord, one end that itches near the nose and the other that swells in the nose, and then apply a flesh wound at the joints that are in the cord, doing this before you can taste that the flesh is on the joints of the cord.
Then extract the cord, place it near the nose at the site of the bleeding with a cotton ball, and do this for three days or more until the ointment dissolves everything that is rotten in the flesh.
Then, at the end of the treatment, place a lead tube in the nose for several days until it is healed.
If you need a quicker cure that dries up, use that one.
And this is the form of the instrument used to pour oils and medicines into the nostrils:
And make it of silver or of copper, which should resemble a small open lamp, like a small basin, and the mouth resembling that.
And if you wish, make a closed tube like a reed, and the opening of the instrument for pouring oils should be flat and open; to which you can attach a handle at the rear end, with which you will pour in the heated oil or whatever you want from the secretions and extractible causes.
Chapter 25.
From the nostrils at the extremities of the nose.
Blisters appear in the nostrils at the extremities of the nose, and are enlarged and poulticed over several days as the swelling is reduced by application.
And for this reason, you should intervene at the beginning of its appearance, and remove all of it. And place your hand over the area or on the cautery or burning medicine which was applied there.
But if its intervention is delayed until it enlarges, then consider whether it is hardened, dark in color, and has little sensation. In that case, do not touch it with iron; for blisters should be avoided when treating this abscess due to its great harm to the surrounding area.
And if the abscess is due to a bite and not dark in color, and intervention is possible throughout it, then drain the poison and cut it without fear, and treat the area with something that dries and constricts until it heals.
Chapter 26.
For the suturing of the nose and lips when the continuity is dissolved by plague or similar diseases.
Know that when there is dissolution of continuity in one of these cartilages, you should not rely much on that operation but rather on several people.
Therefore, when you find any cause of such conditions, consider whether it is fresh plague with its own symptoms, and then adjust the two lips of the plague with sutures, and proceed to cure that which is still sick.
And if the lips of dissolution of continuity are already separated, and any one of them has become healthy, then you should remove each part from its apparent ligature before it develops symptoms. Then adjust the two lips with sutures and strengthen them, and sprinkle dragon's blood on them, followed by three applications of trisactic ointment. Place a piece of diafinicon bandage or another consolidative ointment over the powder, and leave this mixture for two to three days. Then remove the dressing and replace it with a new ointment, allowing the wounds to heal until the granulations are resolved. Cure by applying ointment until healed.
The manner of suturing is that you add the solution of continuity or use needles as we have recommended in the belly suture, or add the solution of continuity with thread as you are made to know.
Chapter XXVII.
Of the extraction of those causes that wind in the two lips in the internal parts.
Spots seen within the flesh of the internal parts of their lips, lead to the formation of hard abscesses resembling lard; some are smaller and others are larger.
Therefore, make sure you incise all parts of the hard swellings in both lips, and after the abscess is formed, fill the place with three layers of cloth until the wound is tightened, then wash it with vinegar and treat the area with a solution that isæ”¶æ•›å‰‚ï¼Œç›´è‡³æ„ˆåˆã€‚
Chapter XXVIII.
Of the incision of flesh adhered to the gums.
Great care must be taken over the gum closely fitting the tooth, which the ancients called albulus. Then draw that thread with your forceps and cut it properly, leaving the healthy tissue to heal.
Then place something hot on the area for about three minutes or another styptic or excitatory powder.
And if that flesh returns, then cut it again, and cauterize it, for after the cauterization it will not return.
Capitol.xxix.
On the reason for teeth with ferments.
When on the surface of the inner teeth and those from the outer side, as well as between the gums, there are sharp, rough edges, some of which are dark and appear yellowish or greenish, and through these edges corruption occurs in the gum, causing the teeth to become loose.
And therefore, ensure that you cut the patient's thigh between your hands and hold its head in a towel, gently moving the teeth where these edges and similar causes appear, so that no part of them breaks for any reason, and do this for the blackness and the yellowish color and other such things that have been altered.
Therefore, if the above mentioned part is at the beginning of the reasoning, it is good; otherwise, you iterate the reasoning on those points for the next day and the second and the third until you reach the final statement of what you want.
And know that teeth have required roots to be removed in various ways and of diverse figures according to how your operation prepares them. And so, for the tooth that is extracted from the inside, the dentist uses one tool, while for the tooth that is chipped between the teeth according to other forms, the dentist uses another tool. These tools you must prepare properly, which you will often see.
Capitol.xxx.
For the extraction of teeth.
Know that when you cure a tooth of its pain with great skill and take much time in the extraction, for no cause can replace the need to extract it completely when necessary, as the substance is sublime during the process of extraction.
When the patient is forced to open that tooth, you must surely certify which is the painful tooth, carefully observing the pain disappear several times and confirming it is in a healthy tooth, and you extract that one, after which the pain does not cease until the diseased and painful tooth is extracted, for we have seen this through the operations of barbers.
Therefore, you must be certain which is the painful tooth, and knowing this well, when you incise along the circuit of the tooth where any virtue resides, until it dissolves from the root of the tooth in the gum, then remove it or use fine forceps gradually at the beginning, as these concussions indicate.
And then irrigate it well to ensure good speech or strong fracture, and place the head of the patient between your hands so that you can hold it firmly without causing pain, and proceed to extract the tooth in a straight manner so as not to break it, nor give the patient additional pain.
And if it is not forced open, then take one of those instruments, and place it on the patient from all sides with ease, and exert yourself to remove it as it is done at the beginning.
If the tooth is broken or corroded, then you should wrap that part with cloth and tie it tightly at the end of a thin thread so that it does not get tangled in the process of your treatment.
And you should incise precisely in the circuit of all parts of the gum and maintain your strength so that you do not break that torn part of it, but return to the soreness due to its malignity being greater than the first pain.
And beware that you do not do what some ignorant barbers do in their incisions and audacity regarding the eradication of boils; for they do not administer what we have advised. For spots often bring great diseases upon men, which are harder to treat than boils, and the causes of their remedies are all, or some of those, or that you extract from certain bones of the jaw as spots we have testified.
And for the eradication of the boil, wash the mouth with warm water or water thickened with salt.
And if there be fluxes of blood for this, as with motas veguadas [a type of hemorrhoids], then take some quantity of vinegar and sprinkle it over the wound, and if that vinegar does not suffice, cauterize.
The shape of the forceps and delicate tweezers used to extract a tooth should be long at the beginning, short and thick, so that they do not bend when those you need to act upon.
And they should be such that when you tighten them around those [teeth], they do not bend, and are short and long.
And they should be made of high-quality iron, with long handles, and at the ends of those handles, there should be teeth that interlock and tighten by strong construction. Sometimes, the ends of those handles are shaped like the bill of a heron, which is called a ciconia, and they are also strongly constructed.
Capitol.xxxxi.
For the removal of teeth and extraction of broken jaw bones.
When you need to remove a tooth that is broken for any cause, first ensure that you pause over the area carefully for one or two days until the place becomes softened; then insert forceps or tongs whose ends are assembled at the beak of an auzel called ciconia or guanta, in the shape of forceps.
The ends of the forceps should be made inside like a hammer or awl.
And if your attempt with these forceps or tongs does not succeed, then open the wound and remove all the flesh, and insert the instrument called atali, which is a small lever whose shape is like this:
And let it be brief, having a small end thick, and not bent so that it is not broken.
So if the wound is sufficiently opened, that is good; otherwise, help yourself with these other instruments, of which these are the forms: the form of the first instrument is triangular-ended, in which there is some thickness.
The form of the second instrument should be triangular and of very fine extremity.
And now help with this instrument having two ramps, of which this is the form approximately as follows: And there are other instruments which will be shown for the scraping of teeth; so that this instrument, which is like a large spoon, has the following form:
From the triangular twisted or short extremity, which is somewhat thick, and should not be too deep so as not to penetrate.
And another spoon-like instrument for the teeth is similar to other instruments.
More skilled craftsmen find for themselves suitable instruments according to what the operation and various ailments signify; so they have instruments for ailments to which the ancients neither described nor provided specific instruments due to the diverse forms.
If the bone of the mandible or other bones in the mouth are penetrated, or if necessary, then apply a weight to that area in its place, using what is convenient from the instruments and forceps which we have mentioned in the extraction of the roots of the teeth, and the gesture of which has the following form:
And let it be put in him little by little, and pressed or held at the mouth so that it does not escape or flee until all the bone is thoroughly treated; then place the area with suitable medicines for it.
And if there is a small sore on the bone, first lance that sore and its blackness, and cure it until it is healed.
Capitol..xxxii.
Of the treatment of prominent teeth above others.
When the teeth are prominent not according to their natural position, especially when they protrude in women, and particularly in venerable old ladies; therefore consider this: if a tooth is close to another tooth and there is no possibility of extraction or separation of it, then extract that one; but if it is not connected to another tooth, then cut out that one with this instrument, which has the shape of a pig's snout, and is made of Indian steel with an extremely sharp edge.
And let your incision be where you cut there in too many days due to the hardness of the tooth, and may not another tooth become abscessed.
And if the tooth is prominently protruded and needs to be filed down, then file that with a file of Indian iron, the form of which is:
And let the whole be of Indian iron; let the margin be filed finely; and let it have small pointed teeth as on the file with which the tooth is filed little by little over days with ease, so that no other tooth becomes abscessed or decays. Then mark that on the outside, and cut that with some razors.
And if the tooth is such that a part of it is fractured and irritates the tongue, then cut that part so that the irritation from that fracture is stopped and equalized, and let it be filled to prevent the tongue from being injured or the speech from being impaired.
Capitol.xxxiii.
For the restoration of decayed teeth using gold or silver filler.
When accidents occur to the front teeth due to concussion or removal by impact or during a fight, and the patient cannot strengthen what is missing, and you have treated it with styptic medicines, but your treatment has not been effective, then for those that are strong, insert them with gold filler and not silver, because silver turns color and may start to decay after a few days, whereas gold remains unchanged over any amount of time.
And the filler should be in such subtlety and thickness according to the quantity that can enter between the teeth; and the shape of the filling is as follows: take the gold filler and place twice its amount between two healthy teeth, and when it expands it should fill the gaps between two adjacent decayed teeth, or one or several small spaces, until the fabric reaches the healthy tooth on the other side. And then insert the tissue into the part from which you began, and strengthen your hand with ease and skill until it is not decayed.
And let your tightness be such that it holds the root of the teeth so that they do not escape.
And then divide the extramitigations of the superfluous tooth with forceps or surgical scissors, and add them to any location with your hand, and convert those and cover them between the healthy tooth and the decayed tooth, so as not to injure the tongue. And let it be thus held like a Roman.
And if it is slipped or broken, hold it with another tooth in such a manner throughout its entire duration.
And this is the form of the teeth and the figure of the extraction of two healthy teeth and two decayed ones, as you see these ligated:
And when one returns a tooth or two to their socket in their respective locations, and they are grown back as we have described, and they protrude.
And it is not done by anyone other than skilled craftsmen.
And sometimes it is fit for certain causes of the bones of the cow, and it is made of them thus like a tooth, and is placed in the place where the tooth fails, and is strengthened as we have said, and remains and serves you long.
Chapter XXXIV.
Of the incision of the ligament where you speak and prohibit speech.
This ligament, where you leave the tongue sometimes either naturally, as one is born with it, or accidentally, due to a wound which has already healed.
And the operation is that one opens the patient's mouth, which is their head in this position; elevates their tongue, and then incises that ligament nerve according to the width between which the tongue can be freed from its attachments.
But if there is any hardness or nodularity in that area, and this is due to the healing of a wound, then you cut once and incise that ligament nerve according to the width at which you have already incised the ligament and dissolved the nodularity.
And make sure that no crack is made in the subcutaneous layer, and carefully split here to avoid a flow of blood.
And soon wash the incision edges with wine or with vinegar and water; then place the tongue depressor under the tongue; if needed, let it stay there overnight to prevent consolidation of another attack.
But if there is a flow of blood, place a glass tourniquet over the area; but if the bleeding continues, then cauterize the area with a long cautery that suits this purpose. And soon after, attend to the other causes until it is healed.
Capitol.xxxv.
For the extraction of a ranula, place the tongue depressor.
Sometimes, an abscess forms and the tongue becomes swollen like a small lump, prohibiting the tongue from its natural operation; and greatly enlarges as it fills the mouth.
And the operation for this is to open the groin about a palm's breadth in front of the knee and consider the abscess.
And if you see it is of a brown or black color, hard, to which the patient feels no sensation, then do not touch that part which is sore.
And if it has turned white, in which there is humidity, then you insert the probe into it, and incise that area with a thin knife, and incise all parts; and if pus appears during the time of your operation, then pause above zinc chloride, so that the pus may be restrained.
And then return to your work after completing it, after it has been washed with vinegar and salt; and treat that according to the other treatment until it is healed.
Capitol.xxxvi.
On the extraction of abscesses from both ears and those that arise in the cheek, as well as other abscesses.
When a boil becomes painful, those glands which are gathered like cotton, which occur externally and are named two ears, when you cure them as we said in the division and it is not healed, then consider if the abscess is hard, of dusky color, of little sensation, then do not touch that with iron.
And if it is of red color and the root is large, then do not touch that with iron for the flow of blood; first let that mature, and then either you will puncture it or it will rupture by itself.
And if it is of white color, tender, and the root is fine, then that should be cut.
And the operation on it is that before your operation, you consider whether the abscess has fully matured and rested from the cautery, or if it has decreased with some reduction; then you make an incision in front of the sun, with its head toward your side, and open its mouth, and the servant holding the patient's tongue between his fingers uses the most noble instrument of which this is the form:
And it should be made of silver or copper, and very fine like a knife.
So when you press upon that place with the tongue and show the patient the abscess, and cut deeply into that area, then take anointing oil and put it on the wound, and pull that part outward as much as you can. Another thing you pull from the cause of the tunics, and then apply that with an instrument of which this is the form:
Another thing you pull from the cause of the tunics, and then apply that with an instrument of which this is the form: and it is similar to forceps, except that the ends of these are curved, so that the orifice of each of those is in the opposite straight part, sharp points, which should be of iron and well tempered.
But if this instrument is not at hand, then incise that with a spatula of which this is the form: and it should be sharp on one side, not sharp on the other.
And since you have incised one wound, incise the other according to this manner of incision, and then after the incision, let the patient heal with water.
Mais si there is a flow of blood, guardize agua de decocciÃ³n de scorsa de milgrana o de hoja de mirtra e similar al de las causas stipticas entro que el flux del sanc sea restreÃ­do, y apret cura aquel entre que sia sanado.
And sometimes abscesses appear in the groin or other areas of the ears, and incise those according to what is said in the incision of two meatuses equally.
And I had already treated a woman with an abscess which was located in her groin, which abscess had a dark color, little sensation, and had closed her groin. The woman breathed easily, and her food and water intake had been prohibited, and she was near death if more days passed without water.
And the abscess had already been pressing so much that it had caused two inches of swelling over two days.
Then I cut it surgically and clamped it with one of my forceps, then extracted it, taking out the larger portion. Next, I incised that part from which the other cut originated, then forced the mouth of it closed, held its tongue, and placed the forceps in the abscess.
And then you cut away a large part of it, and there was not flowing from it more than a little blood. Thus, the gout attack of that woman began, and she soon started to drink water and eat preserved food. Therefore, I could not stop cutting motas from that abscess for a long time, and an abscess formed in its place, which continued to grow as long as that condition lasted.
Thus, I treated the gout of her foot by incising and cauterizing it, following the method; and then I walked around, not knowing what God had done to that nearby.
Capitol.xxxvii.
Of incising the swelling when it is an abscess.
When catarrh affects the uvula, and it is swollen and long, then it is named perpendicular; and if it is in the part with a large and round swelling, then it is called a bubo.
When it is cured as we have said in the division, and you do not find your cure effective, and thus you often notice that the abscess has already been cauterized and is subtle, then you should incise the one that is aggregated round; and if it is at its length, and it bleeds, with a dusky or black color, and is not more than a centimeter, then you must fear the incision of it, for there is fear of gout in that area.
And when you see that according to the manner I have said of its whiteness and length, you make the patient lie down and press on the root of his penis with the tip of an instrument by which it can be determined in what form it is, and then fix the nozzle in the new opening, and pull that downward and cut that with one of the two instruments which are called for the insertion of two bellies.
And know that you should not cut there but where it is attached to the natural term of addition, for if you cut beyond it, you will injure his speech.
And in making the incision, use what we have recommended for the insertion of two bellies, and cure that until it is healed.
And if the patient is frightened by the incision, know that you should use an anesthetic in the cautery to alleviate his fear. The method of the cautery on him is simply with sharp water, for you place the head of the patient's penis in your hand, and then press the root of the penis with the instrument we have mentioned. Then take from the water which we have described in the chapter on cautery, and apply it to that area alive, but do not pause much or too thinly, and fill the cavity of the instrument with which this is done:
Let the lower part of the cavity in which the medicine is placed be as wide as the width of a ray's tail, and place the instrument on top of the medicine near the vulva, while the patient lies on their side to allow saliva or mucilage from the mouth of that person to enter the internal medicine, so that it does not cease due to any such cause in the wound and heals that.
Place your hand on the medicine, and express it over the uvula for half an hour until you see that it becomes darkened and sedated by the bite of the medicine.
And if you want, take cotton, wrap it around the tip of the ray, and submerge the cotton in the medicine. Then insert the ray with the cotton into a tube from above so that the cotton adheres to the tube. Do this several times until you achieve what you desire for the cautery of the uvula, and then let it dry and fall off in about three or four days.
And if you need to reapply the medicine, apply it again, and for the cautery, clean around the uvula with cotton soaked in borax, and modify what is in the circuit of the uvula from the medicine, and wash it with water, and externally treat it with ointment, and internally with potions until it heals.
And this kind of cure is safer than incision and shorter in terms of fear.
Some cases of uvula disease are cured with what is finer than cautery and incision, which is treated by fumigation in this manner: take calamus, hyssop, origanum, rue, scicinos arabicus, camomile, ground and mix those of the herbs, or some of them, in one vessel, and submerge all those causes or some of them; let them bubble in water enriched; and let the mixture be well stirred, and place a wick in the middle of the mixture on which an iron skewer made of brass should be placed according to this manner; let it be made of silver or brass.
And the extremity should be inserted in the mouth of the patient where the vapor rises to the uvula over the quinia, while the uvula is obscured.
And then repeat over those few cases where it is dry, and guard that you do not perform this cure at the beginning of the onset of carbuncles, for it would too tightly constrict the carbuncle. You should not do this, but rather declare the presence of a carbuncle with a cautery.
But if you do not have this instrument at hand, then take a cane and place at its end a hazel nut shell, so that the opening of the malaise may be widened, for the hazel nut shell prevents the vapor from burning the opening.
And this cure is good for health.
Chapter XXXVIII.
On the extraction of thorns and what adheres in the wound and other causes.
Spots or thorns adhered in the wound or from a thorny plant or some other cause.
Then carefully extract what is obvious from those, upon which the sight rests. But first press the tongue with an instrument in front of the light, so that you may be made aware of what is in the wound.
And what is not apparent and hidden in the wound, first make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach, because if the cause attached to the wound is strong, it will be expelled by vomiting; or have the patient swallow a piece of onion or celery root or a piece of dry bread; or take a piece of sponge well saturated with honey, tie it tightly with thread, and make the patient swallow that, for it will reach the place where the thorns are and be expelled. And take an eel and bind it with honey, place it inside and secretly extract it; or take a probe and secretly insert it and then withdraw it.
And if none of these methods work as we have said, then use a lead instrument in this form:
And let it be as large as a small pea, and at the end of it, have a cavity which you insert into his throat with ease.
And apply his head upwards, and keep watch that the touch of his bone in the throat reaches him, so that it affects him and either peels the bone or the spine, or that the doctor touches it with his hand.
And instead, let the patient himself insert a piece of honey, by his knowledge of the place of the cause and peel it downwards, and pull his hand towards the instrument, all this according to the quantity which is prepared for him before it is effective.
Capitol.xxxix.
From the extraction of gouty fluid associated with gout.
When gouty fluid is treated according to what we have said in the division of the cure with medicines and you do not find relief, consider at the weather in the patient's gout, for you may need to adjust the dosage of the medicine with an instrument that we have recommended.
Therefore, if you see the gouty fluid, extract it either through a small needle or with fine, subtle instruments.
And if it is not possible to extract it through that, then take a concave cannula and insert it into the gouty joint. Then place a heated iron in the concavity of the cannula, and do this several times (until the gouty fluid is dead and exits from the joint), and let the patient abstain from water for the entire day.
And then take a sponge full of water, open its mouth over the affected area, and wash the area with it; do not swallow any of it, and let the patient hold the water in their hand for about an hour more, as soon as they feel the gouty fluid responding to the water.
If it is not fully fumigated with what we have recommended, then subfumigate the patient with cyme or asafetida through the instrument we have recommended in the uvula fumigation.
Do this, so that it may fall into place.
And another method of fumigation is this: you take a pot in which are burning coals and the pot is covered with a cloth in the middle of which is an aperture, and you place the end of the instrument at that aperture; and then proceed with the subfumigation; and place the patient's mouth at the end of the canula, and close his mouth so that the subfumigation is not forgotten until you see that the subfumigation has reached the uvula, for the uvula will soon fall.
And if it does not come down, then you repeat the subfumigation several times, and forbid the patient to drink, eat salty foods, and similar things, and do not let him take water; thus it is necessary that this regimen be forgotten.
And this is the form of the instrument used to treat gout when seen; and it resembles forceps as you see, but some curvature is present in it. And the instrument is placed over the gout, and the extremity of it resembles the beak of a stork, which is curved, and has been filed with a file, so that when any cause is grasped, it does not slip.
Capitol.xl.
In which the main discourse on abscesses and their treatment is presented.
Abscesses are special kinds of boils, managed in various ways, as remembered, for each one in this treatise.
And they are diverse in puncturing and treating them through two methods. Of these, one method is specifically for abscesses themselves; and this involves grasping the humors.
And the second method is applied near the locations where bodily accidents occur, for an abscess in the head is different from one in the buttocks; and an abscess in a fleshly area is different from one in a joint. For each of them has its own judgment through surgery.
And for abscesses, some of which cover that they not be perforated but rather await the maturation of the healing in those or their complement.
And for other abscesses which cover that they be drawn out when they are crosswise, and not matured according to their complement, thus as with abscesses that are near the joints, when an abscess is near a joint, the nature of it is prolonged into whatever is in the circuit of it, and greatly corrupts the ligaments or nerves of that joint, making it a cause of contraction of that limb; or if it is an abscess near the main member, and you delay the perforation of it until it is matured it will harm the main member; or if it is near the anus, then draw out that which is not mature; and one should not puncture it raw, due to poor digestion, but rather one that is near the anus, so that it does not cause pus to spread inward from the anus and become a fistula, or one made in the term when it has not healed. And you must know the time for puncturing the abscess, and this is when it is matured.
And know that it is matured when there is the cessation of pain and the subsiding of fever, and nearly the reduction of swelling and pulse, and the alleviation of the top of the abscess, and other signs.
And know when to perceive the puncture hole in the place just below the abscess and of pus coming from the healing of the prominence.
And the puncture should be made along the length of the flesh or body, if the abscesses are in the parts of the thigh or feet, and at the site of the lacertae, the cords of the nerves, the arches; and, finally, in all similar places where reflection does not occur. For those that do reflect, use puncture according to that member.
When the abscess is in flesh, it is better to delay the puncture until the digestion of the pus is confirmed according to our previous saying; for if you puncture it prematurely, you will prolong the course of the disease and increase the hardness and depth of the abscess.
More abscesses are pierced according to the width of the flesh or body as necessity demands, or according to that from which the member suffers.
And ensure that you administer a small perforation in large abscesses, and a large perforation or multiple sections according to the diversity of the size of the abscesses.
And in other abscesses, ensure that the cord is reduced and tied when it is done so as with bread, and do it at a time when it has settled, just as you would in cases of tumors and buboes.
And of those that are incised with a section having three angles; and in which it is incised as the shape of a mulberry leaf, as in the abscesses of snakebites.
And of these, those in which a round section and a lunar section are administered, resembling those.
More for those in which none is done thus, as with superficial abscesses, ensure that you perforate them with a superficial perforation, or flat one only.
And when the abscess is large and has already gathered some healthy matter, that you perforate it and do not hesitate to extract all the pus at that time; having extracted one part, then lift the abscess into another place the next day, and extract a larger part, and continue to do this until it is fully healed.
And more so if the patient is of verdure virtue, or a pregnant woman, or a small child, or an old person in decline, for the animal spirit resolves into the exit of the healthy matter, and greatly alleviates the pain, and you may open it.
Take great care with this chapter, and when you perform your perforation in which you puncture these abscesses, ensure that you clean the wounds and consider whether the wound of the abscess is small, or a flat section, then administer either hot or cold remedies; if the abscess is large, and the cracks of the perforation are severe, then place your hand in each to ensure they heal together.
And if in the abscess you have divided a part of the chain or concaved that area in the circuit, then you should close it with cold lint or a thread made of linen, just as when you have drawn out wounds or roots, their humidity; strengthen it on the third day; and proceed with it and cure it according to what is appropriate from ointments until it is healed.
But if a flow of blood occurs during the time of your operation, then you administer water mixed with wine in which you soak a cloth, and place that over the location of the blood flow for several minutes.
But if the flow of blood persists, then you must administer treatment and cure with powders which I have recommended in several places of this our book and division.
But if it is in the time of winter, and the location of the abscess is near major nerves, then you should apply powders mixed with wine and oil using a cauterizer, and place those over the areas.
And if it is in the summer, and the areas are fleshy, then you should place powders soaked in water and oil or in wine and oil, all of which should be applied on the third day, as we have said, and then you should incise the abscess, cleanse it, and administer to it what is appropriate for its cure until it heals.
And this is what is necessary concerning the knowledge of the cure of abscesses generally, but according to the way of classification, I have already spoken of all abscesses and in what manner the cure of each one is by chapters specifically.
Chapter XL.
Of abscesses whose vein is in the vein of the head.
In the vein of the head, small abscesses occur, and their substance consists of nodules which contain tunics that form them; the substances of these nodules are mottled.
And they have textures, and those that contain humidity resembling lime. And those that contain humidity resembling dust, similar to it; and those that are hard, like stones.
And in the section of all, and in the extraction of those, there is no fear, just as you should perform the extraction without causing any resistance.
And the operation to extract those is that you express them using an instrument in the form of which see below, which is called an entremes, until you know it contains them.
And if what is contained is humidity, then split it along the length in section by surface according to this form:
And begin at the section of B line between the line of G. Once the moisture is evacuated, then scrape that skin which contains that moisture, and do not leave any cause of all, because too many times it returns if there remains any cause of all.
And then immerse it in Egyptian ointment if available, otherwise in water and salt; then fill it and leave it for another day, because with this it will dissolve all that is rotten of that skin.
And then repeatedly treat that part with Egyptian ointment gently if you feel it necessary, until you are confident that there is no rotten cause of that skin; then cure the wound with ointment once it is healed.
And if there is an abscess containing fatty nodes, then incise that according to this form: In the section having a cross-like form, and make an incision between the two halves of the section and thoroughly scrape that part, and exert your virtue in extracting the tunic which contains that.
But if your artery resists, then do what I recounted to you first.
And similarly, treat the abscessed area for sectioning and curing as we have said; the sectioning over an abscessed area should be lighter, because it has little bleeding and little humidity.
And sometimes some of these abscesses, which are in the head, are almost dry in some people; the cause is that it cannot be incised over an abscess in a woman's head, and one should scrape the abscess like a hard, rough, white stone which could not be broken, and if any were subjected to percussion, it would be harmful.
But in other abscesses in the head, this is not covered in this chapter; as with abscesses that come to the heads of children, you should drain the cavities of the ears, but the sectioning of all these should be superficial.
And place the perforation of those in the lower parts below such that it alleviates the body of the disease to the lower parts.
And then attend to those matters that concern the treatment.
Chapter XLII.
Of the section on scrofula which occurs in the neck.
Signs and symptoms of these abscesses occur in the neck, in the armpits, and in the groin; and sometimes they occur in other parts of the body.
And those that occur in the neck, and the signs that are generated within them, and all scrofula of these is within its own membrane. Thus, as with the nodes and abscesses of the head, as we have reported.
And the species of these scrofula are signs. Some of them are hard lumps, and some contain moisture, and some are malignant, which do not respond to treatment.
Therefore, in that one which you perceive to be of good condition in the Touchement, where the color that is manifested is similar to the color of the skin, and is palpable throughout the body, and is not attached to the nerves of the neck, nor to the veins, nor to the arteries, and is not firm, so you should incise it with a superficial cut from above the part to below the opposite side of the body along the line of G. to the line of B., and scrape it thoroughly until it is removed, and extend the lips of the skin around the wound with one or several thin strips if needed, as we have said in the case of abscesses of the head, and extract it little by little.
And it is better caution that the vein or nerve not be severed.
Let the incision not be too deep, so that you do not damage the vein or nerve with your hand during the operation, or relieve the patient, and do not sever what is not necessary to sever; for if you cut a vein or artery and stop your operation, then apply a plaster of vitriol trioxide or other powders which contain fluxes of salt, strengthen the wound, and leave that within which is where the acute pain of the abscess subsides and the swelling is softened and begins to suppurate. When the blood is cut off.
Then return to your operation until it is completed.
And then inquire if there is any other cause for the small scrofulous swellings, and if so, cut those and cleanse them.
And if the large vein is near the scrofulous swelling, cover it so that you do not cut that part of the scrofulous swelling. Before you cut there where the vein is folded strongly, let that remain so it falls by itself.
And then fill the wound with old cloth which you have already soaked in Egyptian ointment, and then dress it.
And if you incise the scrophula completely, then you should adjust the two edges of the wound and stitch it tightly so that no superfluous fluid has any chance to leak out.
But if you see that there is an excess of fluid due to the size of the scrophula, then you should understand to incise the edge of it, remove that part, and administer stitches as described.
And for the scrophulas containing humidity, make a superficial perforation at the place where it appears to you as the site of maturation, and stop the perforation below the dry pus beneath the body, as we have said.
And then administer the perforation, apply ointment and similar substances to it, so that it heals the rotten parts from corruption. And when you see that the wound is already clean, then apply the cream of generative flesh while it is healing.
Chapter 43.
Of the section of the fistula in the glandular area.
The ancients called this section the epilhot, and no one in our land has ever seen it performed.
And this is the inscription of the speech of those.
More in men with foreskin, a cavity that should be avoided during the extraction of the epilhot, as otherwise it is not done properly and all the veins and major vessels of the groin are at risk.
More in those who have abscesses on the mouth or glandular area or ears, when the illness is not in the throat, it is advisable to use the section of the epilhot to avoid the loss caused by perforation.
When we want to do this, cut the foreskin and leave three or four small circles of the foreskin, each in the space between two circles by quantity, so that the section is circular, not in the cartilage, and this place is appropriate for a section, which is devoid of flesh and the blood vessels of it are removed.
And if the doctor fears this, do so when he extends the needle's thread to its end, and then cut the thread as it approaches the canal, but more avoid the blood vessels if you see any cause.
And then cut the cicatrix according to what we have directed; and it is meant by the section of the canal through the flame which indicates that one part is of this intact and the other of its disrupted state, and by the absence of voice.
And leave the wound open for some time.
And when the time is delayed in which the perforation is feared, add two loops of the thread of the wound, and sew that one to the cartilage.
And then administer medicines that make flesh grow where it is healed.
And Alcubasis says that the main point of the discourse we have recounted is simply that you can see that some of those abscesses have already opened the wound in the patient, and the patient has come into death, and its life has been cut off, and some go on to incise the epiglottis so that the patient may breathe the air over the place of the wound by some respiration, and thus be saved from death.
And for this, I order to leave the wound open until the malice of the illness is consumed; and the malice of the illness lasts for three days; and then, at that time, I order to close the wound and treat it until it is healed.
And what I have seen with my own eyes is that a servant took a knife and placed it in the wound and incised there a part of the canna of the lung, and I was called to treat this case, and described the mugen as it is heard from the dead, and uncovered the wound and applied leeches which were hanging from the wound small.
Then I have confessed that she had not incised vein nor artery, and the wind from the wound, and cured her so that it healed soundly.
And she did not suffer any injury nor even in her voice, and soon returned to her usual disposition.
And now I say that in the section of the inguinal region there is no fear.
Capitol. xliv.
On the section about an apostema that occurs on the elbow outside, and is called an elbow hernia.
This apostema, unnamed as an elbow hernia, is a large apostema according to the color of the body, and it often occurs in women.
And it is according to two ways: whether it is natural or accidental.
And in the natural case, it is not easy to cure.
And the accidental is according to two ways: one resembles fatty nodes, and the other way resembles an apostema formed by the obstruction of an artery, and in that case, there is fear. And do not let him think that this is done with iron only in the small one. And thou probe that area and investigate the one he mentions, and if thou findest a semblance of a fatty node, and it is not suspended from any of the veins, then thou incidest that area as the nodes are incised, and extract it from the skin and bursicle it; and if not, then thoroughly examine his entire being, and place care upon the area for healing until it is healed.
Capitol. xlv.
Of the section on kinds of nodes.
Of the joints, these are the main kinds, and I have already described all kinds of them in the division.
And let it be known that I recount thus the difference between a node and an abscess so as to avoid doubt.
Therefore, I say that in an abscess there is a quality of heat and fever and vehement pains until the boiling of the excess is subdued; and when the putrefaction is complete, then the fever, pain, and heat cease.
But if there is no heat nor fever nor pain, and concerning that lion skin which is on his back.
And it is according to the color of the body, and its beginning is like a stain and is made thus, either larger or smaller, and they are according to two species, namely those that are fatty and contain humidity, and the colors of the humidity are spots, as I said in the division.
Therefore, when you arrive at the treatment of the node, express it and inquire about it from its beginning in the tissue which is called intumescent, according to its form that will appear in the capitol which is nearby.
And this is the method of inquiry for abscesses and all nodes, and it is that you take this tissue and insert it into the location most humid which you find in the abscess, and you will mix the tissues little by little until you know that the tissue has penetrated the core.
Then place your hand according to the measure of the abscess's size, and then extract the inserted tissue and consider what is situated in the residue.
And if the running moisture of any color is overlooked, then you incise according to a superficial section as I said in the other abscesses.
And if there is no moisture from the intrusion, then you know it is fatty.
And if it is dry on the surface and has the form of a cross according to this form: As I have instructed you, suspend that with a cord, and completely remove the cord by scraping, and preserve the skin or sack if possible above it, and extract the healthy part at the node.
But if it breaks during the operation, it is not possible to extract that healthy part. Instead, leave the pieces as they are, and then remove them in pieces so that they do not break for any reason.
But if it breaks for any reason, either a little or too much, the node will return according to the most favorable outcome.
And if you see that a part has broken a little, then fill the wound with some corrosive powders and strengthen the wound. Place your hand over the area where the abscess is located, and cure the rest of the patient using another method until it heals.
And if it is not great, then you close its two lips and cure that which is within.
And if the vein is pulsatile on the opposite side, or non-pulsatile, then you incise and fill the area with a third part of vitriol and let it dry for two days or three until the inflammation subsides and the boiling of the blood ceases; and then return to cutting what is damaged around the node.
Capitol. XLVI.
Of the forms of instruments necessary for section and perforation.
Of those, these are the forms of the instruments, and they are of three species: some are large, and others are medium, and others are small.
The form of the large instrument is this:
The form of the small instrument is this:
Make them of iron, or of lead, or of fallen edges properly, so that the instrument enters into the abscess.
These are the forms of the experienced doctors, and they are named Albed and Berid.
These are of three spices, one of which is great, the other half and little.
The form of the experienced great:
The form of the experienced half, its form:
The form of the experienced little, its form:
It is convenient that they be for those abscesses, wounds, fistulas, and buboes, so that among them are of the bones and from other causes.
And they are made round, large, like lions, as well as large needles to which the threads are sewn. They are made of iron, or steel, or silver, and the best are when they are made of steel citrus.
And black feather experiments are made, which they say should be opened where the reflections are reflected by their lightness to those reflections.
And so of three species, some are long, and others are medium, and others are short, according to the quantity of the width of the fistula and its stricture.
Form of the large black feather experiment:
Form of the medium black feather experiment:
Form of the small black feather experiment:
The forms of the needles are of three species. Some are simple, having only a single curvature, and they are of three kinds: large, few, and medium.
And some are solid needles, which are also of three species.
And some of these needles have two curvatures, which are also of three species.
And from them there are three curves, and of three species.
And all these are necessary in their place.
Shape of single slight curve, shape of it:
Shape of great single curve having two curves: Shape of moderate single curve having two curves: Shape of slight single curve having two curves:
Shape of great single curve having three curves:
Forma of a woman having three curves:
And these are the forms of the knives on which the joints and abscesses are cut and scraped, and they are of three species: some are large, woman-shaped, and small.
Forma of the large knife:
Forma of the woman-shaped knife:
Forma of the small knife:
The extremities of those on which section is performed are acute, while the other extremities are non-acute. They are not held in such a manner, but rather so that during the scraping of the joints there is no fear of cutting into a vein or nerve, and for this reason, the injury is healed and there is some relief from the heat which causes the scraping of the abscess.
And these are the forms of the curved knives, and they are of three species: large, woman-shaped, and small, as you will see.
If they are made of iron and resemble a ray from which alcohol is produced.
And it is in the outer side punctured with spatum hidden there and in those parts inside and outside, as you want, as you see fit.
The forms of spatum, which are hidden between the fingers and do not allow the patients to perceive them, and they have three species: great, female, and small. And these are the forms of those:
The forms of ventosas, in which the flow of blood is arrested, and they have three species: great, female, and small; the forms of them:
If they are made of iron, round, and of certain length, and are subtle.
And you should have these suction cups either large, medium, or few, so that through those incisions the flow of blood is rapid in necessity, and when previously there was no medicine.
But do not use those to close all the openings in the body, and use them only on fleshly areas, such as on the inner thighs and outer thighs, and on the armpits, and on the breasts, and on the belly, and on the folds of skin, and similar fleshly creases.
And some small instruments are made of those tools, resembling curved surgical implements according to this form; through which blood is drawn when performed by venesection, or by incision of a vein or artery.
And some small instruments are made round according to this form:
Capitulum xlviil.
On the treatment of the breasts of men which are like those of women.
Sometimes the breasts of some men swell when they begin to be flabby, and at times the breasts swell, and the breasts of women gather together, like Roman women.
And for those who have this, cut out the affected area according to this form, from the line of B to the line of G, and then excise all the tissue, and fill the wound with red medication, and suture the two edges of the wound together, and cure it until it is healed.
More so, if the breast droops to the sides and is softened by its size, like in women, then cut it into two lobes, each section resembling a lunar shape. Each should be contained within the other, such that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form from the line of B to the line of G. Then excise the cord which is between the two edges of the wound, remove the fat, and administer what we have said about suturing and powders as necessary during the cure until it is healed.
And if you do not complete the incision that needs to be made due to the restlessness of the patient and the flow of blood, then you must fill the wound with cloth submerged in corrosive ointment and leave it there so that it corrodes the roots of the fat, and then cure that which becomes healed.
Capitol. xlvi.
Of the perforation of abscesses where the vein trembles.
These abscesses where the vein trembles are of the kinds of scrofula, tumors, which contain a swelling that is extracted.
And of those that contain humidity, they must be incised at the lunar quarter according to this figure: from the line of G to the line of B. And when all that is in the abscess of pus is evacuated, then you complete it with new material and leave it for another day.
And then the material should be left in place and treated with appropriate ointment until it heals.
And if the abscess of the glands or scrofula is present, then you incise there accordingly as we have said in the section on scrofula.
And if the ulcer is extended to the point of becoming putrid, then apply a cautery to it as we have previously stated.
Capitol. XLIX.
Of the section on abscesses that occur through an arrow or a vein.
When an arrow breaks an artery and the chain (or tendon) over it is consolidated, then dark motes or spots occur as abscesses. The signs by which one can recognize that inflammation or abscess is due to the artery or vein are as follows: when an abscess is due to an artery, it is long and extends along the course of the limb; and when you press on the abscess with hot objects, you feel a stridor in it.
And that which is due to the vein is round at the surface of the body.
And the section over this abscess is error, and especially in that which leaves the axillae, and the armpits, and the neck, and in mad spots of the body; and it is great, therefore you should make sure that its cure be avoided, and that which is in the extremities, or at the head, should be avoided.
More about that which is from the liver due to inflammation of the orifice of the artery, cut the longitudinal section in the chain; and place the section with stitches near the artery, and deliver the tunics where they are uncovered.
And place the needle nearby and make it penetrate into the other lobe, and strengthen the artery with double thread in two places â€” which you should demonstrate to me in the extraction of two arteries, which are found in the tempests.
And place the point in the area between two ligaments with steam so that the wound heals and the abscess is dissolved.
And administer cure in which powder is applied before the ligaments fall; and cure that with suitable ointments until it heals.
And if it is an abscess due to the drying of a vein, then you should have your hand where you can reach the center of the abscess with your hand, and then insert the needle at that location where you have your hand, making it penetrate; and take out one from inside on one side and put another in on the other side, and then ligate the abscess well with good thread as I have said before about the grapevine twist between two ends of the thread.
And if you fear that you will take out the thread, then insert the honey at the needle and completely remove the abscess by making the first incision of the needle again, and strengthen your four threads at different locations.
Then dry the abscess in its middle location so that when you sit at that place, then you incise the excess of the cord, and leave what is soaked.
And then place over the powder which you have soaked in wine and oil, and administer the cure which is made with cloths and ointments until it is healed.
Capitalize the abscess which has occurred due to a twisted nerve.
Thus an abscess occurs in artery and vein, and similarly an abscess occurs in nerves when there is percussion or occurrence due to superfluous work.
And it is most prevalent in the areas of the assistants or the thigh, or in any area where the joints are lax.
And it is a severe abscess, and its color resembles that of the rest of the body, and it is in the largest parts of its location. When it is stretched due to inflammation, one feels in it the patient's stupor.
And it is not an abscess that extends to the front of the body, and therefore one leaves the chain, and he is lax in all parts and does not go to the front or back parts.
Therefore, that which is in the joints does not have to be filled with iron, for strong pain induces contraction.
More severe is that which is in the head or on the forehead, as it causes convulsion with foam. If it is a small abscess, then apply heat and cut it open with a sharp instrument.
If it is large, then suspend it with a thread, and lance it, and drain it; then close the wound with stitches, and continue to treat it until it heals.
Capitol. li.
Of the section on abscesses that occur in the cheek affecting the stomach.
Some people have swellings in their stomachs and in other parts of their body. These swellings are called funguals due to their similarity to fungi; the root of each is thin, while the head is large; and the veins around these areas are often constricted, both for those that are small and for those that are greatly enlarged.
And I have seen one case where in the stomach there were two swellings that resembled fungi, and there was no difference between these white areas, which had thin veins.
And already those lips were inverted and split, and moisture flowed from there constantly.
Then I incised those and opened one in the foot measuring eighteen inches, and the other measuring six inches.
And in the operation of their incision, consider whether the gout is humid, and the color of the tissue is white, humid, of fine particles; then you incise with a shallow cut, and let it be in your presence cauterized in the fire, for the sections should be expelled without corruption; and if you find the corruption, cauterize that.
And if you see the gout painful and terrifying, avoid incision with a sharp instrument; rather, when you take lead powder recently made, strengthen that tissue, the method of which is as we have said; let that remain for two days.
Then adjust in the constriction of the lead thread; therefore, do not cease to strengthen the lead greatly within the tissue, after it is incised and has worked on its own.
But if the tumor is of large size, in its incision there is some cause for fear and alarm, especially in that which is in the abdomen.
But it is possible that you incise the mass and then cauterize it to prevent it from returning.
And then cure what is inside so that the wound heals.
And beware that you do not presume to incise a tumor which is of dark color, has little sensation, and shows no reaction, for such a tumor is cancer.
And I will provide a reminder of the disease nearby.
Capitol. lii.
On the cure of an umbilical hernia.
An umbilical hernia is caused by various reasons; either due to fissures in the diaphragm which is above the abdomen, and protrudes through it along with the membrane or intestine depending on where the other ruptures are; or due to a wound from which fluid flows from a vein or artery as previously mentioned, or due to constricted ventosity within it.
If it is due to a rupture of the sac and herniation of the tissue, then the color of the abscess resembles the color of the body; and the pain is severe, and nearby appears in various positions. If it is due to the protrusion of the intestine, then the situation of that area differs more markedly from what we have described. When you press on that area with your thumb, it becomes hidden and soon returns; firmly hold that area, and use a strong method to introduce cold and vigorous work.
If it is due to humidity, then the pain is severe and does not become hidden when you press on it with your hand; it is neither relieved nor intensified.
If it is due to scalding, then in this case the abscess appears blackish and gradually darkening.
If it is due to no injury, then the abscess is severe, large, and hard, and is situated according to a certain quantity.
If it is due to windiness, then the touch of it is severe.
And in the operation, you consider whether the prominence of the navel is due to arterial blockage, or venous, or from excess; then you must avoid treating it, for there is fear and dread as you were taught in the Capitol where I said about abscesses from arteries and veins.
And if the prominence of the navel is due to the intestine or the hernia, then you must command the patient to lie on their side and extend. Next, gently examine around the entire navel, and command them to lie on their back with your hands under their shoulders. Then, spread a damp cloth around the area you examined with the gentle touch; extend the size of the abscess upwards by about an inch; in the circuit, place a strong string or thread tightly and properly.
And then extend the size of the abscess over the membrane and insert your finger into that indentation to feel for the intestine; if you have already palpated it or guarded it with the membrane, then you should extract it quickly and push the intestine back into the abdominal cavity.
And if you have found the membrane, then take it with forceps; and incise the superfluous parts of it.
But if it is contrary to your artery or vein, then circumvent that knot, and soon return to your operation; and take two needles and put them into those strong threads, and interpose two needles in the circuit which you have made around the abscess in the manner of a cross, making them penetrate; and soon strengthen the abscess in four parts over the needles.
And if you want, hold the needles and let the area between them dry and fall by itself; or incise that when it becomes subtle and can be removed, and soon cure that with ointments until it is healed.
And if the prominence of the navel is due to flesh nowhere else or by humidity, then drain the abscess from your cavity as we have said and remove the pus or humidity which you find there, and soon cure that with ointments that will consolidate the area.
Capitol liiii.
Of the cure of pain.
We have already said, in the division, of kinds of pain and in what manner treatment is applied to their cure. And we have said that it is necessary to ensure that the pain is not ulcerated; and we have said that pain generated by the method and caution in the cure of it.
And the ancients said that some kinds of pain are in a place where it is possible to completely eliminate them, such as in the head, which is in the mammary glands or in areas similar to the limbs, where one should extract all of it, especially when it begins small.
More often than not, when it is old and hard, one cannot determine its properties, for I have neither been able to cure such cases nor have I seen another, nor can it be treated in this way.
And the operation in such cases is as follows: when it is located as we have said, you should first expose the ailment and purge of black bile for several days, then draw that out, if found to be clearly present.
And then prepare the patient for operation, placing him in a position suitable for the procedure; and extend your hand towards those that lead to it; and bend all parts with the knife according to good excision so as not to damage any vital part of him. Let the blood flow, and do not arrest it lightly, and squeeze the areas, and wipe away the thick blood with your hand or with an instrument at your disposal.
But if you find thick blood in the incision of a vein or an artery, then cauterize that area once the flow of blood has ceased, and proceed to treat it with the other remedy until it is healed.
Capitol. liv.
Of the cure for dropsy.
We have already discussed in the division the species of dropsy caused by water, and the signs of each species, as well as the cure for them using medicines.
And that which is cured by iron is nothing but the specialty of colic alone, and it is not approximated to the specialty of tympanites nor to the specialty of hypochondria, for this is fatal.
And when you have treated this specialty of tympanites with medicines and your treatment does not succeed, consider that if the patient already has debility in the abdomen or another dropsy, as if it is in their lungs or abdominal organs and similar to those, then do not treat them with iron, for fear is present regarding this.
But if you see the patient has abundant virtue, and in them there is no other disease but dropsy solely, neither child nor old, then the method of the operation for it is that you lift the patient between your hands, and place your hand near their abdomen to squeeze out the fluid from them, pushing the water to the lower part of the body, and then take a spinal suction cup according to this form:
it should be of two sharp parts long, with sharp ends like a suction cup; however, it should have some small width to prevent passing into the intestine during the operation, and to avoid damaging it.
And then consider if the generation of dropsy is from the intestines, for when you palpate the section you are away from the navel by the quantity of three fingers at the lateral parts, on its right above the pubic bone.
And if the generation of dropsy is due to illness of the kidney, then your palpation should be on the left side of the navel by three fingers.
And if the generation of it is due to the liver, then your palpation should be on the right side.
And you should not palpate on the side where the patient feels pain, as this may cause excess fluids to flow to that area.
And then puncture the instrument completely through the wound, and insert it into that section, elevate your hand with the pus between the wound and the abscess, and you extract it; if it is about one inch or more.
And then puncture the abscess until the pus reaches the desired location, which is the site of the water. And then extract it and insert an instrument of which this is the form: And it is similar to a thin silver cannula. It is made of silver or gold or copper, on the lower part of which there is a small hole, and on its sides are three holes: two in one part and one in another part; and at the extremity, it is incised according to the plume manner, as you see.
And at the extremity of the instrument above is a ring, so that when the instrument reaches the water, immediately it begins to release a quantity of water through the small opening. If you release more than what can fit in the half-hour, it will cause the patient to faint due to the resolution of his animal spirit, or bring about an approach of death that is five signs away.
But release from there according to the quantity of the virtue of the liquid and according to how the disposition of the patient's condition signifies to you from the pulse and the quality of the liquid.
And then extract the instrument, and retain the liquid which causes it, as soon as it is retained by the cork which it passes through. You are instructed to perforate it according to this manner.
And then repeatedly apply the instrument if the patient tolerates this, and extract a small quantity of water, and do this for several days out of fear, and be careful not to soak in the water but only slightly.
And if you fear for the patient, and let a large quantity of water remain, then cure that with burial in sand, and washing with wetness, and in the sun wait for a long time; and cure that with drying medicines until it is healed.
And cauterize on the stomach, and the spleen near the extraction of the water, according to what I have recounted in what precedes.
Capitol.
For the cure of children whose locations for the passage of urine are not perforated.
In some instances, one of the children is born with the abdomen of its mother not perforated (or it is opened straight or not in its proper place).
Then cover the wound with a flap of skin as soon as it is cut according to this form:
And then place a thin lead nail there and bind it up, and keep it for three days or four.
And when he wishes to urinate he is relieved and voids urine; then return it.
And if you do not place the lead, it is possible that the urine which falls on the area will not allow this to close.
But that which you cut should be straightened and treated with a lead nail, as we have said, for many days before it is enlarged.
But those in which the cut is not in its place, are said to be caused by stones. The stone that causes it should be removed from the head of the penis so that urine can flow through the parts inside; while lifting the penis with your hand above the parts on top; and it is not a generative issue, because the sperm cannot reach the uterus according to its straight path, making this a chronic illness.
And the manner of the operation is that the patient lies on his back, and then extend the head of the penis with your left hand with strong traction, and incise the head of the head of the penis at the site of the curvature with a sharp blade, thus like the incision of a feather, or any part you do not reason to cut, so that the middle of it comes out resembling the head of the penis and that I pull it down into the middle location as needed.
And look that in your operation for the flow of sand, if you see any spots occur; pause at it and apply something to stop the sand, and dress the wound until it is healed.
Capitol LXVI.
For the abscess which occurs in the prepuce, at the head of the penis, and is accompanied by corruption, discoloration, and adhesion of the prepuce to the head of the penis.
Spots appear in this abscess on the penis and form an elevated flesh wound.
And of those, one is malignant and the other is non-malignant.
And of the non-malignant, take a thin needle and cut through that in which all that is contained; then place your hand over it to submerge it in Egyptian ointment; then cover it with fine ointment until it heals.
And if the boil is malignant and of a white color, then you should apply a cautery near the incision and around it.
And if the boil is on the foreskin of the head of the penis in an uncircumcised man, and one part of the boil is inside the foreskin and another part is outside, then you should remove the part that is inside at the beginning before it becomes consolidated; and then cure the part outside. For when you cure the foreskin together with it, it is not assured that it will not be torn.
And we have examined accidents in the genitals and in the foreskin, such as blackening and corruption. Then you should reduce all that is already darkened and that is about toè…åŒ–æˆ–å·²ç»è…çƒ‚ï¼›ç„¶åŽåœ¨å…¶ä¸Šåˆ’çº¿ï¼Œç”¨èœ‚èœœã€‚è¯¥èœœæ˜¯ç”±å¤§é»„ç²‰ã€ä¸‰ç§ç ”ç£¨å’Œç­›è¿‡çš„é†‹åˆ¶æˆçš„ã€‚
And then attend to that other cure while the one is healing.
And if there is a flow of blood, then administer a lunar cautery according to this form:
A lunar cautery is used in two positions together, either for a flow of blood or during an infection when the wound is broken.
And if the head of the abscess is corroded and destroyed entirely in an hour, then you should introduce a lead catheter into the meat of the prepuce so that the infection discharges through it.
In the adhesion of the prepuce, at the head of the abscess (and this adhesion occurs only in that part from which the prepuce comes, and no circumcision is required over it; when adhesion occurs due to an infection or an abscess), you should excoriate with a blunt spatula until the adhesive substance dissolves and the head of the abscess is completely discharged.
And if it is difficult to excoriate those thoroughly, then you should excoriate with a spatula some part of the head of the abscess and the prepuce, and this is because the prepuce, when thin, being very light, is easily perforated by its thinness.
And then separate between the foreskin and the head of the penis a thin strip of skin, which is already moistened with the fomenting liquid to prevent another fold from adhering.
And then let it be tied with astringents when it is consolidated.
Capitol. lvii.
On the purification of infants and the treatment of what occurs to those who have been circumcised.
Circumcision is not a solution for continuity in the same way as other infections: indeed, it is more so of our operation and our will, and those of it are properly in infants, it is necessary that we assign to it the best operation and the most gentle path leading to health.
Therefore, it is said that the ancients did not command circumcision in any of the laws for free men, as they do not use it in their laws. It is merely because we have acquired this practice through experience; the reason is that I have examined the majority of artists and barbers using circumcision and purification with a knife and with torches; and they use lint with wine and incision with anointing.
And I have already tried all these methods and cannot find a better modification with scissors, or with honey or vinegar in the modification like ointment, for you will always see the cord come back up, for it is held by two tunics, and the woody one remains down, and it is certain that another incision and painful scar are forced. And for the modification which is done by excision, and is digital, of which shoemakers use, it is not secure regarding the incision at the extremity of the male member, for it often enters into the channel of it.
In the operation with ointment, you must use iron and corrupt your operation. And the cord of the child is short by nature, and often needs not to be modified in such a manner, and I have seen it.
More of the modification that is done with scissors and ointments with vinegar, the quality, experience describes to me, for the scissors are of proportional incision, for which the sharpness above is as the sharpness below; and therefore, when you press your hand in proportionate two sharpnesses, and cut according to a comparison at one time; and it is made compression of the vinegar in a figure containing the cord of the virgina from all parts, with which no error can arise.
And the manner of the first operation is that you make the child lie mainly if it is among those who understand a little, that you bind him only in his foreskin, and let that be for another day.
And then make that child comfortable in every way that is possible for what receives its intelligence. And then place that child among your knees preparedly, and do not be more than a hundred; and hide the scissors in your hand or place your knee on him so he cannot see those or any other of the instruments.
And then insert your hand into the child's foreskin and blow into the head of the foreskin, and then modify that which is attached to it with sordicity.
The shape of the forceps after modification, this is the shape:
If the outer edges are not sharpened and the inner edges are sharpened, let the angle of the blade be such that the length of the two acute edges is equal to the length of two handles.
More importantly, the error in modification is that if you lift the intrinsic thigh too forcefully, or partially, you must make an incision.
Therefore, ensure that you extend that part of your hand with the finger in front of the incision site and make the incision according to equality.
And if you cannot hold it with your finger, then extend that part with the thumb and make the incision.
But if they have passed three days and remain what is swollen with the inguinal abscess, then you let this be incised with a cautery, and excise that for ease, and scrape that according to how it is prepared.
And guard the head of the abscess, for if not done properly it will not be good.
And therefore treat that part where the wound consolidates with the powders we have recommended in the treatise on powders.
And if it is incised beyond measure, and you obey the rules above, this will not harm it.
And therefore treat that part as we have said until it is healed.
Chapter 8.
On the treatment of retained urine in the bladder.
Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by an obstruction due to a stone or a strangulated hernia, or pus or meaty growths, and resembles those we have said about the methods of treatment in the division.
And if what we have said is not dissolved, strongly apply the cause on the patient, then administer extraction of it with an instrument which is called a syringe, of which this is the form: It should be made of silver and should be very fine, like a slender quill long in the likeness of a palm and a half, to which should be attached a fine tube at its head.
And the method of urine extraction through this is that you take a fine tube folded and tie it at the end with wool or cotton for good closure; and insert the ends of the tube into the part left by the syringe, and cut with scissors if any excess wool is needed. Then strongly introduce it into the canula and tightly close the syringe with a wax seal.
And make incisions in the patient's side, and sprinkle the bladder and groin with a mixture of olive oil and vinegar.
And then introduce the probe easily until it reaches the root of the groin; and then fold the groin upwards at the place where the probe ends; and then push the probe inside to reach the bladder; and then push that towards the patient's side so that it reaches the cause, and if this is not done in this order, but the meat in which there is a tortuous course.
And then slowly insert the thread into the wool, for urine will soak the wool.
And then extract that and use a probe for treatment of urine, continue doing this and use the probe until the bladder and patient are properly relieved.
Capitol.lix.
Of the quality of cleansing the bladder with enemas, use strong ones and have similar instruments that are suitable for this.
When an ulcer or abscess occurs in the bladder, or there is a burn injury there, or it is constricted by swelling, and you want to distill waters and medicines in that area, then make an instrument which is called clampcedra, and this is its form:
so that in the extremity of it is numb, so it is closed. And in that there are three cuts: two from one side, thus many times.
At the beginning, it is concave, in which what is pushed is located, and according to the quantity that fills it, its addition occurs. Within this, when any cause, due to the humidities, draws it out, it is drawn out, and when it is expelled, it is drawn back. When expelled for a long time, according to how it acts, naphta is applied in the battles of sea with it.
So, if you want to expel humidities from the bladder, insert the extremity of the clampcedra into the humidity, and draw out what is pushed to the upper parts; thus, the humidity is drawn back into the cavity of the clampcedra.
And then insert the tip of the pessary into the vagina as we advised in the gynecology; and then push the moisture out as you push, for that moisture will quickly reach the bladder, and the malady ceases there.
The form of the subtle pessary through which the bladder is affected, and that is the form:
And it should be made of silver or tin, with its head resembling a small feather, and insert the stalk inside cotton.
And then take a bladder of mule, place the moisture you want to affect the bladder with in it, and tie it tightly between two strong ligatures with double thread, and heat that moisture over the fire.
And then insert the tip of the pessary into the vagina.
And then strengthen your hand on the bladder with the moisture in a descending structure so that the malady ceases as that moisture reaches the bladder.
If you do not have a bladder present, then take a piece of parchment and make from that circle; perforate it entirely round its circumference; then insert strong thread through all those stitches, as they are turned; then add the circle as it is added alsofatur, so that you pause in that which you want from the humidities, and smell and waters.
And then you tie that with the instrument and do so with it as you have done with the bladder, and ensure that the humidity reaches the bladder through your hand.
Capitol.lx.
Of the extraction of the stone.
We have already discussed in the division the species of stone and its cure with medicines, and the difference between a stone generated in the kidneys and a stone generated in the bladder, and the signs of the former.
And we have discussed the stone for which major surgery is performed and sectioning.
And the stone generated in the bladder properly is that which is inserted in the bladder.
And I now proceed with that explanation and abbreviation.
Therefore, I say that the stone generated in the bladder mostly affects children; and among its signs is that the urine discharged from the bladder resembles water in its subtlety, and appears in that sand; and the patient grinds his teeth, feels coldness in his genitals, and soon becomes feverish; and this causes the anus to hurt instead of those.
And this is the healing of children within which they have reached fourteen years; and it is a difficult cure in old age. More in young people, it heals through this fever that is between them.
And of that in which the stone is larger and the cure is easier; and if it is small, it is contrary to that.
Therefore, when we reach the cure of that, start with the beginning of that which we modify the patient's genitals with a cristera (a type of instrument) which extracts all the opening which is in their intestines; for that opening sometimes prohibits the passage of the stone by questioning it.
And then place the patient on their feet and stretch and bend them slightly so that the sole of the foot descends to the neck of the bladder, or so that it turns a few times.
And then place the prepared cushions under your hands, and let the other servants hold the patient's legs, so that the bladder is made to descend to the parts held.
And then apply it to that and all that region.
And if you feel the sole in the space, then quickly apply heat to it.
And if you do not feel it completely with your touch, then know that you should anoint your index finger of the left hand with oil, if the patient is a child, or your thumb if the patient is an adult, and insert that into its anus. And apply heat to the sole while placing your finger there. And gradually insert that into the neck of the bladder.
And then press upon that area as you have said, and expel that to the external parts. Look for the location from which it came.
And command the minister to press the bladder with his hand; and command another minister to with his right hand extend the legs to the upper parts, and with his other hand roll back the curtain which is placed above the legs, at the location where the operation is performed.
And then insert a spatula there; this is the form of it: And cut there where it is between the anus and the legs, not in the middle, before the left thigh; and let the incision be on that bone which you said is in the anus, and make a transverse section, so that the incision outside is wide and inside narrow according to the quantity that flowed from the bone, as much as possible, and no more. For strongly we hold the incision where you said it is in the anus, the bone should be severed and the hole closed with its faculty.
And observe that from the stone there is some to which it has angles and margins, because the passage of it is made difficult by this.
And of that which seems like a lion, and is round, and they make from it a slight passage.
And if that which has angles and margins, adjust in the crack.
And if it is not thus open, then you must probe it with a needle or strengthen it with a gesture decently, the extremity of which be thus like a file on which you strengthen the stone, and do not extricate yourself from it; or you must insert a thin instrument under its curved extremity.
But if you cannot do this, then you enlarge it a little, and if you see a flow of blood, incise strongly there with vitriolic acid.
But if the stone is more than one, then at the beginning you push your hand to the mouth of the bladder, and then incise there; and then push a little at that place; similarly do if its spots are more than two.
And if the stone is very large, then ignorance leads you to incise that great section, for which happens to the patient one of two causes: either it dies or it manages to achieve a continuous distillation of urine, by which the area is not completely consolidated.
May administer the expulsion of the stone when it is outside, or use forceps in the fracture of the bone to extract that which remains within the flesh.
So when you have completed your operation, fill the wound with slices of aloe and dragon's blood, and strengthen it. And place over that cloth infused in oil and wine, or in fragrant oil and water, so that the abscess may yield.
And then raise the patient's leg on a stool, and do not remove the bandage on the third day.
And when you have removed it, sponge the area with water and some oil, and then treat it with ointment containing diaphionic and ointment containing diabazic acid until it is healed.
If in the wound you encounter an abscess that is hard and corruptive, and it appears as if the blood is frozen in the bladder and through which urination is prohibited (and this is known by the discharge of blood with urine), then insert your instrument into the wound and extract that blood, for if it remains it will cause corruption of the bladder and its putrefaction.
Then wash the wound with vinegar, water, and salt, and oppose all sorts of herbs, using what is suitable for its cure while it is healing.
And mark the hours for all your treatment, placing both hands on the patient's thighs and applying the medicines which are pressed onto the area.
And if the stone is small and is in the meat of the penis, and the emission of urine is prohibited, then treat it by using what I have recommended before you reach the section; for too many applications of this treatment are accused of causing drying. And now I will describe it: you should take a metallic drill, the shape of which is as follows:
of triangular shape, sharp, inserted in the foot.
And then take honey, and apply it to the wound, letting the stone rest so that it does not return to the bladder.
And then insert the needle into the wound, perforating easily where the perforator will reach the stone. And rotate the perforator with your hand around the stone little by little, and complete the perforation on that side before you make it penetrate on the other side; for the urine will then be quickly relieved.
And then press your hand on what is left of the stone from the perforation in the wound, for that is fragmented, and is washed by the urine, and the patient is cured.
More if this cure is not achieved due to any cause that prohibits it, then apply honey to the stone, and another layer of honey above the stone. And then place a bandage over the stone in the wound between two layers. And then extract it. And then loosen the ligament and modify the sclerosed vein, which is done in the lesion.
And it is not necessary to use silk thread for the ligament, but only to prevent it from returning to the bladder. The other ligament above this is because when the silk is loosened near the injury of the stone, the cord returns to its place and heals the lesion.
And for this reason, when you place the silk above, you must raise the cord to the parts above, or it will return in another way, and heal the lesion as we have said.
Capitol. lxix.
On the extraction of stones from women.
Stone in women is rarely generated.
Yet if a stone does occur in any of them, the cure is difficult, and it is prohibited by too many methods.
One of them is that the woman faints because she is weak.
And the second is that you cannot find a woman well versed who can describe whether she mixes it with the doctor when she is married, or if it is one of the women having a husband.
The third is that you cannot find a woman well versed in this art, especially in major operations.
And the fourth is that the location of the section near the bladder in women is far from the location of the bladder, so you need a longitudinal section, and there is fear in that area.
But if necessity prompts you to do this, then you must seek out a midwife who is well versed, and such one is not easily found.
But if you are lacking in that, then seek out a midwife who is skilled and subtle, or present a well-versed older woman knowledgeable about the condition of women, or a woman who has part of this art.
Therefore, have her present and command her to do everything you will tell her, from the inquiry about the bladder to the beginning of the procedure; for this reason, she should check if the woman is a virgin, and then place her hand in the woman's anus and feel for the bladder.
Then if you find it, cut it out and leave the one you just mentioned, and then order him to incise over it.
But if it is not a stone, then order the midwife to insert her finger into the bladder of the patient and feel for the stone, while placing her left hand on the bladder, and grasp it with good compression.
Then if you find it, gradually wash out the bladder through its orifice with much water, leaving some of its virtue so that it may reach the root of the thigh.
And then incise over that insertion of the catheter, place the root of the thigh in any part where it stops and center the stone in that part, and cut him if the pain is not relieved by the stone.
And the section should be small at the beginning; then insert the probe over that section, and if you feel the stone, then adjust the section according to the quantity he knows the stone will be removed from there.
And perceive that the grains of pepper are spots: some are small and large, lion and sharp, long and round, and having wings.
And therefore you perceive what grains of pepper are so that you may signify about what you want.
And if you want a flow of urine, apply vitriol trioxide to the area for one hour before cutting the urine, and then return to your operation after the pepper is removed.
And make sure to prepare among your instruments those which you have mentioned in the extraction of pepper in men, so that you may be helped by them in your operation.
And if you want a flow of urine, and you know that the expulsion of urine is from the artery that is incised, then apply powder to the area and strengthen it with powders and promote descent, and do not repeat this; and leave the pepper and do not extract it, for strong pressure will kill the patient. And then treat the wound.
When the sharpness of the pain in the leg subsides after some days, then you return to your operation while the stone is forgotten.
Chapter LXII.
On the section about inguinal hernia.
Hernia aquous is nothing but an accumulation of moisture in the white fiber, which is left when the cord of the genitals containing the humor is relaxed, and it is named fibrous.
And sometimes it is in the own linen cloth, which nature prepares in the part of the humor before it is cooked and another humor has taken its place; and this is the cord of the genitals between the white fiber, which we have said, and it is not this but a tendon.
And the generation of this hernia is due to weakness which occurs in the genitals, because this material infiltrates there, and sometimes it occurs due to percussion performed on the genitals.
And this moisture having colored spots, its color is either declining to yellowish, or bloody, or red, or black and starchy, or watery white, and it is this that is most common.
And the signs by which one knows where this addition of water is located are these: if it is in the white cell which we have said, then the abscess is round, slightly declining in length like the figure of a gourd, and appears the genus, for the humidity contains that from all parts.
And if the humidity is in the proper flesh, then the abscess is round detached from the gourd and for this reason one estimates that it is another gourd.
And if the humidity is between the genus and the white cell, then cut off the centiment.
And to know the color of the humidity, you draw the color of the humidity in the abscess through a medium liquid whose form precedes it; and according to what happens in the trace of the medium, judge what is inside it.
Then when we come to the cure of it, you must command the patient to bleed if this is within your capability, and often let his body fill.
And then he is laid supine on his back on some cause a little forth or aft, and place the head on the pillows.
And then set yourself on the left side of the patient, and command the minister to stand on the right side of the patient, who extends his cloth over one of the sides at the buttocks and the part of the miracle of the abdomen.
And then take a spatula and split the buttocks at the midpoint along the length near the coccyx.
And the section should be made according to rectitude, equally distant from the line where you divide the skin of the buttocks, until it reaches the white ciphac (likely referring to a fatty tissue or muscle layer).
And excise that, and observe it, and keep it for this: do not enter that; your excision from the part where you excised it should be suspended on the finest hook and subtly examine the excision according to the quantity you can.
And then puncture the fatty tissue full of water with a large hole, and extract all the water.
And then separate between the two lips of the section with forceps, and extend the flap above; and do not touch the cord around the genitalia, and incise the flap in that manner which is possible to you. And incise that completely or in parts, especially its fine inner layer; for if you do not thoroughly examine the incision, it is not ensured that the water will not return.
But if you proceed with the exterior part of its cord during your operation, when you have completed the sectioning of the flap, return inside that, and properly suture the two lips of the genital cord, and properly care for that as with other wounds until it heals.
And if you find the cord corrupted by another illness, then ligate the vessels which are above the suspensory, extract the cord, and properly care for that as we have said.
But if the water is present in two parts, then you know that there are two hernias; therefore, incise that part according to what you have done in the other equally; and if it is evident to you that it is a simple operation, then you perform it.
And then you cleanse the blood, insert in the sections submerged wool in oil or rubbed oil; place another wool over it which you have soaked in wine and oil, and spread that over two genii et miraculum ventris; place further on cloths folded and powders, and lay those above the lint which is according to this form:
And then press two cloths and fill them with well-combed wool according to this likeness; and make the ends where they are pressed tightly or with wet wool, and attach them to the structure in the waistband of the trousers, one end grasping from behind into the two, and the second grasping at the crotch part, and place the two ends on two thighs, and other two ends on two girdles, and all the structure be adjusted in the waistband of the trousers.
And sometimes this hernia is artificially treated with a cautery at the section instead of using iron; so you take a thin surgical cautery and incise there at the cord of the genii, and ignite it as we have recommended until the white cippac containing the water is discovered, and then you use the cautery in this form: and it resembles Greek letters.
And then puncture that blister, and ignite within it all the moisture to be expelled.
And then lance the blister with needles, and incise it with needles, and cauterize it with a thin ignited cautery; and cut it open as much as possible so that you can remove all of it; and protect yourself from the smoke that the fire produces.
And know that this operation is safer and farther from the risk of infection, and better than an incision.
But if you encounter a boil during the incision or cautery, or during the risk of infection, then treat it as you would any other similar condition, applying the appropriate cure as described.
But if the patient is fearful and does not expect the second operation due to its horror, then administer puncture as I advise you; and it is certain that you should certify, based on what we have said about the meanings, that that hernia is painful.
When you must suture the thigh on some elevated part, then perforate the abscess at the lower side with a spatula, and pause the perforation according to the length of the body.
And let the opening be wide enough to drain all the water.
And place your hand over the exact spot, close it, and leave it open, so that the water can continue to flow. And place something over the wound to ensure it heals.
But if contrary to the flow of water at that time you perforate it: and this is not done so that the white lint prevents water from entering through the wound's openings. When you need to put in the wound a pledget or instrument from which water is drawn from the dropsy, the form of which precedes; or apply a small sponge around the wound.
And you know that the water returns, and it is agueguada (heated) for about two months or until it does; and when it is heated, then perforate it according to that method, so that the thigh passes its days thus.
Capitol LXIII.
On the section about flesh hernia and its cure.
Know that in the section about this hernia, one fears great harm to the major organs; for I have seen its removal and being saved by the better method.
And I am remembering the operation in that case and the types of abscesses.
Therefore, I say that abscesses naturally occur in the tissues where the glands are composed, and this happens for several causes: either due to acute painful congestion, which is infused into the glands, or due to a blow.
And the color of the abscess depends on the color of the tissue, and pain is not a symptom in it; it is a serious abscess.
And the abscess is firm and blackened, of which the color is dark, and there is no tenderness in it.
And sometimes it occurs due to the dilation of the arteries, and due to inflammation of those vessels, as the memory of which is already perceived, or due to inflammation of veins.
More than that, which is due to the inflation of arteries, it is known as the dispersion of the apstema when you grasp that among those thighs; and do not cut there.
More than that, which is caused by the inflation of veins, is not dispersed from there; you should apply compression with your hands.
And it is possible that sectioning may be performed on this species as well as on other tissues; and you incise the cord of the tendons, then extend the heel above, and extract that from the white cavity, and deliver the suspensorium of the vessels, ligate them, and incise the suspensorium after you deliver that from all parts of the heel.
Therefore, if the heel has already consolidated in those tissues, then you should extract the heel and incise it.
And if there is an adhesion due to any cause in the cavity, or between what is between the vessels, then you should deliver all that adhesion and incise it with a round incision.
If the flesh is native to the place of adhesion which is behind, then cut into all that belongs to it and remove the fat as we have said.
Then since your operation is completed, fill the wound with wool soaked in olive oil and wine; and place it over the other dressing until it heals.
Chapter LXIV.
On the treatment of hernias that occur through force.
It is an abscess enveloped by some envelope resembling a clot, and it makes physical exercise, activity, and walking difficult for the patient.
And in the treatment of this illness, one is fearful of what preceded it and caused it.
However, proceed with the operation according to how I have described the first steps.
And I say that you should suspend the patient's legs on an elevated frame; and place the scrotum over the thighs, leaving the parts exposed; and tie the groin area with a strap tested for tightness against the thigh; and have another attendant hold those down while you extend them vigorously.
And then incise with a sharp blade by transverse section along the right of the vessels among which the vessels are uncovered.
And then excise from all parts thus as we have said in the extraction of arteries which are in the temples.
And then place a needle in which there is double thread, and tie that at the beginning of the locations where you incise, and tie the other half at the end of them. And then incise those in the middle location by a right section according to the length of the body, and extract what is added from the foul and corrupted humors.
And then cure the wound by the cure of other wounds in which you wish healing to be generated so that the vessels which nourish them are those of two genius, for this is not harmful.
But if you incise all the vessels, then ensure that the testicles are extracted or that they wither due to the incision of the vessels, so that it is deprived of all nutrition due to the incision of the vessels, and may wither, or that they wither on their own.
Capitol LXV.
Of the cure for intestinal hernia.
The occurrence of this hernia is due to a separation that extends over the diaphragm onto the abdomen from the muscles of the abdominal wall, because of the rupture of the intestines and some of the intestines.
And this rupture is either of the diaphragm or of its excision, and these two species occur due to various causes: through a blow, by jumping, from shouting, from lifting some heavy cause, or for similar reasons.
And the sign of this, when it is due to extension of the diaphragm, is that it occurs gradually over a long period of time, and does not occur suddenly. It is an abscess enclosed within the liver, by which the diaphragm compresses the intestine.
And the sign of this is when it is due to separation of the diaphragm, for at the beginning it causes sudden and intense pain; it is an abscess that appears different from the nearby visible one, and this is due to the displacement of the intestine, with its body in the parts outside the diaphragm.
And sometimes the intestine pushes the skin out, and this hernia is called intestinal bulge.
And sometimes it is caused by distension, and sometimes a hole forms in the intestine, where it gets stuck, and this causes great discomfort to the patient, and sometimes it leads to severe pain, especially when pressed.
And in the treatment of the symptoms of this illness there is fear, because it is believed that the examination must be avoided in that area.
And the method of the operation for this is that you command the patient to push the intestine back into its cavity with their hand at the internal parts of their cavity if they obey in their return, then quickly place them on their back between your hands, and lift their legs.
And then stretch the scrotal skin from above downward, and incise the scrotal skin entirely lengthwise; then place it in two flaps of the incision according to where you need to open the section.
And if the section according to the quantity that it is possible for you to be perforated from there, let it be opened.
And then strip that skin which is left with the cord of the testicles, once the white hard part of each section is uncovered.
And then insert your thumb into that which is seared on the testicle, in between the white skin, which is left with the cord of the wound, and between the skin folds, and release any adhesion that is in the part behind the wound.
And then place your hand on the testicle folds externally, and with this stretch the white skin with your left hand, and elevate the wound to the part of the section; and command the minister to stretch the wound upwards while you dissolve the adhesion behind with a solution.
And seek around with your fingers that there be no cause of the intestine enveloped in the white tough skin. But if you find any cause, then peel it off to the abdomen, leaving it there.
And then incise in the part below the testicles for the section from which the blood and health flow as we have recounted in what we have said.
And then administer wool submerged in oil, and place it on the wound; apply the plaster which we have recommended (and some times the white wick is cauterized, which we mentioned near the incision of this fear of bleeding, because often such times accidents occur). Let the plaster remain until it falls by itself.
And if the application is delayed, then pour cold water over it, and place it there until it falls as we have said.
And then treat the wound with another method for treating wounds until it is healed.
Capitol. lxvi.
Of hernia ventosa.
In this hernia, there is nothing seen that has been burned during the treatment of it.
And the first surgeons would do it this way as we have recommended for the hernia in the belly: which is that you tie the vessels near the section over which there is ease; then dry and clean in the middle area where you introduce an apostema to facilitate that, until the vessels fall.
And cure the wound as we have said until it is healed.
Chapter LXVII.
Of the disorder that occurs in the ankles.
In some cases, there is a rupture in the ankles as we have said, and apply a poultice to the area.
And the physicians do not assign any cause of the ruptures to the bladder; and if they do, it is very little; and return to the main topic at all times.
But if the time is prolonged in this, there is an appropriate crack in the skin through which to return the intestine into the cavity; and this happens due to the extension of the skin, as we have said, which causes the skin to stretch, soften, and become suppurated, and apply a poultice.
And the treatment of it is with a cautery as described in the preceding narration.
And sometimes it is cured by iron according to this manner: and it is that the patient lies on his back between your hands, and then the place of the rupture of the abscesses dries up by drying out in a width according to the quantity of three fingers.
And then strengthen the white chalk that is at the center when it is uncovered.
And then take the rod and place it over the center of the chalk that is drying, and press it against the abdomen.
And then prick the two center spots over the end of the rod of the chalk, and adjust one to the other with the suture.
And then remove the end of the rod, and do not go beyond the center of the chalk, nor extend the hole, nor any other cause like this in the treatment of intestinal hernia.
And then cure that in the treatment of wounds, and after cutting the edges, clean it and restore the wound while it is consolidating; for the chalk contracts and the edge of the rupture is not adjusted.
And cautery is better in this place, for it is more proximate to health.
Capitol. lxviii.
Of the mollification of the scrotal skin.
Spots on the scrotal skin in some men are mollified because the flesh between there is mollified, and it is thought that this is due to local conditions.
Then it is necessary for the one who is examining in the treatment of this to cause the patient to lie according to his condition, and at once entirely remove the scrotum which is mollified over the natural scrotum; and then bring the two lips together at the suture.
And if you wish, begin the removal of the excess scrotal tissue that is mollified with three or four stitches and a firm suture.
And then incise between the sutures; and afterward treat with treatment for other wounds until it is healed and the stitches fall out.
Chapter LXIX.
Of castration.
Know that castration in our law is excommunicated, but by cause it is allowed to me that I remember it in this treatise; and the remembering of it is necessary for two reasons, of which one is that when a doctor is questioned about it, he knows the cure for him upon whom it occurs; and the other reason is that we may have need of castration for our young animals, such as mules, oxen, pigs, and similar to animals.
And thus it is said that castration is performed in two ways: either by incision or by fissure (or section).
But in that which is performed by incision, the way of the operation is to cut the animal in water shortly before the genitals become soft and relaxed. And then take those parts with your hand before they become resolved and do not show marks upon touch.
When castration is performed due to a crack or secundo, ensure that you have the animal and press the cord of the testicles with your left hand.
Then lift the suspensory ligament, and incise over each groove between two testicles.
Then incise those glands that you have excoriated. And do not incise any of those on the scrotum for any cause, but incise the fine one which is over the veins.
And this method of castration is better which is performed by traction, for traction firmly leaves no cause of the testicles since the animal desires copulation.
Then cure the wound while it is healing.
Capitol LXX.
On the cure of hermaphroditism.
Hermaphroditism in males occurs in two ways: one where there is a difference or appearance in the space in the cord of the testicles, where between two testicles there is a difference that resembles female characteristics in which the skin is involved.
And sometimes there flows urine which is in the channel of the testicles.
In women, it is a special case: and the labia of the woman around the clitoris are like two testicles of man with a small amount of fatty tissue on the outer part like the scrotum of man with two testes.
And the cure is of three kinds: two for men and one for women. And you should incise those tight flesh areas where the pus escapes from that area, and then treat those with the cure for other wounds.
And in the second kind for men from which urine flows from the channel of the testicles, neither cure nor operation is needed.
Chapter 21.
On the labia and flesh protruding due to conditions in women.
Labia fort is tightly adjusted due to natural causes where it is stretched and appears noticeable; and in some cases, it becomes enlarged in some women so much that it hangs like in men and can pass during intercourse.
Then you should have the superfluous phlegm in your hand or cup and discard it.
And do not end in cupping, especially on the back of the hand, so that no flow of pus occurs.
Then treat that with the cure for the sores while they are healing.
More hidden flesh is flesh that arises in the horror of the womb while it fills that space, and a large lump is situated outside according to the likeness of a cyst (and for this some first called it "hidden disease"); therefore, we should cut it thus as we cut phlegm, and treat it while it is healing.
Capitol. lxii.
On the cure of alratica.
Alratica is when the hymen of the woman is not perforated, or is only slightly torn. And it can be either natural or accidental.
Accidental is due to a malady that has preceded, and that is caused either by flesh not fitting well or by a slight or thickened ciphac.
It is caused in the region of the liver, or in its flanks, or above it, or below it, and you forbid coitus and conception and childbirth, and strongly you forbid menses.
The knowledge of that is made by observing the midwife, if the obstruction is apparent, probe gently; but if it is not apparent, then you approach that with your fingers or with a probe.
But if the obstruction is due to a slight ciphac (obstruction), and is close to the two lips, then you open and separate that.
And you place powders on the two lips, and then place your fingers, indicating with both hands around them.
And the woman is on her back, her thighs extended, and then spread the two lips with force until that slight obstruction is broken and the obstruction is opened.
And then take wool and soak it in oil and place it over the area, and keep someone there to prevent the incised location from becoming consolidated.
If the abscess is large and thick, then incise it with a spatula or a leaf of mint.
If the abscess is in flesh, then suspend it with a pin, and incise it.
And use those medicines that stop the flow of venom from a bite, such as garlic, dragon's blood, and hyssop, mixed with honey.
And then administer an ample lead cannula to prevent the infection from becoming slightly consolidated.
And keep it there for several days and administer cooled wine.
And then cure it with the other consolidation remedy before it is healed.
And sometimes accidents occur in the natural abundance of other tissues, then you must incise according to this method. If this is due to a chronic abscess, the chronic abscess which is in the major part should not be treated by any means of incision.
Capitol LXXIII.
For the treatment of hemorrhoids and piles and of red boils that occur in the groin of women.
Hemorrhoids are appreciated as the result of small veins within which constantly circulate corrupting fluids; and as for ancient hemorrhoids, they are formed by cords.
And I have already said in the division the species of those and the signs of those, and to say likewise which receive treatment and which do not receive treatment.
Therefore, say that hemorrhoids and cords when in the internal part of the major area and do not appear to the sensation, then do not treat those by any means.
But those that are in the external part of the major area on which sensation is present, are those that can be treated.
And ensure that you place the woman in a comfortable position and then widely extend the thighs, either with scissors or a rough cloth, and incise there where the roots are.
And then sprinkle over those wounds the flux of the blood from one of the incisive powders six bites, thus as it appears and looks like those.
And then wrap their feet for an hour, and then immerse that in cold water.
And if the bleeding persists, then apply that dress in a decoction of sumac and of seeds of millet grains and of walnuts and of similar substances.
And then take flour of oregano and mix it with honey and vinegar, and make an ointment with this over their back.
And if the bleeding is stopped, that is good; otherwise, apply two ventosas (cupping glasses) to the breasts, and perform six scarifications.
And then take wool and immerse it in the juice of caraway or in the juice of agrimony or in the juice of greater celandine in vinegar, and apply it to the area; and then cure the area with ointments until it is healed.
And cure that which is within and let it be healed.
Capitol. 74.
On the perforation of the eye in the vein.
Various special cases of apoplexy occur in the vein, such as stroke, apoplexy with a stone, ulcers, abscesses, erysipelas, fistulas, hemorrhoids, and thrombosis, as well as other types of apoplexy. And I have already described these illnesses and their special cases, as well as the symptoms of each, and their treatments in the division.
And let it be known that I will describe in this treatise on apoplexy the cautery used when it occurs in the vein among those apoplexies that involve health, and if you want to know how the operation is performed, you may ask.
Then consider whether the pain in the abscess at its beginning is sharp upon percussion and flux and fever, and sometimes that reddening and if it catches over that the sensation, when noÂ·t piercing of it, and cure it with what helps during the maturation until the acuity of the accidents ceases.
Then you should make the patient lie on a bench that has two benches; recline on their side and adjust their feet to the part behind their abdomen, and spread their thighs apart, and place their arms below their armpits, and have cushions of flax for them.
Then the midwife should follow the rectum straight and administer the instrument through which the openings of the womb have been opened, the form of which will come in the cases that will be mentioned later.
When you want to administer this instrument, place it at the opening of the womb of the patient, and what part of the instrument enters the womb should not go beyond the opening of the womb and treat the malady. If the instrument is larger than the part of the vein, then cover it with powder on the part of the vein to prevent the instrument from entering the vein.
Cover the vein that runs in the channel above with a cloth, and let the minister hold the channel and rotate the vein within until the openings of the vein are exposed.
And when the excitation appears, and it is touched with the hand and is hot and moist, then cover that part of the head with a sponge soaked in cold water.
And when the foulness is evacuated, then cover the wound with a compress submerged in infused oil or green oil which has some strength; and place the paste in the opening of the vein.
And cover the vein and over the wick place a clean woolen cloth submerged in water in which nettles have been boiled.
And it is usually cured in about two days by applying an ointment that you should use until it is healed.
And sometimes the liver and wound are washed in an attempt to cauterize them with water and honey, then placed in water in which barley or rush grass has been boiled, and then returned to be anointed.
And if the wound is inside the liver softened, then cover it and do not attempt to treat it with a ferret, but take care that which we have said in the division.
Capitol.lxxv.
To teach midwives how to treat false pregnancies naturally as described in the figure.
Necessary cause is that the midwife know at the beginning the figure of natural childbirth by signs of it. When you see the female expel from the parts and desire to smell the air, and about this she is troubled by what is over her during labor, and hastens the birth of the fetus, then you know that this part is according to a natural figure, and its birth is above her head, and the second one is either suspended or pendent from the navel.
When you see those signs, then make sure that the abdomen is compressed so that the fetus descends lightly; when it is on its head, give the second stage, and it is cleansed of those superfluities through good purification.
That which is another to this part is unnatural and displeasing, for when the fetus is situated on its feet and the body of the mother is situated in front of the head of the fetus and its feet, or one of its hands, or at the side of its head, or at its abdomen, and strongly it is turned over its own spine, and resembling the figures of such things is displeasing.
The midwife must be knowledgeable and subtle in all those causes, and must guard against error and deception.
And I show all the figures of those, and what each organ is in them so that it is signified by this and is placed upon it.
When the fetus is situated on its head by natural cause, and that is vehement upon the woman and is made difficult for her, sometimes the virtue of her is weakened, then make a cesarean section, or what the women have her, and evaporate the congh of her with fenugreek and sweet olive oil.
And then insert the probe between his so-called small spine and cut open the second one, or scrape the former with its edge while letting the moisture flow out. And press the woman's abdomen until the fetus descends.
But if it does not descend, then cause the woman to be lubricated with honey andpsyllium.
And then command her, placing her in a steamy environment, and make her sneeze by putting something in her nose or mouth; keep her mouth and nose covered for about an hour until the fetus is expelled soon.
And if both parts of the fetus are already expelled at the beginning, then cause her to pass them gradually with facilitation. But if the instrument does not obey, then place the woman on a sieve and lift her feet off it, and shake the sieve over the ground; hold the woman so that she does not fall due to the shaking.
And if the uterus is not turned inside out and the wound is fatal, then incise there and extract the fetus or join the body to the hand with a cloth and extract it equally, for that will be forced open.
When the fetus is below its feet, then make sure you push those parts inwards, and soon reduce the fetus to a smaller size, and then equalize it, and finally take a foot and gradually extend those parts.
More easily when it is situated between the thighs, then command it to be expressed, and turn it outward by this method, for that will be forced open if God wills it.
And if it is not forced open by what we have recommended, then return the fetus gradually inside as you pause that part according to its natural figure, for that will be easily forced open by slight incision.
And if all that we have recommended is prohibited, then take a mixture of alum and dissolved gum, and pound it thoroughly in the mortar with good pounding, and line it with this the woman's pubic area, below the lower part of her abdomen. And then make that incision in clear water, once he reaches the hypochondriac regions.
And when you see that the parts around him are no longer inflamed, then perform a mirtle fumigation on him and place your hand over him to prevent any inflammation. And when you have kept the fumigation for an hour, then make that incision over a cloth, and immediately perform a snuffing and extract the contents from his mouth, then remove that, and apply a light compress to the lower part of his abdomen, which will soon relieve him.
Suture the wound longitudinally with one of their hands. Gently reduce the hand back into place, but if you cannot reduce it, then elevate the woman and make her pass.
And if passing is not possible, then make aåˆ‡å£ï¼Œç„¶åŽè½»è½»åœ°å°†æ‰‹é€€å›žåŽŸä½ï¼Œä½†å¦‚æžœæ— æ³•é€€å›žï¼Œé‚£ä¹ˆæŠ¬é«˜ç—…äººï¼Œå¹¶é€šè¿‡å¼ºçƒˆéœ‡åŠ¨å¥¹çš„å¤§è…¿å¸®åŠ©æŽ’å‡ºã€‚æŽ¥ç€ï¼Œç»™äºˆä¸€äº›æ‚¨ç”¨ç²˜æ¶²åˆ¶æˆçš„è†è¯ã€‚
And if labor has begun, then make a cut there, and then study the reduction of the hand, and close the wound according to its natural figure, and make the woman cough and command her to hold herself until it is closed.
Lift the leg and spread its hands while the foot's fascia is at the side of its mother. Let the midwife hold the foot and gently rotate it little by little, so that it becomes easier to manage.
And when it is equalized and settled, then place over its head what we have recommended of oil and ointments.
And then command that it be cooled little by little. When you have done this, place the cucumber over a basin and command that it be inclined over the right side, and then command that it be compressed; and make it apply condiments. The fetus's exit is prepared over the side.
When the pains of the mother occur in this manner, consider it, and then incise the second one with your knife so that it is evacuated of moisture.
And if the foot is suspended over the face and neck of the mother, then incise the one on the abdomen, so that it is not retained and causes death.
And then push the fetus into the parts inside, according to where it fits, and tell the woman to strain herself several times, and the rest will be easily expelled by light pressure, if God wills.
The exit of twins or many fetuses. Know that twins or many spots appear naturally, and sometimes even three or four are born. But this is strange and worth investigating; mostly they arise from natural causes, not from evil.
And count those, whether they are multiple, a second one, and they are separated by chives. They distinguish between the ligaments at the umbilicus of each of them. Sometimes they are expelled several times as if it were a fetus by natural straining lightly, and some remain for several times by uncontrollable straining as we have reported.
And if they are difficult to deliver, you should facilitate the birth and proceed as we have said for non-natural figures, treating them as we have recounted.
And if the midwife is subtle and does what she does with subtlety and delay, and is ingenious according to all form as prepared by her leading to health.
Recollection of that which is formed in the matrix from embryos and are aborted.
Sometimes embryos are formed in the womb one, two, three, four, five, six, and more than ten, and you should verify that one female aborts with a single embryo, while another has all formed, the cause of which is made by the measurement of the glorious sages.
And all this covers what is in the science of the midwife who judges by that part seeming like it, and therefore places her hand on it so that it should be.
Chapter LXXVI.
On the extraction of the fetus when it is dead.
When you treat the dead fetus as we have said in the division of medicine and it is not outside the body, then you must use surgery more. At this point, consider whether the woman has a healthy constitution and is not among those conditions for which her life is feared to be endangered.
When the woman is placed on her back on the bed, and her head is inclined sideways, and her thighs are elevated.
The minister should hold that [area] with two hands or tie it to the bed so that the body does not extend during the extraction of the fetus.
And then moisten the mouth of the mother with olive oil and honey, and with juice from thyme and fenugreek and sesame.
And then the midwife should anoint her hand with those oils and honey, and place her hand with facilitation in the mother, and seek with her hand the location where the fingers will be placed on the fetus.
Place the fingers accordingly: then consider if the fetus is positioned to be delivered through its head, and then place the fingers in the folds of the head, or the neck, or the mouth, or the palate, or leave the beard area, or the clavicle, or the proper locations of the ribs, or leave the hypochondria.
But if the discharge is from his feet, at the ankle, or in the middle of the back.
And let him hold the thumb with his right hand, and curve it at that location which is between the fingers of his left hand, and insert your hand easily and place the thumb in one of those locations which we have said, until he reaches the cause of the pain.
And place and hold another thumb, or the third if necessary, so that there is equal pressure, and not extension according to its straightness solely.
And let him grip it all the way around, so that the tension of the thumb is alleviated as is done in drawing out a tooth.
And let it be between them so that the extension is softened; and if any part of it is retained, then let the midwife apply some of her fingers with oil and insert those experienced fingers and rotate them where the retention is.
Then if the part of the feces is forgotten, let the nails be inserted into the place which is then filled up; and do so while all the feces are forgotten.
But if the hand is placed in front of the other, and it is not possible to reduce it due to the contraction, then cover that part with a cloth; and then extract it while all is forgotten, and incise it at the joint of the hand or on its back.
And do so also with the other hand and on both feet.
But if the head of the feces is large, or it experiences contraction during insertion, or it is at the head where there is well-compacted water, then you must insert spiny sponge between the fingers, cut open the head, and extract the water, or you must probe that with an instrument called "alundat," the shape of which will come in the forms of other instruments in the chapter which follows this.
And do the same if the feces has a large head by nature: then you must incise that with a looped instrument, or probe that with an alundat as we have said; and then extract the bones with forceps.
And if the head is swollen and compressed, you should open the furcula, when the humidity which is in the feet has infiltrated.
And if it is not complicated, nor obstructed by swelling, then you should incise the head as soon as possible according to what will be convenient for you.
And if the swelling in the abdomen is suppurated or is in hydrops, then you must perforate it to allow the humidity that is within it to drain out.
And if the swelling is on their feet, then the pull of it is light and its direction toward the mouth of the vein is light.
And if it is compressed, you should incise the abdomen and the foot, when you must extract that piece of cloth which you have wrapped around your hand, and cut into the abdomen and foot to allow what is within them to drain out.
And if the other members are swollen and return to their normal state, then the surgeon should insert her left hand; and if the mouth of the vein is opened, then she should insert her hand into the region of the vein, and seek out the head, and push it with the fingers into the mouth of the vein, and then insert one or two ounces, and push them there.
And if the mouth of the vein is constricted by an apostema, and this happens to someone, then ensure it is not twisted; first, ensure that you administer an effusion of watery fatty causes. And administer plasters; and follow the patient with waters that soften and moisten.
And if the wound is on the side of the body, then it should be punctured if possible: and what we have said about the live wound should be administered.
And if this is not possible, then incise in pieces, and extract.
And ensure that you do not leave any foreign cause inside the wound.
And when you have completed your operation, then administer what we have said about the cure for apostema caused by the vein.
And if there is a flow of blood, then apply cold waters and administer the other cure.
And I have already seen a woman in her abdomen where one child was dead, and nearby another pregnancy began, and the dead fetus is now the other. It happens that after a long time an abscess forms in the swollen area; and when opened, it inflates and begins to discharge pus.
And I was called to treat it, and treated it for a long time, and the wound did not heal properly.
Then I placed my hand on it for several causes using a strong adhesive plaster, and inserted one splint, and after some days, inserted another splint; and I was too amazed, as in the abdomen there is no bone.
Then I realized that they were the bones of the dead fetus.
Then I dressed the wound, and extracted the bones, the woman existing in her abdomen's many dispositions, and having seen it in such a manner for a long time, I cured her of a small arm.
And I do not consider it strange, but rather that in this there is science and aid to what the physician uses his hand for in treatment.
Of the forms of the instruments that are necessary to extract the stone.
Form of vertigo at which the liver is opened:
This is the form of strengthener in which you ligature the arteries, at which ligature there are two vertigos in the two extremities of two flax. But let this vertigo cover be more subtle of string, and made of hemp or flax.
And let the width of each flax be as wide as two fingers, and the margin on both sides as wide as one finger. The length of each is one palm and a half; in the middle location of two flaxes are two ligatures of that same thickness flax, which are already tight. The length of each is the width of one palm and a little more, and the width of each is as wide as two fingers, or a little more.
And these two additional items be inserted in the mouth of the uterus so that they be open when you revolve the two prescribed virtues.
Form another one like the previous one but finer and lighter:
Make it of silk or linen thread according to the likeness of forceps. Moreover, at the extremity of each, there are two additional pieces as you see, and the length of those pieces is about one palm, and the width of each is two fingers.
And when you want to open the uterus, then place the woman on her side with her feet hanging down, and open what is between her thighs. And then open your hand with the instrument as you would with scissors equally according to the quantity you want of the size of the uterus before the clamp does what you want.
The form of rotation which the ancients described:
Form of pressing which is applied to the fist:
Form of pressing which contains the great scalp:
And it is assembled to forceps which have teeth at the extremity, as you see. Sometimes it is made long like forceps according to this form, as you see, with teeth like catgut forceps which are inserted and contained. Form of pressing slight:
Form of a hook having one spine:
Form of a hook having two spines:
Form of a spatula having two extremities upon which the head is incised:
Form of two flat spatulas:
All these instruments are exercised, and when more species of that kind are multiplied, the craftsman should prepare them, making their operation lighter and providing more for their quantity.
And do not delay in preparing those instruments, for the need is urgent.
From the extraction of the second child.
When the second child is retained, you should induce labor, while commanding the patient to hold her breath, and then perform that maneuver with caution, and strengthen your hand over the mouth and nose of the patient. If by this it comes forth, well done.
And if not, then take a rod and perforate in the cover a tube and pause there over herbs burning at the mouth of the uterus, as with calamus, rhubarb, anise, camomile, scikabad (arabic), cinnamon wood, and saintpierre. All these herbs or some of them may be submerged in water in the rod, and place that over the fire.
And place a cane catheter in the mouth of the uterus, and keep that there so that the vapor comes to the cavity of the uterus.
And then perform that sneezing as we have said before, and the second one shall be done with greater speed.
If the sneezing does not succeed close to this cure and you cannot do it, then command the midwife to submerge her left hand in sesame oil or in aleth cotton, and then insert that into the nose and seek with that the second one, as you have found. If it is annexed in the prepuce of the thumb, then insert her hand according to what we have recommended, and when you have found the second one, extract it little by little following rectitude so that the thumb does not fall due to the strong attraction. Above all, make sure it is placed on the back right and left with ease.
And if the opening of the thumb is constricted, we have already recommended the cure with sneezing and treatment of the wound with herbs.
If all the causes we have recounted are not overlooked, then guard that you do not fatigue it through repetition of abstraction, but rather anoint the area with ointment and tetrapharmcon; for this will cause it to heal in about a few days and be resolved and forgotten.
When it heals, elevate the affected area to the head, and this leads to the illness; then it is necessary that sub-fumigations and suitable treatments be administered for this.
Moreover, some of the Ancients recommended sub-fumigations with nard and dry figs.
Form of the instrument with which the woman is sub-fumigated, you should retain the menstrual discharge and the second product:
It should be made of iron or earthenware.
And place the thin end in the coher and the broad end over the fire, and the sub-fumigation be placed on the coals of the fire.
And hold that there while that the sub-fumigation be consumed and they iterate another.
For the treatment of an unperforated child's anus.
When the child cries and its anus is not perforated, those already incised subtly and elevated. Then have the midwife perforate with her said incision; and if not, puncture it with a sharp needle, and take care that it does not touch the sinus.
And then place it warm in wine and oil; and apply the ointment while it is fresh.
But if you fear it is obstructed, then insert a cane for several days, and wait until the child wishes to defecate.
And when an obstruction of the anus occurs due to the consolidation of a boil or abscess; then have that consolidation incised, and treat it with what we have said about the treatment and the lead.
For the treatment of fistulas that leave discharges.
The fistulas that leave discharges are often nodotic and swollen, those that leave discharges near the anus or in the space of one side.
And it is either a fistula or a carbuncle.
And when that nodosity is old and flows with watery white or thin pus, sometimes these fistulas penetrate.
And those that penetrate are known as those caused by the exit and by windiness; sometimes the patient experiences difficulty in exiting, and strong pain is felt from those worms.
And some of these fistulas occasionally penetrate into the space between the bladder and the meat of the groin; and those that penetrate into the joint of the thigh and into the knee.
And to determine whether a penetrating fistula goes into the anus or not, insert your thumb in the anus and gently probe with a thin wire or needle in the fistula when there is no tenderness.
But if there is a tumor, then insert a probe of lead or horsehair between the layers where you feel the tumor or the hair.
And if you do not feel it at all, nor proceed from any cause of evacuation, worm, or swelling, as we have said, then you know it is non-penetrant, and now you can move to the cure.
And when the fistula is penetrant to the bladder or to the meat of the genitals, then the significance of this is dysuria from that side and prohibition thereof, so that the area may be consolidated by medicine.
But if it is penetrant to the joint of the thigh or to the bone and causes pain in the circuit, then the sign of this is that the probe passes through here if there is no tumor in the bone, and pain in the circuit of the limb; and that pus comes out continuously from it; and that it does not respond to any medicine, nor is it consolidated by ointment.
And in all those penetrant fistulas, complete cure is not always achieved, and the cure of these requires the hard work and skill of the medical practitioners upon which they rely.
In that which is not penetrating and not ancient, heal with iron as I shall recount to you later, and what I already said and prescribed.
And that is why the patient lies on his back with his hips elevated between cushions, the thighs inclined towards the abdomen, and a lead or iron implement inserted into the channel if it is in a tortuous fistula where you can perceive the passage of the probe.
And if the patient feels pain around the throat, then you should insert the thumb upward into the throat.
And if you feel the probe already partially inserted and discovered by itself, or something between your thumb and the sore or flesh, then you can certainly determine that it is penetrating; and then do not work on that, for healing does not occur there, as we have said.
But however, some say that it is healed in some men promptly.
And for the treatment in which healing is hoped for, you should heat a fine cautery according to the width of the fistula, as is preceded, and insert that heated instrument into the fistula until it reaches around the throat; and then repeatedly insert it two or three times until you perceive that all those fused flesh wounds, which resemble goose quills, are fully healed.
And then cure that which is with blisters wrapped in bandages between which all those flesh parts that are adhered are inflamed, and then cure that which is with medicines the flesh generating and consolidating, and if it is healed, well; and if not, then it is not healed in some time by another cure.
And if the probe enters but does not penetrate inside, you have said which is in the anus, and between that and the probe which is a veil of flesh or tissue, wipe the fistula with what dries the surface of the wound, then dry the wound from the beginning of the fistula, and you should dry the probe, and it should be in the fistula where the drying reaches the place where the tip of the probe reaches, and through the probe it is released and cauterized.
And then cleanse those fistulated tissues which are adjacent to the penile urethra and do not become infected from any cause.
But if a flux of pus comes between you and your operation when inside those tissues, then let that which is worse be cauterized with fire or with sharp medicine. For the cautery by fire makes good two habits: it adjusts those tissues and removes the pus through the excision of humidity.
And then cure that which is with cold muscles wrapped in bandage or in cloth stitched around the area until it gets warm, and then cure the wound with ointment of hard flesh that generates and consolidates.
And these medicines in which there is stiffness and excoriation; when the stiffness is restored, it is cured, and you fear no recurrence.
And if the fistula has pierced through to the anus and is long from the surface of the body, then insert your finger into the anus and inquire about it.
And if there is a tent and between you and her it is covered with cloth or flesh, and is close to the penetration, then it is not an operation in it but rather by way of trust and hope.
That cause is to administer one of three ways: either with a cautery as we have said; or by excising it until you can achieve the cavity in which it is possible to insert the necessary instruments and cure it thoroughly; and do not proceed with excision for fear of damaging the anus containing the core, but rather act according to the will of the patient; then cure that as we have said, for a strong cure will be effective; or by elongating that cloth and cleansing it near the anus as we have said, or with a tent or another sharp instrument, and then cleanse those fistulated tissues which are in the excision area where you can perform percrustation; then strive to restore the entire wound with excision, and if the opening above is not consolidated, and open the fistula near the anus, it will be easier for the patient. And sometimes the fistula is closed in this manner: when you insert the probe into the fistula, and place it near the buttock on the surface of the body with the needle and at the edge of the buttock, then take hold of the perforated extremity, as if piercing a needle through the vein according to this form:
and insert it into that channel wrapped in several threads or around them; then insert the probe with thread into the fistula until you achieve its cavity.
But if it penetrates at the edge of the buttock inward, then you withdraw the thread in such a way that you insert your hand into the buttock; withdraw the end of the thread and adjust both ends equally, strengthening each one, and leave it for a day or two. When more of the thread is embedded in the flesh, strengthen well that part where these muscles are embedded between the two ends of the thread and where they are situated.
And then cure the wound as it is consolidated and healed.
If the fistula openings are not penetrable, make them penetrable in any manner you prepare, but rather from within so that you do not injure the patient. Then place something inside to ensure it heals properly.
The shape of the pointed spatula used where the fistula is split: the curvature of which is acute and the other part not acute, so as not to injure what is unnecessary, as you see.
For the suturing of hemorrhoids where there is pain at the site of those hemorrhoids.
Hemorrhoids can be described in two ways: one where they resemble charcoal, or where they are like the fat of a sheep. And some hemorrhoids are small and large, and the pain from them comes at times and is one, and they are lumps, and outside the anus, in the extremities of it.
However, those that are outside the anus are according to those with less humidity, from which yellowish water or a little of continued blood flows, and are according to the color of the body.
And the treatment for that which is inside the abdomen is to command the patient to lie down and to squeeze between when the abdomen rises and the veins appear before you. Then you should lie down and suspend your legs over some supports that you have with you at your elbow, and then apply those to their sides to relieve their pain.
But if your hands are not available due to the moisture and softening of those hands, then take some rough cloth or burlap or a wet woolen cloth, place them on the ties mentioned, and then apply those and sprinkle some powdered cauda on them after the application, so that they serve as a cautery; or cauterize those according to what is described in the chapter on cauterization. And then treat them with the other treatment until they are healed.
And if the anus does not yield to evacuation, then insert a probe into the patient's anus using a small biting instrument, and wash it with the water from the abdomen that allows slight evacuation when the patient squeezes.
If the hemorrhoids are outside the anus and the cause is slight, then you grasp them with your finger or grasp them with forceps, insert them, and place them back using what we have said earlier until they are healed.
And if you have an incision, make sure to suture them according to this manner: take thread wrapped around a needle and carefully extract the hemorrhoids from above, then make the thread penetrate through the edge of the other part, and wrap both ends of the thread around the part below the needle, securing it longitudinally; strengthen the hemorrhoid with firm tension, and then secure the thread and remove the needle.
And do this to all of them, leaving one open and not sewing it, so that the excess blood can flow from there.
And place a warm cloth soaked in olive oil or ointment over the anus; place it there and order the patient to rest. And then let that which is inside remain; when it is cured, treat those with ointment or other treatment until it is healed.
And since they are old and do not respond to medicine, you should cauterize them with the point of a spatula or with your finger when they are moist, and after scraping the surface from below, which you prevent from consolidating; then treat those that have consolidated.
And when you cauterize them with stronger heat than the first time when they are bleeding and are excoriated; then treat those that have healed.
Know that an abscess, this is crucial, and it is not something round according to the color of the body, resembling a gooseberry, and it forms throughout the body but especially in the areas around the feet and fingers, and due to these pains you should treat them.
And then cut what is in the circle of the key and hold it with tongs or forceps, and eradicate it from its root; and place care there.
And if you wish, cauterize what follows as preceded in its chapter.
More commonly, a veruca is a small, rough, fistula-like round prominence on the surface of the body, with venous spots in most of the children.
And the treatment for it is to extend and incise that, or to tighten it with a needle or with thread that encloses it. And if you wish, cauterize this as we have said, with fire or with sharp medicine.
More commonly, a formica is a small, felted or fistula-like prominent swelling on the surface of the body. When you press on it, it resembles the bite of an ant and is formed around the body.
And the treatment is that you take a pin of awl or of tortoise shell, and it should be strong, and place that over the worm between which you contain the circle of the pin from the parts of the patient; then return your hand around the pin as you enter what is in the circuit of the worm, and place that in the prepuce of the flesh, and that you eradicate the worm from its root.
And if you wish, do this with a pin of elm or iron according to this form:
Let the upper part of the pin be thin, blunt (that is, unperforated), wrapped so that over the digit the learning of it may be concealed and the rotation of that may be prevented.
And if you wish, cauterize the worm according to what is said in the cauterization of Athylos at the tip of the cautery.
In the manner of the instruments that you administer with the christeri (cautery).
Sometimes the cautery is made of silver or tin or elm that has been melted or hammered; sometimes it is made of those instruments small and large according to those you are administering, for that which is administered in the treatment of small children should be small; and of those of which the bottoms are sore or painful, the cauteries of those should be small.
The form of striking hard and little:
The head of the catheter above which the bag is tied should be broad according to this manner; and there should be a place where the bag is tied as you see.
And the lower end of it, which is inserted into the anus, should be closed (i.e., not open) like a lion's mouth, gradually becoming finer; and on one side of the tube there are two openings, and on the other side one opening, and the width of the opening should correspond to the size of the rays, with the larger one slightly smaller.
And the bag in which the medicines for the beast's bladder or sheepskin are placed should be a palm's length.
And it should be perforated with holes as it is coiled; and the space between the holes should be the thickness of a finger.
And then insert into these holes strong raw honey or something similar; adjust the bag to that; and when the bag is placed in it, make the head of the catheter straight between two distinct points with strong constriction, and then catheterize each hole: More specifically, the quality of catheterizing each hole is that you fill the bag with medicine, which should be warmed according to the quantity of the patient's tolerance; and be sure that it is neither too thick nor too cold.
And the patient is laid on their back, elevating their legs and placing them on a cushion; then apply oil or honey or fenugreek or similar to the tip of the cautery; insert it into the anus with ease, and the minister takes the bag and presses out two more times with vigor, ensuring that all that is in the rectum is evacuated into the intestine. Then remove the rectum and the patient lifts their legs against the wall.
And if the medicine forces it to vomit, have it as much as it can bear; and if it sleeps all through the night, it is better for recovery.
And if you rectify the patient for bellyaches and its vomiting, then repeat the cautery until it is healed.
And if in the anus there are hemorrhoids or abscesses, then use a thin and sharp rectal probe, from among the probes that children can tolerate.
Of the cure of the plagues.
And I have already said in the division of the cure of the plagues what pertains to the free treatment, and now I speak of the cure of those more severe and those involving medicines according to their needs.
Therefore, it is said that plagues are diverse according to what causes the plagues and according to the place on which the plaques fall.
And the causes by which stones or wounds from a sword or knife, or blows from a mace, a stick, or an arrow are made, are thus similar to those of stone causes.
More specifically, the plagues that occur in parts of the body are thus like a plague that falls on the head, or the neck, or the feet, or the belly, or the thigh, and similar to those affecting the limbs.
And I am recounting the cure of some plagues so that you may apply that reasoning and rule to other plagues.
And I will begin with simple head plaques, for the recall of composed ones will come at the beginning of the third capita.
Therefore say that when an injury occurs in the head and it is a simple plaque and not a fracture, consider: if it is due to a stone or similar object, and has already struck the skull just by itself and is a large plaque and you fear the imminent evil of an abscess at that place, then you should incise and bloodlet from the cephalic vein as soon as possible, and do not delay this; and you extract from it as much blood as the strength of the vein allows, unless some reason prevents bloodletting, especially if the blood that results from the plaque is little.
And the bloodletting should be from the opposite side of the injured area; and one must prevent the patient from filling up, eating, or taking heavy foods.
But if some reason prohibits the reduction of food intake, then it should be limited in amount and not approach meat or wine.
And place over the plaque, if an abscess has formed, a poultice of oil rubbed with salt or in wine that contains astringents.
If it is certain that an abscess has formed, then place yourself over the wound, if it is recent with its own blood and the air has not changed there sprinkle the powder which I will describe shortly.
And if the air has already changed there, then place yourself over some ointments until it is healed.
If the wound is large or due to a lance wound and the edges do not fit properly due to swelling, then adjust those with sutures according to the method of suturing that I will describe later.
If the wound is already uncovered from the bone and flesh, and it is not a retention but only a small suspender, then incise that area and immediately treat the wound with medicines and restore the flesh in its proper place. Command the patient to eat foods in which they take pleasure: bread and vegetables that resemble them, until they are recovered.
And if you find putrefaction in the flesh and it does not adhere to the bone, then incise all of that area and drain it, and immediately treat it.
If in these wounds the artery or vein from which the flux of blood can occur is present and cannot be treated with medicines, then you inquire about the artery. If you find that uncut part, cut it with a blade or ligate it; if necessity compels you to do something that we have not said, then you cauterize before the blood is abscised.
If these wounds are simple and small, the cause is light; sprinkle this powder over them, that which hardens before the air changes those.
The manner of the powder is this: take oil of cypress divided one part, blood of dragon divided two parts, and gall three parts; mix them all together, sift them, fill the wound with it, confine it well by good packing, and let it coagulate with the blood.
Then tighten it above with powder and leave it, and do not loosen it while it is not packed, for the medicine will not be effective until it is healed.
And sometimes one makes this cautery alone, when it is not in your presence the sign of dragon.
And this operation is performed in large abscesses when it is necessary to pause over them and straighten them, and for recent abscesses near their surface, which the air has not yet affected.
And if the air has affected them, especially when it is in the summer season, then I cannot determine their position, but then care for them as we have said, try to place yourself over those hollows that are depressed and glistening, or place a mixture of flour and water with honey where pus is forming; and soon after apply another remedy while they are healing.
And if a fracture occurs in the bone of the abscess and it is small, then you extract it with forceps.
And I will speak of the treatment of fractures of the head in what follows.
Of the abscesses of the neck.
If the wound occurs in the neck, there is no difference in treatment, and between head wounds when they are simple.
But if the nerve of the neck is incised or an artery, when it is a nerve, no artificial cure is necessary but rather to avoid any treatment that causes strong constriction, as zinc and zegi (quicksilver) are like them and poison the nerves and contract those. And do not place any cause of cold on the wound, for the substance of the nerves is cold and their continuity is in the brain, which is the core of all members.
And if it is to be treated with light medicines, such as washing with cold water twice, sometimes infused in olive oil, roasted or unroasted, and applying thuci when washed with cold water and the other pears minarantz according to this manner, and apply a moist salve.
But if the wound is large, then administerç¼åˆï¼Œæˆ–æ”¶ç¼©å…¶è¾¹ç¼˜ï¼Œç„¶åŽåœ¨å…¶æ„ˆåˆæ—¶ç”¨ç²‰æœ«æ²»ç–—ã€‚
If there is depth to the wound or accidents in the lower part near the fundament, then perforate that at the most pressed location.
If the wound has already severed an artery and there is a flow of blood, then separate or dry that area, or tie it with a ligature if necessity demands it.
If the vertebrae of the thigh are already severed or all, and if the veins of the leg have been saved, then you adjust the edges of the ligament and suture over the bone of the thigh without touching that; equalize that and return it to its natural shape, and strengthen that with proper structure, letting that alone for a few days; then cure that with ointments in which there is stipticity and excitement until it is healed.
If the wound has already reached the bone, then probe that area, and if it has fragments of bone, extract all those you can from there; what appears unable to be removed, leave that until the wound suppures, and is separated and the inflammation around it alleviated.
And if the wound is recent, then sprinkle it with the powder which has been recommended. And if in the wound a fistula is formed, then cure it as described in the next section, which will be mentioned soon in its chapter.
If it is a lance or cut wound, and you determine its depth, then consider more whether the wound has distention when the patient faints; then know that the wound is mortal.
And if it is not deep and the wound is recent with its own bleeding, then you apply powder in the first hour, and do not press on it to prevent the blood from being retained in the depth of the wound and returning to the heart and causing further fainting. Instead, apply an attractive ointment and remove it after two days.
And if the ointment is not available, then you apply something to the wound's orifices like a wick to allow the moisture to drain out; and make the patient sleep on the wound so that what is within it can drain out.
If however more than three days have passed since the onset of the pain and no spasms or heart palpitations nor constriction of the lungs occur, and other good dispositions persist, then you may conclude that the pain is gone; then treat with heat for this one and the other treatment until it is healed.
If the healing of the patient is impossible, and all the time has been opened, then you may conclude that a fistula has formed; treat this accordingly according to its own chapter.
And if the pain is due to a stab wound or cut, and it is simple on the surface of the foot or hand, then treat this according to what is preceded by suturing, if it is large, or with powder, if it is small.
If it has already perforated the bone, and you have incised the wound to extract these pieces, then twist the wound and pull to extract those pieces, if they are separated. If they are not separated, then let them be until the wound heals, as their extraction is alleviated.
And for other accidents of pain in other members, the cure is the treatment that we have said.
Of the pains in the abdomen.
The discomfort that occurs in the abdomen is either severe, mild, or intermediate.
And the small disruption is made difficult by another method. I believe that reducing them is more difficult if you do not quickly prevent the interruption of them in their place, for it opens up and becomes swollen, making the instrument difficult to use.
And therefore, the intermediate disruption is best, for in that case, the reduction of the intestine is not difficult, unlike in the two species mentioned before.
And know that the suturing of the abdomen is according to four methods, but two common sutures are applicable to the suturing of other body pains.
And two other specific wounds communicate to the other wounds, more so indeed in the wound of the abdomen.
And I advise you regarding each exposure and declaration.
So say that when the wound is small and some cause of the intestine penetrates through it, making it difficult to reduce that part, then this occurs in one of two ways: either due to the smallness of the disruption, as we have said, or when the intestine becomes inflamed due to the coldness of the air.
And when this is the case, then you should wet that attempt by submerging a sponge or cloth in clear water alone, or by using squinting, spic, and embroques, and place the intestine into it until the inflammation resolves.
And sometimes in those where there is stiffness, it is better to use water alone in resolving the inflammation.
And when you see the inflammation resolved, then moisten the intestine with water in which althea and mallows are steeped, for by this means it is alleviated with little cause.
If it is necessary to use an instrument near this cure, then divide the disruption with a small instrument at which the veins are incised.
The primary cure is better when it is appropriate that no sectioning be done, and not an occupation to dry out nearby and in case of deficiency.
Of the instrument, note its shape:
One part of the blade is sharp, and the other part is not blunt, with the tip fine but not too fine like a point; it should be slightly rounded.
And since the wound is enlarged and the intestine protrudes, then ensure that its reduction follows its natural form, in its proper place. If possible, do it over the area, for this is better.
If the disruption is large and located in the lower part of the abdomen, then place the patient on their back and position their legs higher than their head; if it is in the upper part of the abdomen, then position the patient's head and feet higher than the sides.
And if the rupture is in one of the two parts of the abdomen, then pause your understanding and consideration for some time so that the part where the injury is may be higher than the other.
And thus you should apply this to large wounds and to medium-sized wounds.
And in small wounds, pause what you have prepared, and then ensure that the minister has your most skilled helpers with him. He should hold the rupture completely in his hand and adjust the edges of the wound, and then uncover that area to another who will suture for any cause nearby or another.
And this is the common method of suturing: take a needle, or a countersinké’ˆçº¿å·¥å…· according to the width of the wound; then leave part of the end of the ring finger rupture, and strongly fix the needle once, or another that you do not put thread at both ends of the suture, but rather at two ends of the cloth that is left from the inner parts, before you make it penetrate from one part; and you have already added two ends of the suture and two ends of the cloth, and so four orders are made.
And then strengthen the double thread in the circuit of the needle, and several times on both parts together, and then join the two edges and the flap by decent joining; and then leave the thickness of the digit and insert another needle there, and then apply that thread as you did with the first needle; and do not cease to do this if necessary between the needles until all the contraction of the flap is completed.
And the needles should be of medium thickness between coarseness and subtlety, for the fine needles penetrate the flesh lightly; and the coarse ones are difficult to manipulate in the wound, which is why they should be of medium thickness in both fineness and coarseness.
And it should not be that the needle is placed at two nearby ends of the wound, for fear that the flesh be cut too lightly and that the flap separate before its healing.
And do not make the sutures too long so that the wound is not prohibited from healing.
And then incise the ends of the needles so that they do not slip out of their proper place; and place powders expanded from all parts over the sutures, which contain the ends of the needles; and leave them until you can see that the wound is already consolidated.
These species of suture with needles is more convenient in small wounds, for only one or two needles are needed in their suturing.
The second suture is made as follows: and you administer the suturing of the four extremities, from the knot and two extremities of the thread, in one go, with a needle which is wrapped equally in subtlety and thickness.
And when you have the needle penetrate these four extremities, withdraw the needle from that thread part where it started, so that the thread retracts and comes up from the underside to the wound, so that the suture resembles a stitch in cloth where the threads are tightened.
And pause between each suture the width of a small finger.
And this suture I know for men.
And with this suture, I closed the wound which was inflicted upon a man in his belly where he had been stabbed with a knife, and it was the rupture of the major wound about two palms from the middle of the belly; and it was the disruption in the middle of the member. And then I returned that part after the belly had been opened for twenty-four hours.
The wound is consolidated in the space of fifteen days or so, and cure that and it is healed; then that which viscous moisture, and it is converted into its proper condition.
And other doctors had judged that it was not healed; by miracle of fire, for I did not cure that with ointment, for it was in a place where neither ointment nor any medicine could reach, but placed my hand over the wound as an old woman would two days a day and applied frequent washing with honey water until the fire healed.
And I will speak of two species of suturing properly according to the narration of Paracelsus.
And you should begin with the suture of the chain, and insert the needle from one side through to the inside.
And thus, as the needle penetrates through the chain and along the thread according to the right path and length of the entire body, you leave the end of the needle on which you have inserted the needle inside; and pass the needle from the other end inside out through the other part of the wound.
And when you have made the penetration, then make another penetration in that limb at the external part from the internal part; leave the end of the probe that is on this side, and penetrate the needle into the other internal part from the external part.
And make the penetration with your penetration which you make penetrate in the probe at the end of the needle which is in the limb until all of that penetrates.
And then begin from this side of the limb and sew it at the end that is of the probe on this other side, and extract the needle from the hole you just made, then return it to the needle and with the end of the probe that is on this other side, place it at the end of the limb; and extract this from the hole which is on its side.
And do this one time and again, and do this another time or two more as you sew all of this that is on the outside according to that example.
And the sum of this method of suturing is that you sew with threads of skin on which you sew the skins, endeavoring that you sew a third part of the width of the cut from the extremity of the wound, and leave the other third until after you finish the job.
And the second species of suture proper which Gualia describes is that of suturing it and pressing it, in which you sew with one third of the thread on which the medicants are woven, endeavoring that each part is added to its corresponding part according to nature; and apply the extremity of another to the other extremity of it, and this is done as I have instructed you.
Place the needle at the extremity of the wound on your own side of the part from the outside, and make it penetrate into that side internally; leave two thirds of the thread; then turn the needle and make it penetrate from the inside to the outside with the other two thirds of the thread.
Then turn each of them, and make each thread penetrate from the inside into the outside part with two thirds of the thread in the other side opposite to it.
This method of suturing is better than the common light suturing, and this is the suture about which we have previously reminded you.
This is the speech of Gualia
And some would say that the suturing of the abdomen is corrected with two needles, so that you introduce a thread into each of these, and start with the insertion of the needle from where you should, and make that one penetrate through the other layer according to the suture in which I join the tissues equally.
And be aware that when the disruption is in the middle part of the abdomen, the suturing of this area is more difficult than of other parts of the abdomen.
And the judgment of plague treatment is judged by other plagues.
This cause is when you manage to obtain the recent plague from its own sweat before the air alters it, and reduce the hernia, suture it, and treat it properly, then place it over that red powder.
And if the air has already affected the wound, then place over that dressing materials which are present and let them harden and gather the edges, and be consolidated with chords and inspected; and proceed to treat it as one would other wounds until it is healed.
And if you do not have the medicines present, then place over that dressing for some time, until it begins to drain fluid, and change it two times a day as I have shown you, until it is healed, without needing other treatments when the wounds are simple.
And if you fear that the wound may communicate infection to the main limbs, then soak a lion's wool in well-pressed oil or in refined oil, and place that over the area between the joints, leaving the axillae uncovered.
And if there is pain or putrefaction in their intestines, then apply this remedy several times, then crystallize that with a vinegar stiptic black tartar, especially if the infection has reached the intestine and caused an ulcer penetrating into the cavity of the abdomen.
And know that which comes from the large intestine is of a lighter and more healing nature than that which comes from the fine intestines.
And it is of difficult healing that the intestine called "gungun" does not receive healing from plague that falls into it; this is due to the great number of veins in it and its large size, and because of the subtlety of that part and its proximity to the nature of nerves.
But if what you are dealing with from the plague is the tissue, and manage to obtain it fresh, reduce that according to your skill with which you equally restore the intestines.
But if it has spread to it and already turned red or black, when you strengthen that with astringent on the area that is darkened, in order that there be flux of pus, for in the tissue are veins and arteries.
And then incise what is another in that ligament, and place two ends of the astringent hanging from the part left by the plague, so that above you it alleviates the attraction of it, close the opening of the tissue and the emission of the arm of the plague.
Remembrance of the plagues when they occur in the intestine.
When there is a disruption in the intestine and it is small, sometimes it can be reduced in some individuals, which is why I saw that man who had been wounded in his belly by the thrust of a lance, and the wound was old, having become a fistula due to its chronicity and distention.
Then I sought to heal him, even though he was not yet fully recovered from the wound. Instead, I managed to subtlety integrate that which was healthy into the area that had healed and was now consolidated.
And when I saw the area already consolidated, I treated the patient who had suffered an injury in his belly; and none fell ill from this accident, but they took care with their dietary and beverage choices, and frequently bathed and exercised their hands.
And some experienced individuals have said that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it should be tied in this manner: and you take grains of large size; then adjust the two edges of the wound and place one grain of those with the mouth open over the two edges of the wound; therefore, when it takes hold of those and tightly closes its mouth, cut off the head of the grain, for it adheres and does not dissolve.
And then place another formica near the first one, and continue to make formicas one after another according to the quantity of the whole plague.
And then reduce it with the plague; and crush those attached heads within the intestine until it is healed; and do not harm the patient in any way.
And it is possible that the intestine has been treated with fine bile made from the gallbladder of an attached beast; and you should take the end of these threads of the intestine, which is raw, and place the end of it in fine bile wrapped up, and then insert those bile threads into needles and apply them to the intestine, and reduce it in the disruption.
And this method of suturing with formicas is simply done out of trust and hope.
But if the plague is great and extensive, especially in one of the fine intestines, where there is no engagement but only a slight inflammation, and it does not heal from it completely.
Of the cure for stone and fistula.
Know that any boil or abscess when enveloped and becomes ancient, and is made into a ulcer, and does not consolidate and gets a branch all the time and is not excised, then in whatever member it is, universally it is called fistula and we call it that abscess.
And according to truth, a fistula is a hardened, white node where there is no pain and which has a cavity like the pain of an ulcer; therefore, it is called that ulcer rizatz, that is, pain.
And in an ulcer, there is a moist node which gets a branch; and when the moisture is strong, it is excised within a few hours. And sometimes this moisture is hot, small, large, and fine.
All those causes have been shown, and the signs of them and their cure by medicines in this division.
And cover thus so you know the cure for fistula which is caused by surgical operation with hand.
And know that fistula occurs in all parts of the body; some of these fistulas lead to the large veins and arteries, or to the nerves, or to the pelvis, or to the intestine, or to the bladder, or to some of the ribs, or to one of the spinal bones, or to some joint composed thus like those of the foot and the hand; and these are those that are close to the main part of the body and similar.
And of these fistulas that proceed in this manner, they are among the illnesses of difficult cure, and do not receive a cure, and the occupation with them is labor and ignorance.
And if some fistula is deep and does not reach these locations as mentioned, and you expect and rely on its cure, and want to come to know it, then take a probe or a needle, and if the fistula follows a straight course, then inquire about it.
If the fistula is tortuous, then investigate that with a fine lead wire, for lead has lightness due to its body and is bent to alleviate and straighten the tortuosity.
If the fistula has horrific movements, it is not possible for you to signify about it with a probe.
Then cristelize the orifices by their orifices, for the humidity with which you cristelize that will affect other orifices and flow from them.
And then inquire precisely, according to the manner by which you can know if here are bones or nerves, and whether the fistula's cavity is distant or nearby, or it is a fistula with only orifices that extends over all with your strength, through your inquiry, where you question the patient, and by your compression on the area with your hand, and the appearance of the significations and the causes of the swelling.
And when you have stood on all those causes in true position, then proceed to the cure according to confidence: for you consider now if it is a nearby apparent fistula or in a location close to bone, distant from joint, nerve, artery, vein, or one of the locations which I and you call.
When you dry the fistula as previously described from its narration, stop what is in that filtration and of corrupted flesh, and what is born in the opening of the flesh, or vein and similar, and cure that within so that it may be healed.
But if the fistula is of deep length and is according to the straight line, then delve into it until it is as possible for you, and thereafter modify it with all its corrupted flesh; and afterwards apply sharp medicines wrapped in cloth, and insert those into the cavity of the fistula, which you have understood by means of iron.
And do this with that several times until the sharp medicine dissolves all that is rotten in the cavity of the fistula due to corruption.
And thereafter restore it by applying ointments that generate healthy flesh until it is healed.
But if it is not healed by this, then you cauterize it as we have previously recommended.
If the cause of fistula is bone and you must certify this, then inquire about that dry and that moist one according to what we have recommended, if you do not prohibit any cause of vein or of nerve or of main member as we have said.
If the bone is exposed and there is some corruption and blackness, then rush in where the corruption has stopped entirely; and place something over that which the flesh inside has healed.
And if it is not yet healed and you graft on as you do, then know that you have not achieved the complete eradication of the corruption; then uncover again thoroughly and make the reason and purification of it with your final fortification, and place something over that.
And so, if it is healed, that is good; and if not, then know that that corruption is deep within the body, which you have not reached, and then in that place do nothing but leave it as it is.
And if the corrupted bone is small, or if it is possible to extract it with forceps, then use fine forceps suitable for this.
And if it is bone pain, then you must thoroughly extract all of them, and from none of them do you leave any cause for your strength.
But if it is due to some cause of humidity, and in their incision there is neither fear nor error, then incise those membranes or flesh where they are, and deliver the bones.
But if you are not prepared to expose the bones at this time, then pause over the wound that may cause it, and leave that part within which is near those bones of flesh and membranes, and guard the wound that is not yet consolidated, and keep the section you have incised in your operation constricted.
Having done so, if you fear, pause over the wound submerged in a triple sopor with oil, or a wound submerged in Egyptian ointment, or in some of the green ointments; for when these can be applied, and the bones are free from them, the swelling is alleviated.
But if it is a large bone such as the thigh bone or rib or resembles those, and what is corrupt in it affects only the surface, then rush that away completely behind where the blackness and corruption are exposed, and place the wound again.
But if what is of it is corrupted and great part, and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to close that and incise entirely into the place where the corruption has been reached, and then cure that until it is consolidated.
And I advise you when examining a man in the thigh to place it as an example and aid for your operation.
A young man of about 30 years old, who experiences pain in his thigh, and where the painful part inside is over the internal matter of the body into which the matter has reached the thigh, and the matter is a large abscess, and it is not due to an external cause.
And then the abscess was allowed to mature for a long time due to the error of the doctors, and the matter's particles began to settle. Its cure was nearly paused when the leg became fistulized, and you made orifices in the particle where all exuded pus and the body's humidity.
And then the cure lasts for about two years, and not fire is used in those who are skilled in the art, among whom I was called.
And there is the leg and the materials that were flowing from it through those openings; and already the condition of that man was totally stabilized, and the color of his skin was yellowish.
And then I inserted the probe into one of those openings and guided the probe to the bone.
And then I examined all the openings closely and found those that could be reached from all parts of the leg.
And then I laid open and incised over one of the openings, exposing a part of the bone, and found the corrupted tissue, which was already foul, corrupt, and discolored; and a part of the leg had already become corrupted where it had penetrated into the marrow.
And then I clamped what was revealed to me and prepared the exposed bone.
And I believe that it is not in the bone but that corruption which causes abscess and constriction, and I already understood the reason.
And then proceed with the restoration of the wound using medicinal materials for a long time, and it is not yet consolidated.
And then you iterate and discover over the bone according to the first discovery, and find continuous corruption in the bone.
And constrict what appears to be that corruption, and then you proceed to make the cure and restoration, but it is not restored.
And then you discover on the other side and do not cease to incise the bone little by little particularly, and proceed with the restoration. But it is not restored until you incise around a palm of it, and he extracted its marrow, and then restore that with medicines, and it is slightly consolidated and healed.
And no iteration is necessary in the operation of the section of the limb, but for the disposition of the fracture and for the lack of tolerance and fear of death, which makes him suffer continuously due to excessive evacuation and bad fainting.
And therefore health is through entire cure, and nothing is in place of sound flesh; and it is done well the disposition of him in his body and return the virtue of him; and it is conversed in his dispositions and not forced to him contrary in movement nor damage in any cause.
And if the bone is protruding in a place already injured, then proceed as follows: You must firmly grasp and move that bone at its extremity, commanding someone else to extend it. Place a larger woolen bandage over the flesh where the bone is left, extending its end so that you can draw the flesh towards the area left behind. Then uncover the flesh in the place you wish to cut so that the saw does not damage the flesh.
And place a stick or board properly over the bone, for when you do this, it is not forbidden to saw without damaging the broken flesh.
And ensure that the sawing is over the broken area little by little, for if the corruption is inside the bone and does not appear in its appearance through sensation, you may have to make another pass with the saw.
And if the bone is corrupt and non-projectile, there is one continuous part connected to the other, and the corruption is in the middle of it or a part thereof, then you uncover the flesh from all parts; then place fustes, and closely secure that of the first part where the corruption is located so that the closure of the other part remains continuous.
And the closure should be small according to the location of the corruption, as we have said.
And if the corruption is in the joint, incise that corrupted joint, and set the bone where it is continuous from the other part.
And if the corruption is in the continuity of two joints, then it is not in its proper place but misplaced.
And if the corruption is in the axilla of the arm or the armpit, it is quite difficult; however, you must inquire how the corruption appears to you, and incise and drain that area according to any disposition which is within your ability, and every misplacement should be corrected by you, provided it does not contravene veins or nerves.
And consider which are incisors and the saws to cut these bones are made of according to the position of the bones, and the preparation of those, and their size, and their subtlety and greatness and smallness, and their hardness and their rarity; so that you may prepare for every kind of operation an instrument suitable to that operation.
And consider that operation to you concerning the kind of instrument on which you will depend; when you have great study and long knowledge of the ways of this art, and experience in the ways of diseases, so that whenever you have them you choose what is convenient for it from the instruments for all diseases.
And you shall form at the end of this chapter the number of the instruments which you will use as you please, and on which you will proceed according to your desire, which you will experiment with on the others. Form of the saw:
Form of another saw:
Forma of another shall be great:
Forma of ray: Let the head of this ray be according to the form of the head of a star key, and its points be according to the form of thestellar spikes.
And do not convey any other treatment but that the points come into contact with the heads of the joints when they are broken, or with the large open mouth.
Forma of lesser razor:
Forma of broad razor:
Forma of another saw decently made: let it be made with an arc above and the sharpness of its edge of iron, and the handle of its blade of well-made sticks. Forma of it:
Forma of the razor which has a cavity:
Shape of a razor, or another fine:
Shape of another razor with a curved end:
Shape of a small razor resembling a needle:
Shape of another cutting instrument, smaller:
Shape of another cutting instrument; this resembles a ray, and its end is like a point, and it is used in several places in the proportion of the bones:
Shape like a ray which is proportionate to the bone that is perforated:
And its end is triangular and sharp.
And it is made of iron from India, and resembles a cavity like all the causes we have said about razors, cutting instruments, and saws.
For the cutting end and the joint of the bones.
The extremities may be affected either by an intrinsic cause or by an extrinsic one, or as you have medicated that corruption through the treatment of those medicines and the cure does not bring relief, or sometimes the corruption goes away from the member which you do not perceive by any cause, then it is necessary for you to enter that member into this so that the corruption accedes the wound, in order to expel the evil either through death or malice, which is a greater misfortune of the member.
The sign of the one upon whom this occurs is that the member becomes black before it turns red, as if already burned by fire. You may notice the blackness within that part where the reddening enters that member which affects him and takes over his entire body; therefore, examine carefully that part.
And similarly, if the cause of the corruption is a percussion by some venomous causes such as from a scorpion, a viper, or a rattlesnake, and similar signs.
And if the corruption or the percussion is in the extremity of the finger, then you cut the finger and do not give space to the corruption so that it enters your hand.
And when you approach the hand, then incise that of the axilla, and do not give space for corruption to enter within the arm.
And if you prefer that, then incise the arm between the elbow at the joint.
And if corruption passes and surrounds the elbow, then at that point is the death of the patient; and another cause given other than this for cure is the quantity of virtue.
And similarly, do for the foot when corruption prefers the inside of the foot, then incise there between one of the bones.
And if it takes in the sole of the foot, then incise the entire foot. But if it penetrates into the sole, then incise the leg between the joint of the sole.
And if corruption has already pervaded the sole, then there is nothing but dismissal, and leave the patient to die.
And the manner of incising the member or closing it is that you hold the tendon in one part and leave which you want to incise, and tie another tendon over the spot; extend the assistant's hand with a ligament to those parts left, and extend the assistant another ligament on their side; you separate the flesh which is between two ligaments until all the flesh is uncovered; then it should be incised or closed.
And ensure that a cloth is placed around all parts so that it does not touch the spot, and that when the lesion comes to the patient, it be adjusted and the cautery applied properly.
And if by chance there is a flow of blood while you work, then cauterize the spot frequently, or place some constricting powders on it to stop the blood; then return to your treatment until it is completed.
And then tie the injured member with a ligament as required, and treat it until it is healed.
And I advise you that if an injury occurs on a man's foot, the doctor and you should examine this accident which we have advised, which is quite common in blackness on his foot resembling the combustion of fire.
And that corruption initially occurs within the said tissue where it tends throughout the foot.
And then that man prepares himself to put more faith in the cure as he sees the healing proceed in the limb with the intensity of his pain and heat subsiding, and the affected foot enter into the joint, and the wound heal.
Long ago this corruption occurred in the hand indicated.
And then it comes to me, and I perform to reflect that superfluity on what is placed over the hand of the medicaments, near the transformation of the body; and the superfluity is not reflected but begins to proceed into the other part where it began in the hand.
And they make me incise the hand of the patient, and I do not want to do this hoping for the reflection of that superfluity, but more because I fear the incision of the hand of the patient will be fatal, as the virtue of gout was strong.
And after he awakens from my presence, he returns to his land and informs me that that man prepared and incised his entire hand, and he was cured.
And I have added this narrative only as an aid regarding what is known about this illness, and as a guide by which it may be understood and acted upon.
On the care of colic and the quality of cleansing enemas with medicines.
When an abscess occurs in any fleshly member and the space of the abscess is prolonged to collect pus, and then it breaks and is perforated, and the pus is drained from it, and the area remains clean as if it were a vessel, and the skin above it remains thin like fine cloth, and no further corruption occurs, and it does not imprint on bone or nerve nor in muscle, it is called colic, and is not named fistula.
Yet if the space is prolonged to a point where corruption presses into any member, then it is called a fistula and we stop.
And the treatment for it is to remove that skin entirely as if it were stirred, especially when it remains thin like cloth, and you must ensure that it does not stick to the area due to its corruption.
If you hope that the string adheres and that the corruption has not reached an irreparable consequence, and on the string it has passed face-on, then you cure that with a clyster.
And you consider the string, and if it is large, and the hand that holds it has an unpleasant odor, then treat that with a clyster using a medicinal Egyptian remedy which consists of oil and wine mixed in equal parts, and be sure to place them in a vessel, and keep the mixture over fire until it simmers and reaches the desired consistency.
And then you take what is necessary from it and dissolve the medicine in water and honey; then treat the string with this clyster, strengthen the orifices of the area, and leave the medicine in it for about two hours.
And then extract that medicine; do this for several days until the string is purified and the wound is healed.
And sometimes it is treated with an aqueous solution of ash when this medicine is not available; then you take the ashes from vitex, put them in water; and extract that and treat the string with it until you are sure the string has been properly treated.
And if the patient does not tolerate the Egyptian medicine nor the water of the ash, then prepare that mixture with water and honey mixed with seventy parts, and prepare that mixture with wine and honey mixed, for it is the property of honey to purify and wash, and wine causes adhesion in the sinew, especially when there is an excess of stringency and dryness in the wine.
And when you have passed it several times and you are sure that the sinew is already softened, then administer that mixture with water that causes flesh to grow in it.
And you take dyeafinicon ointment, dissolve that mixture with oil rubbed and winestringent; or you administer that mixture with several medicines and apply other ointments that have the properties which I have already written in the treatise on ointments.
And if the opening of the sinew is wide in which the clister tube cannot be inserted, then gradually enlarge that hole with a small iron instrument, and place it in the hole wrapped in Egyptian or basilicon ointment until it is enlarged.
And if the opening is wide, then you should suture the lips of it and leave enough quantity in which the enema can be added.
And if the opening from which the fluid flows is elevated above the upper parts, then dry that area below it so that the fluid can flow into it. When the fluid is constrained in the depth of the sinus, flesh will be generated there.
And if it is not possible to dry the sinus in the area below as you wish, then you should perforate the member with a preparation through which the fluid can flow slightly according to your ability and ensure that no cause of obstruction retains the fluid.
May he who is over the opening of the sinus, whom you cauterize at all times so that it does not come out what is stuck in it with the arm. And that you may know if what flows from the arm is much or little, or is digestible, or is non-digestible.
And thus you consider the place of that sinus, if in it the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess.
And as your treatment is prolonged in this manner, and you see the matter that is discharged over the opening of the sinus already adheres, or there is a growing adherence, then you may remove it or let it dry for one day. When you remove the wound dressing, then change the cloth with another and renew the ointment.
May it be that the sinus has a subtle virus spreading, then do not neglect the adherence of this, for the healing of it appropriates, for some people in whom flesh generation in their wounds is slow, and among those, it is done contrary to it.
And if after several days the sinew is still movable and not adhered, then you know that the adhesion of the sinew has been delayed; and if the delay in adhesion is due to a prolonged cause, then you adjust it by drying with medicines. And if the medicines are wet in their substance and in their virtue, they are dried like an ointment of yafinicon when there is an excess addition of resin.
And the best remedy for what is cured, is to take an ointment of yafinicon and dissolve it in sweet oil, and apply it very evenly over it, and use that.
And pretend in that action when there is no bone, use yafinicon ointment, mixed with honey and made thick, and use it; or take myrrh and aloes and incense, mix them all together and powder them over the honey which is on the fire, and lay this over cloth and strengthen it over the sinew; and lay this on the honey which you have cooked and made thick, and powder it over cloth and strengthen it.
And sometimes it is administered to him long aristology and reasons of celestial lily (and the celestial lily) and flour of iris and centaury, and use those simples or adjusted, squeeze them and sift over the honey which I have recommended; and use it.
And if the sinus is prolonged and does not heal by this cure, then you should know that the corruption is in the root of it, and you must investigate in the bones or in the other hard members or the ligaments; then you cure it by fistula treatment, as was said above.
For the cure of tumors, nails worn away, and incision of the digit with sectioning.
Panniculus is an apostema which leaves the nail of the finger or toe, and it swells in other fingers, and as it prolongs, its cure is less desired; or it becomes a cautrated apostema, or it is corrupted, and you insert a stick that corrodes the root of the nail, and thoroughly corrupt that part entirely, and let its corruption penetrate to the bone within which it produces an offensive odor, and the extremity of the finger is cut off, and its color becomes yellowish.
And when you have done that as we have said in the division and do not relate your cure, then you should enter to remove all the fluid that has escaped from the joint and place a cautery near it, for a cautery is beneficial in this.
If the bone is sound and the joint is healthy, and the adducions of the joint have already compressed the flesh into its interior parts, and begin to pierce it, then you should pause with a fine needle at the angle of the joint that pierces the flesh, push it out, and incise the flesh with ease, placing your hand over what remains of the flesh as medicines burn and corrode inside until it is thoroughly treated; then treat that with ointment until it heals.
If the corruption has already reached the bone, then you should incise the bone there and extract it, for nothing is healed that remains in the corrupt bone.
And if you see the corrosion and corruption spreading to that side, then you should incise there in one of the joints according to where the lesion is located, and treat it until it heals.
If at the joint there is percussion or friction, and in that pain there is great violence, then you must at the beginning phlebotomize the patient, and soon dry the joint with sharp spatula by transverse section above with juice, and guard yourself that the section does not penetrate into the flesh left by the joint, for you will cause the patient great pain, which will be a cause of natural excess fit in the place; and cure that place with what alleviates pain.
But said fit, which is natural in many people, the flesh is very light and loose in them, or the joint is very light.
And some of them are located in the vicinity of the joint, or the natural condition of the fingers is due to several nodules. But that which is natural in several nodules of the finger is not harmful, and this which is natural in the joints is very loose.
And of those that are natural fleshly, the section is light, and you should incise it gently with a sharp knife.
More difficult for those born near the joint, the cure is hard; therefore, beware of its removal.
More difficult in those born near the knee, ensure that you incise the beginning of the flesh around into the bone, and nearby it will be one of those convenient joints for this, and soon cure what is within to become healthy.
More difficult the consolidation which occurs in the fingers among their joints from disease or from birth or due to consolidation of plague or from burning, then you must cure that consolidation so that the fingers return to their natural form.
And then place between his sheets the affected part in olive oil to prevent it from consolidating lightly, and separate between them, or place between them a thin sheet of lead so that it may consolidate as needed.
And similarly, if consolidation occurs in some fingers at the palm, then you must dry that consolidation as prepared and conform it to the figure of the member.
Of the varicose veins, so they are.
Varicose veins are so called, and they are thickened veins full of melancholic superfluities that appear on the parts of the body, and their greatest occurrence is in the groins, especially in the groins of those who travel much, those who work much, and those who carry things.
Then administer a purge of the body from black bile several times with strong expulsion, and immediately bleed the patient from the internal jugular vein.
More often, the treatment of them is according to two methods: one is to incise and draw out that black blood, and the other method is to elevate the vein and extract it entirely.
The sectioning is done in this manner: soak the groin area with warm water until the thick blood has resolved, which is febrile from the groin. Then strengthen the part of the patient's thigh above the buttocks between the inner and outer thighs with a bandage. Next, secure the vein in one, two, or three places with a wide excision. Use your hand to elevate the black blood from below the groin upwards, into the abdomen and above it, until the desired quantity has drained out, which is sufficient to neutralize the malignity of the disease.
And then ligate her, and command her to abstain from foods generating black bile.
And continue the cure through phlebotomy when the veins are full and this is noted by the patient.
Raise the limb in this manner: you raise the leg of the patient, if there are tumors on it, and then immerse it in warm water and wrap the leg with a wet cloth until it becomes red and the veins are prominent; or exercise it with strong exercise if warm water is not available, until the limb is warmed.
And then dry the vein along its length or at the rear of it you make a incision, or at the lower part you cut it.
And then cut the vein with forceps and strip the vein from all sides until it appears to you that it is darkening. You should notice when that vein begins to darken.
And then, as you extract the vein, you see that white thing which is the cord.
And then you place that ligament elevated and curved from the knee, and suspend it on an iron hook or lion's claw.
And then sear another section near that section for three digits, and cut the knee from the upper part of the vein where it appears.
And then elevate that and incise the rear section of the tendon, and extract that and elevate it where it enters through the second section, and extract that from the section above it.
And do this where you extract that from the section that is highest above or higher than all other sections, where everything enters; and then incise that.
And if you do not obey to extract and elevate, then insert a strong double-threaded needle and tie that, and extract it. Or insert that iron rod and rotate your hand in all directions where it is curved. And be careful that it is not incised; for if it is broken, it will be difficult to elevate that part and the injury has come about through that damage.
And when all of it has been expelled, then place over the wound lint soaked in wine and oil, whether it be well-roasted or not roasted, and care for it until it is healed.
And if the vessel is constricted having tortuosity in which there is an encapsulation at certain parts, and it is not according to straightness as we have said, then cut into that at all parts of its tortuosity and at the locations of its encapsulation, and place it under tension so that you elevate that entirely.
And guard yourself in your section so that you do not cut the vein and that you do not damage it, for it will be difficult to elevate that; serve your prudence there.
Form of the incident where the vessel is constricted:
It is not cut as with ordinary incisions nor does it have an acute extremity because it does not damage the vein; and it has a large flexibility like a lion, for if it were subtle, it would cut the vein due to its subtlety; having this in its superfluous thickness as we have said.
From the extraction of the calf vein.
This vein is generated in the legs in lands with cold and arid soils of little tenacity, in which neither grass nor trees grow.
And the vein is generated in other parts of the body besides the legs.
And its formation is through putrefaction that breaks down the connective tissue, just as venom inside the body becomes serpents, worms, and lice that generate between the connective tissue and the flesh.
And the sign of the susceptibility to the onset of this is when you encounter inflammation in the leg intensely; then, nearby, the area becomes vesicated; and nearby, the vein starts to protrude from the site of that vesication, seeming like a plant emerging.
And then, as the extremity appears, when you wrap a piece of lead around it, which weighs as much as the skin of a dragon, insert two dragons' worth of lead, and mark that spot, letting the lead hang from the leg.
And as often as any cause affects the parts outside, wrap this in lead and apply it there. And if the wound is prolonged, then you incise a part of it and wrap the remainder; and do not incise that which is inside while part is outside, for if you incise that, it will contract and enter the flesh, causing an abscess, swelling, and bad ulceration.
That which must be treated extensively and extracted little by little, until it is completely expelled from the anus, and no cause should remain in the body.
And from this vein, some men are situated whose length is of five palms and ten, and I have already been informed that one was cut of twenty palms.
And if it is incised at the time of its medication, then insert the probe into the tract of the patient and perforate that which is long in the body, until all that is in the matter is evacuated. Then administer putrefaction to the area for several days with medicines; and cure that by the treatment of abscesses.
And this vein sometimes has protrusions, especially when it appears at the joint of the foot or in the foot, and brings to it many orifices, and is situated from each orifice.
And therefore cure it thus as we have said in the division and what has been said above.
Of the section on worms generated under the skin and called bovine illness.
This illness is named in some lands deves nos (or "itch") and is called bovine disease. For many times it appears on cows, and there is a worm that is native between the skin and the flesh, which goes throughout the body up and down, and is shown by its own movement from member to member, tearing the skin as it goes outside.
And its generation is through the putrefaction of some humors, just as worms, snakes, worms, and ascarids are generated in the belly.
And it is feared because of its malice, for when it goes in the body and rises to the head, and affects the eye, then greatly hurts it and enters and destroys the eye, and many times this happens.
And when you want to cure that and extract it, then do not perform this without considering its mobility and appearance in relation to the sensation, then check what is on it and what is left from it by adhesion and strong constriction, and dry it thoroughly before extracting it.
And if it is found in the flesh and you do not find it, then place a cautery on fire over the area where it resides, and the main fear is corruption of the area, which corrupts it as we have said.
And if you see that it has reached near the heart, then firmly bind over the supraclavicular area, and dry it thoroughly, and extract it; and check that the illness uses modification of its body through medicines that expel putrid bad humors, and avoid foods causing putrefaction.
Of the section on the illness of gout.
This illness is called gout in our land, and it is a pain that occurs in some limbs, and often is passed from limb to limb.
And I have already seen that which I will recount to you. I was called to a sick woman at a village, and upon examining her arm, I found a small swelling in the vein of the arm. After it had risen for about an hour, I saw that this swelling went up like a worm rising from one place to another, though less urgently than feared, like silver fluid moving from place to place.
And then the pain spread to that area, fixing itself in the muscle, and there it stayed for about an hour.
And then it spread to the other side of the body, reaching the other arm.
And then, I was told that she moved about the entire body as I observed; and it was too amazing to see the change in her and the speed at which it spread from one limb to another. And I had already seen this before in my own case according to that manner, but I have also seen many cases where the pain is perceived as being permuted from one limb to another. But not all have heels as in women.
And I do not consider it to be so, but rather because the woman was old, with a dry body and exposed veins, and in this appearance there is a sensation of that humidity changed.
And it is necessary that this backward curvature not appear in those who are delightful and have a humid corpus with enlarged veins.
And since you want the cure for it, and the patient feels that pain, if it does not appear as we said regarding the heel, then strengthen that area and let it rest lightly and dry over it until that constricted humidity is inserted, and cauterize the area.
But if you do not see it in the heel bones, then cure that by releasing the body and by what you expel humidity, and cleanse those with foul pills and with saffron pills and similar.
From the extraction of arrows.
Arrows are diverse according to the species, and according to the places of the body in which they lodge; for their diversity is that some have large points, small, concave, and silent, solid; and some have three angles, and those to which belong tongues; and those to which belong feathers.
And of the signs of apoplexy: when the arrow pierces it, passes through the bone, and is situated above the brain, for it happens by excessive heat, scotoma, vertigo, rogor in the palms, inflammation and rogor of the tongue, spasms and confusion of understanding, vomiting of bile, and greatly weakened speech, voice is destroyed, and is situated at the site of the wound a white humidity resembling dust, and from it resembling excess moisture of flesh.
And if you see these signs in this manner, then abstain from the cure and the extraction of the arrow, unless it is outside.
And the signs of the arrow when lodged in the heart are that it is near the left nipple, and one feels a hard lump there which is not visible; and the movement of the arrow seems like the pulse, and the flow of the black bloody wound, and there is a coldness at the extremities, sweating ceases, and fainting; and then you know that death descends upon him totally.
And the signs when the arrow has pierced the lung are frothy blood from the wound, and the vessels near the neck are constricted, and the color of the patient has changed, and he exhales a great spirit sometimes, and seeks to draw air with difficulty.
And if the arrow is lodged in the periosteum which is in the foot, and the pain is near the small bones, then it causes a great and violent pain along with heavy breathing, and does not affect all the members of the muscles.
And if you catheterize the stomach, then forcefully remove some undigested food from the wound.
And if you catheterize the stomach, and it is inserted into it, remove some opening of the wound, or the tissue, or intestine which is ruptured, and there is no hope for the cure of it by removing the catheter.
And if the catheter reaches the bladder and causes urine to overflow, and the process of it from any cause at the parts outside, and great pain occurs in the patient, then know that it is fatal.
Moreover, the other limbs such as the face, neck, arm, shoulder, back, and flank, and the vertebrae of the spine, as well as the furcula and coxa, and their counterparts in the limbs, are saved according to the major dispositions when the catheter does not find a vein or artery and is not a poisonous catheter.
And I will recount to you what I have seen about the nature of these catheters, so that you may understand its significance for treatment.
The cause is that in a man an arrow struck the lacrimal of his eye in the root of his nose, and I extracted it from one side, left his ear gray, and he recovered, and was not injured in his eye.
And I extracted another arrow from Juzeu which struck him in the gray of his eye, leaving the eyelid but not the arrow, for it was hidden and could only be removed by a small extremity attached to its shaft, and it was a large arrow among the sharp arrows of the Turks, with iron like a lion where there were no ears.
And Juzeu is fine, and was not injured in his eye at all.
And I extracted another arrow from a Christian man which was stuck in the glabella, and it was an Arabic arrow, and that one with its ears; then I incised over it between two guides, and it was submerged in his glabella; then I touched it with something sharp, and soon extracted it, and the Christian recovered.
And another arrow was extracted from a man which was lodged in his stomach, and I perceived that he died from that; and so, after thirty days had passed and no change occurred due to his condition, I incised over the arrow and evacuated it, and he recovered, and no ill accident befell him.
And I found a man in whom an arrow was embedded in his back, and the wound had healed over it. After about seven years, incise the arrow in the side of the thigh.
And I found a woman in whom an arrow was embedded in her stomach, and the wound had healed inside it, and there had been no change in her condition over time, and the woman did not experience any discomfort during her usual natural operations.
And I found another man in whom an arrow was embedded in his face, and the wound had healed, breaking the arrow. He did not experience any more pain, and appeared similar to others.
And I extracted the arrow from the king's prince, who had an arrow embedded in the middle of his nose, and it had slightly declined to the right side, with the entire arrowhead hidden.
And I was called for the treatment of him around the arrow wound within three days.
And then I examined the wound of the arrow closely; and then I inquired about the one that felt subtle, and did not feel it; but he felt the puncture and let me touch his right ear, and then suspected that that puncture was at the tip of the arrow.
And apply the place to be plastered with an attractive and digestive plaster, convincing myself that the place we apply it will show me the location of the arrow, so that it dries there.
And do not miss the significant location where the arrow struck; and continue applying the plaster over it for several days without missing any spot; and meanwhile, the wound consolidates, and I remove the arrow from its socket over a period of several days until one day I feel the arrow in its own nostril and tell me this.
And then place a sharp corrosive medicine on the wound for several days until it opens up. And touching it, I examine that area, and carefully examine the tip of the arrow, which adheres to the shaft.
And then you adjust in the opening of the wound with that sharp medicine until I visibly see the tip of the arrow, and pass to my time for that over the space of four months.
And then, once the wound is enlarged, and it is possible for me to insert the forceps into it, I will manipulate that, without using any aids, so that I do not cease to refine and devise various mechanical methods until one day I successfully used a pair of forceps inserted from above, as described at the end of this chapter, to extract it; then, I restored that wound.
And some doctors judged that the cartilage of the nose is not restored, but I restored that and when the wound is consolidated, the patient recovers completely, without any defect in it.
And I recount to you the quality of extracting some arrows, so that you pause and consider this rule and significance of what I have not said, for the parts of this art and the definitions of those are not understood in the narration nor do they comprehend them freely.
And the wise craftsmen compare a little about motion; and with that which is present about that which is absent; and find new operations and new instruments for the descent of foreign causes when they occur.
And therefore I say that arrows are not expelled from the members in which they are inserted but according to two manners: either by attraction of the place in which they enter; or by the contrary part.
And that which is expelled by the place where entry was made, or the arrow proceeds into a fleshly location and is then launched and expelled.
And if it does not respond to the attempt of the hour in which it was drawn out, then you should leave it for a few days until the flesh around it can heal, and reduce the attraction to it and its exit.
And similarly, if it is inserted into bone and does not respond to your attempt, then leave it for a few days and repeat the operation with attraction and motion each day, and it will be expelled.
And if you do not obey your effort for some days, then you must puncture in the circuit of the arrow at that bone from which all parts travel subtly into the area where the arrow is enlarged.
But if the arrow is already hidden in the place of the body and hidden from sensation, then you inquire about it by touch, and if you feel it, then extract it with some instruments which are suitable for its removal.
And if you cannot remove it through the wound due to its size and the length of the arrow, and here there are neither nerves nor veins, then you incise the wound to make it larger and possible to extract the arrow.
And if it is in the ears where it is embedded, then you incise the flesh in which it is stuck as much as possible with all the skill you can; and use your ingenuity, if you cannot drain the flesh around the fracture of the ears and in torsion of those parts that must obey.
And when you administer the extraction of the arrow in any place where it is, then you use your hand's torque and forceps in all parts to make it obey; and with great subtlety ensure that the arrow is not broken and that it is made easy for its extraction and for this extraction.
And if you cannot do this at your hour, then you leave it for some days until the parts that are in the circuit of him heal, and then proceed with that which is alleviated. And if it makes contrary effects with the flow of blood, then you administer what we have said about cure in its chapter.
And preserve your virtue in the incision of veins or nerves, or cords, and administer means in every manner for the avoidance of the arrow; and do this with ease, tranquility, and delay and firmness as I and you have recommended.
And thus contract the arrow by itself that the patient be according to the figure according to which you should place the tip of the arrow in him, for this is more advantageous. And if this is not possible for you, then administer what is possible for you according to the figures.
And for arrows that are deflected contrary to the other part, or which you have already treated some part of them externally, or cause swelling at the tip of the arrow by the sensation of the part above the elbow; then dry over that; and let the section be according to the quantity in which the forceps take hold; and then remove it, for it is made light and everted.
If it is retained in the bone, then twist the lance according to the opposite direction where the arrow presses into the bone, enlarge it by inserting, and then extract it.
Otherwise, leave it for a few days, and then reinsert it where it is embedded.
If the shaft of the arrow is there, then push it into place.
Otherwise, if the shaft is stuck and you want to administer an impulse, then insert it there. If it is obstinate, stir it with a curved tool so that the concavity of the tool enters into the channel of the arrow, and then push it into place.
Otherwise, if the arrow is curved, then push it with a strong stirrup entering into it, so that the arrow straightens out.
And if the arrow is poisoned, then make sure you concave all the flesh where it is located, if possible, and then treat it with what is appropriate.
And if the arrow hits the foot, or the abdomen, or the bladder, or the side, and is close enough for you to touch it directly, and it is possible to extract it dry from that spot, then dry it and guard against cutting a vein or nerve, extract it, and afterwards treat the wound until it heals.
Form of forceps with which arrows are extracted:
Let the ends be curved like the beak of a bird, so that they can grasp the arrow and not let it slip.
And from these, special loops are made, large, few, and medium-sized, according to the size of the arrow and its smallness, and the width of the wound, and its depth.
Thus, in order to alleviate the instrument in the concave arrow and press it towards that area.
Of femoral venous incision.
Of femoral vein incision. The veins for which custom dictates to perform femoral incision are xxx, which are in chapter XVI, and are two pulsating veins near the ears, called by Avicenna; two herbs that are clearly visible on the temples; and two veins that are in the inner corners of the eyes, called aspicients; one vein in the middle of the forehead, and one vein at the extremity of the nose; two guidegi vessels near the neck; two veins in the upper lip; and two veins in the lower lip; â€” these are the veins called algelic â€”; and two veins on the left side of the tongue. Moreover, the veins that are incised in the arms are V; of which one is cephalic and is from the wild ivy; the people call it "the vein of the head," and it is a median vein, composed of a branch of the basilica and another branch of the cephalic. They call the latter the "vein of all the body," while the basilica is the vein that is from the domestic ivy and is called "cithernal," and the common people call it "the vein of the belly"; those of the forearm, which are incised over the brachial artery, and are where femoral incisions are made, as this vein becomes apparent on the surface of the arm; and savallata, which is the vein between the mentioned auricular and the smaller one, and it has two branches.
And in the foot and thigh there are three veins; one of them is that which gives curvature to the bend of the wild beast's leg; and the second is sophena, and its place is given to the bend of the domestic animal; and the sciatic vein, and its place is given to the bend of the wild beast; and in the thigh are other veins similar to those.
The condition of the veins near the ears is catarrhs, headaches, meningitis, and old bad ulcers of the head.
And the quality of sanguine in those veins is as I will recount to you: it should be rubbed on the head of the patient, and the head of the patient should be rubbed at the occipital region where both veins are located with a wide cloth for good friction; then firmly press the patient's neck with a band where the two locations of their veins are near the ears in two pressed areas of the head; and you want that on your right side, and if you feel the pulse of those on your right side, here it is tested.
And you take the surgical lancet, which is the one that will be inserted, and you insert it into the vein between where the phlebotomy will reach the jaw. And then raise your hand to the vein and its branches above and incise the vein with an incident incision. And let the length of the incision be the width of two fingers adjusted or around that; and let the blood flow out as much as you want.
And then strengthen with powders and leave that there until it is healed.
And already it was mentioned at the beginning of this book regarding the incision and their cautery.
More than the two arteries, which are adjacent to the femoral vein and vital for the efficacy of phlebotomy, they are ancient and evil migraines, persistent eye diseases, and a corpus of acute effusions in the veins.
And the quality of phlebotomizing those is as I will recount to you: strengthen the patient's thigh muscle such that the two veins become apparent by a clear sense, and demonstrate the pulse at their location with your hand; and then you can feel for it.
And then you elevate the codena above the vein at the parts superior to what you have already indicated, and insert the fleurbotomi incidentiaj dejos, and elevate the vein in them; and cut that as you have done in the other two veins; and let the blood flow according to the quantity of your necessity.
And then release the constriction of the patient, and place your hand on the vein for an hour, and then place the compress and powder above with a strong constriction, and leave it there until it is healed.
And after the memory of them, and of those the incision, and the extraction at the beginning of the book.
And thus the youth of flebotomy of the vein of the forehead is near the flebotomy of the cephalic for ancient illnesses of the face and migraines and fever and foul ulcers.
And the quality of the flebotomy of the forehead is according to what I will recount to you; so, the patient strains his neck with a bandage in which the vein appears; and then take the instrument which is called a fossor, this is its form:
Pause the pointçªå‡ºçš„éƒ¨ä½åœ¨æ³„æ®–è…”è†œå£çš„é¡¶ç«¯ï¼Œåœ¨é‚£æ¡é™è„‰ä¸Šæ–¹ï¼Œç„¶åŽä»¥å€¾æ–œæˆ–å› å…¶ä»–åŽŸå› çš„æ–¹å¼å‡»æ‰“å®ƒï¼Œè®©è¡€æµæ ¹æ®ä½ æƒ³è¦çš„æ•°é‡æµå‡ºï¼›éšåŽè§£é™¤å¯¹æ‚£å¤„çš„ç©¿åˆºï¼Œå¹¶åŠ å¼ºé‚£é‡Œçš„æ„ˆåˆã€‚
Sometimes the opening is made with a lancet, but I do not know if the lancet should be of acute extremity as in other lancets, or whether it should be of broad extremity, and one should lance it transversely, for the bone is close by and strong; the lancet, being thin, would break in it during the lancing.
More importantly, the youth of the two veins that are at the corners of the eyes through the groove of the eye by inflammation and stye in the eyelids, and for facial ailments.
The quality of the lancing is that the hernia strengthens the hole in itself with a band, and then lance those areas, and you stand over the head of the patient.
And the lancing should be made transversely along the length for a little while with a small lancet, for in that place there is no flesh; and if the lancet is thin, strengthen its extremity, for it may break.
And then let the blood run until it is necessary, place your hand over those points, strengthen them for one night, and then remove those.
May the femoral puncture of the vein be performed for acute fever and severe pain, for facial ailments, migraine, and swelling that occurs in the face, especially when it is chronic.
And the quality of the femoral puncture is that the patient raises his leg and closely places his left hand on his nose, takes the delicate long lancet, and inserts it in the middle location of the nasal tip according to proper alignment, for the vein does not appear here through sensation, and the blood begins to flow quickly.
Cover your hand with the lancet little by little and let the blood flow according to your need; then remove it after one night, for the wound is healed rather quickly.
May the judgment of the femoral puncture lead to the construction of ale and the onset of leprosy and various other ailments and corrosive bad ulcers similarly as with hemtophoresis.
And the quality of the femoral incision is that the patient strains to defecate at each hole in his side with lint; and the attendants are over the head of the patient, and the patient lies on a bench.
And gradually perform the femoral incision along the vein with a small and ample cautery; and extract blood according to the season's quantity or according to what is necessary; and make it seem as if you are dealing with another vein.
And gradually remove the lint and strengthen the two veins with a mid-straughtener so that the patient does not become overheated, and leave enough room in the flesh for the wound to heal.
And the benefit of the femoral incision for the veins Algerich, it helps to reduce small abscesses and pustules in the mouth, and the corruption of the gums, as well as bad ulcers and fissures, and those that are in the nose and around it.
And the quality of the femoral incision is that you make the patient face you, and strengthen the side of his neck with a bandage, and then turn the lips and look at two veins, of which one is on the right side of the lip and the other on the left; the demonstration of each is by the blackness of each of both, and this is more so in the area around those are small black veins; and then incise each with an incident incision.
But if you are in doubt about which of those is the one, then you understand the incision of the largest of those and of the most obvious.
And make the resemblance of the two veins that are in the lips above.
But of the two veins that are below the tongue, the juice for the phlebotomy of the cephalic vein is near the grooving for the uvula, in the treatment of uvulitis, and other mouth ailments.
And the quality of phlebotomizing those is to follow the illness between your fingers in front of the sun, and elevate the tongue, and look at the tongue, on one side of its vein and on the other side of its vein, and the color of each is declining to black.
And then phlebotomize each; and guard that you do not end your hand in phlebotomizing those, for those are arteries.
And your veins that are lanced in the groin are in which customarily flows in all men, and the lancing of their veins is done according to two methods, or they apply a myrtle or olive needle at subtlety declining; or with a surgical lancet lancing, and call it annelid, and this is its form:
It is the lax of the myrtle thus as you see, and you apply to opening the concave veins full of apparent large vessels, and at those that contain coarse turbid blood.
And this lancing is of lesser width and more subtle extremity, and you apply it to lancing thin veins that contain fine citrus blood.
May the youth of the femoral incision of the basilic vein which is one of three veins: from where you extract the blood from the ill areas which leave the gout and the cold, and from what affects the foot and the abdomen.
And it befits the phlebotomist, when performing that phlebotomy, to guard well that and be over-cautious about that, for if he leaves the artery there in the puncture of the phlebotomy, he will incise that artery and cause fluxes of blood, so you must ensure that you do not phlebotomize at that point before cutting with a knife.
And if the basilic vein does not appear by clear manifestation, then you must leave that and change to the other, or seek some of its branches; or perform phlebotomy in a location at the end of the arm, for that is manifest; and dry out that vein with a knife as we have said.
May it be that you wish the phlebotomy of the median vein, then before the structure of the arm, touch the location between where you know the pulse location, and then place your hand over it with a cloth; then raise the arm and dry the vein with a concave section for the phlebotomy with a knife as we have said; and guard that the percussion does not occur in some space of the location of the artery.
And when you observe, as you strengthen the ligament, inflation occurs in the place that you have touched with your hand, then that inflammation is of the artery, and therefore avoid that.
And if you observe the blood flow during phlebotomy as golden like a child's, and the blood is thin and rosy, then you know it is arterial blood; then withdraw your hand for a long time; and bring your hand close to that place; and if the blood is divided, four or five drops are divided, then strengthen your arm and leave that.
And keep the patient from the moccio of the disease, and have a fear over it, and do not wet that for several days until it is healed.
And if the blood is not divided, and you see that the proper medicine for this is not present, then incise the artery if it appears to you; for its extremity is contracted and the blood is divided; or take some recently drawn from a fistula, and do that, and take half of it and strengthen it over the location of the vein with stricture descent on the ligament and with powder the next day.
And if the wound is incised, that is good; otherwise, treat that part as described previously in relation to the location of the powders causing the flow of blood.
And the incision of the wound is difficult due to the small size of the injury and the possibility of tendon damage.
More than the dark vein, phlebotomy is beneficial when extracting blood from the part above the heart and from the part below the body; for this, it consists of a branch of the basilica vein and a branch of the cephalic vein, as we have said.
And beware of the vein that is over-tender in phlebotomy; for, that is a nerve. Then, if you puncture the phlebotomy and find the nerve, it will cause stupor, and its recovery is difficult, and it does not fully recover easily. This nerve shows many vibrations in sensation; and if hidden, it is subtle and not visible, so when performing phlebotomy at the section of alnessil, pause to avoid the nerve with your strength.
And if the vein is between two nerves, then cut the vein lengthwise.
The purpose of phlebotomy of the cephalic vein is to draw blood from the head and relieve symptoms of headaches.
And in this manner, if you want the phlebotomy to be effective, perform it either at an olive phlebotomy or a myrtle phlebotomy; for it is the pure blood from all the veins, without affecting the artery or nerves.
Nevertheless, in some individuals, an abscess is more severe, and if not phlebotomized during the first percussion, it may not be noticeable in the subsequent treatment.
The first is that you must know that a phlebotomy is not administered except for the conservation of health and with hope for it and caution regarding the outcome of ailments; and that a phlebotomy should be performed in one of the veins that are in the groin, namely: cephalic, femoral, and basilic; and that a phlebotomy should be performed at the beginning of spring, on an empty stomach in spring and autumn, and in winter before meals, when signs of congestion appear.
And the phlebotomy should be performed on the third day or at the first opportunity after three hours have passed from the beginning of the day.
The phlebotomy that is administered more frequently causes greater convenience and necessity at that time, whether at night or during the day, at any hour and at all times.
And you must know that a child should not be phlebotomized before it has reached four years of age, and a woman who is pregnant should not be phlebotomized except in the fourth month between the seventh and eighth months. Women who have passed their thirtieth year should not be phlebotomized.
And when someone wishes to be fistulectomized in any manner whatsoever, make sure to modify his intestines before the fistulectomy with a leonine enema, if there is a motile fenestra retained, so that the veins do not eject superfluous fluids during the fistulectomy of the intestines, which are purified, and do not injure the principal members.
And the patients shall not be fistulectomized while nauseous or vomiting, nor from illness or drunkenness until what is within them is sufficiently relieved, nor from dropsy or gout, and more importantly, fistulectomy should be avoided near colic pain, near vomiting, near abdominal conditions, near multiplication of coitus and labor, and near fasting or vigil, and from all causes that dissolve the virtue, either corporal or animal.
And consider in the subtlety of gases before proceeding if the wound is large, with food and drinks, and with medicines if that is possible at that time.
And consider between the bath if any cause does not prohibit it, or by exercise to make the wound subtler.
And pause the femoral incision at the foot of the bed, so around three o'clock, as we have said.
And I assure you that the foot of that side should be guarded on the day of all evil accidents, as when there is anxiety, anger, fear, and all bodily accidents, as when there is toil and superfluous pain, or similar.
And to her, let the causes be presented in the use of which there is a custom among men for their aromatics and odors, as well as balms, according to the quantity and possibility.
And follow the femoral incision over a cushion that is placed higher than the cushion of the one to be flebotomized.
Then draw out his arm, and rub that area with your hand three times; then tightly bind the ligament with a rope and wrap it twice.
And let the stricture be tempered, for if the stricture is not equal, or if the stricture is due to excess, then prohibit the flow of the blood; or if it is due to softening, then similarly restrict the body's flow of blood.
And near the stricture, make sure that those who are to be lanced press their hands between them while the veins are swollen and visible to the touch.
And near the lancer, apply a little antiseptic ointment to the site of the lancing properly; then place his finger of the left hand on that vein, leaving the location where the lancing will occur, so that the vein swells a little and the puncture is felt clearly. This is like a cord escaping, indicating the fullness of venosity. When you pause the lancing over that area, it contracts, revealing the position to the lancer; if the lancing does not reach the vein, but if it does, it is narrow.
And therefore, make sure that the lancer is firm and attentive to all these causes.
And near the puncture, but if the vein is already open in one go, that is good; otherwise, repeat this or another pass over that area a little, or with greater urgency if the location has not become septic.
And if the area is suppurated, or the patient sweats, then you let it be for a day or two, and do not apply a lint, because strong it would cause an abscess to burst, nor enter into bath.
And repeat the phlebotomy if necessary.
And if the abscess is small and deep, and you fear that it might not drain enough, then repeat the phlebotomy in that vein according to rectitude and adjust the incision a little, and do this before the area suppurates, for when the area does suppurate, you should make a slight incision.
But if you see that it has already suppurated, then do not repeat the incision there, for it is unnecessary for any reason; and place your hand over a part of the wound, for it alleviates the pain from the blood. And it is better in this place than olive oil and other oils.
And similarly, administer a part of olive oil in all phlebotomies where you incise the veins; they do this with tyriaca alfadoc and sagzenea when placed over the area, for the blood becomes finer and is agitated when it is thick.
And if in the place of the flebotomy a great apostema is generated, many blotches appear, especially to that one who has not been bled during that day or at the time of the appearance of the small vein, then you apply, over the area, a sponge infused in water and salt, slightly heated, and keep it there for an hour, for it dissolves.
And make sure to do this near the site of the blood from that vein with the help of the patient or another vein.
And if there is any darkness or greenish color in the area for a few days, do not notice this; if you want, place over it some cause of aloes and myrrh dissolved, or some juice of mint or camphor, or something similar to it.
And many blotches appear; these are signs of the apostema and prominences from the flebotomy of the basilicus vein.
And place your hand over that area. If then you find it soft, apply a compress to that area; this prominence is bad and harmful. Then be careful to place over it some cause as we have said, for strong blood will flow from the arterial vein.
And apply a plaster to where there is stiffness, so that the area may harden, and then treat it with another remedy until it is healed.
And you should extract from the wound all humors according to the quantity of its virtue and according to the color prevailing over the wound as it appears.
And if the blood is black, you let it remain until it becomes thin; and similarly, if you see it thick, you let it remain until it becomes finer; and similarly, if it is sharp, you wait until its acuity is reduced.
And for one who is full and strong and has the need for a single bloodletting, the incision of the vein should be enlarged and the bleeding should be allowed to continue.
And for one who is weak, do the opposite, and ensure that the blood is extracted in several sessions, and that it be drawn out thoroughly.
And the best method in vein bloodletting is the transverse section, not puncture.
This method of femoral incision avoids the flow of blood and injury to nerves, and is more advantageous and safer than incision based on breadth and length.
And in which it is customary for syncope to occur after the femoral incision, and know that you should give a little of wine infused with milgranas or simple scalded oxymel before the femoral incision; and extract at the side of the blood in three or four draughts.
And if there is a cold condition, then before the femoral incision take a draught of mirbane infused with mirbane powder or aromatic honey infused with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and sweetly scented herbs, or of aromatic and fragrant honey.
And if syncope occurs after the femoral incision, and is caused by the discharge of foul blood, then know that you should take a draught of meat water and subtle fragrant honey; use its aroma from an alehoof, and bind your foot with it.
And use the other causes that we have said in the division of syncope by evacuation.
And to cool his arm and dissolve his blood for the second time, incise from which the phlebotomy is by main evacuation, and the virtue of it is cold, which evacuates the blood little by little, so it depends on the quantity of the virtue over consecutive days.
And if one wishes to cool his arm and draw his blood for the second time, and his body is strong, then do this about seven or nine hours after the first phlebotomy.
And if one wishes to draw the blood from his body in the direction opposite to which it naturally flows, then do this on the second or third day after cooling.
And if that body in which there is hot blood already scorched and heated, causing fever, then draw the blood from it all at once in a large quantity, and intensify the perception before syncope occurs; for you should have preserved all the conditions of phlebotomy. And place your hand over the pulse to control the body's loss of blood, so that it does not die instead of experiencing syncope. For when the phlebotomist is ignorant and negligent, this should be done in multiple stages.
And do not cover when you want to release the arm and evacuate the blood for a second time, as the openings of the vein are already closed and it is difficult for the blood to issue forth, that you press upon it with force and slightly extend it, for this is too much.
Let it remain in the state of being phlebotomized; or keep what is at the acuity of the phlebotomy where the blood coagulates in the openings of the vein; or place over it a piece of tyriaca alfarach, or sagenea, and apply a light compresson while the blood has subsided.
And if the vein is inflamed, let that be and do not touch it until the inflammation subsides.
And if necessity prompts you to evacuate the blood again, and there is no excuse, then let that (the blood) flow in that same place or in the other arm at another vein.
And the vein called "funis del bras" is phlebotomized in place of the fascia or basilica when they are not found or are hidden, for it is composed of those.
The quality of the femoral puncture is that the patient introduces his hand in water after the fire has reddened and the vein clearly appears.
And then strengthen it over that area of the galled middle vein; and then perform the femoral puncture according to the transverse small vein, neither longitudinally nor according to its length.
And make the incision wide and let your femoral puncture be at the place where you perform it near the joint of the hand a little.
And if the flow of blood is stopped, then immerse your hand in water again and let the blood run into the water until you achieve your necessity.
But if you are in the days of summer, then you are excused from immersing your hand in water again, and it is better to hold the body of the blood in water during winter.
And the femoral puncture is safer than that of all other veins, for it does not have a pulsating vein or nerve.
And the venesection of the thumb of the right hand is relevant to liver diseases.
And the quality of the venesection on it is that you tightly tie the hand with a ligament or your hand, putting it in a hanging position so that the vein is swollen and clearly visible; then proceed to make the incision transversely; and if you cut it completely, no harm will ensue.
And make sure that you do not bring your hand close to the venesection, but leave it with the nerves of the fingers naked and without flesh.
And then immerse the hand in a hanging basin and let the blood flow into it. For if you do not immerse it in the hanging basin, the blood will coagulate in the orifice of the vein, which is forbidden to flow.
And when the blood is extracted in the required quantity, then pause over the vein with oil and salt to prevent it from closing completely; similarly ensure that you do this for all related veins.
May the youth of the femoral incision on that side be such that it is related to the ailments of the spleen.
And make the same in the femoral incision on this side as you have done on the other.
And the youth of the vein sephena in the femoral incision is for the ailments that are on the left side of the body, as with ailments of the liver, and retention of menses, and for the ailments of the hemorrhoids and ulcers of thighs and ancient wounds, and their likenesses of ailments.
And the quality of the femoral incision is that the patient inserts his foot in warm water and makes friction thereupon, through which the veins become apparent; then place a bandage over the joint of the foot; and at the location of the vein, cut it out as described above, from which its branches run along the surface of the foot.
And therefore, in the femoral incision, if you leave the hernia, cut it out as described, which is better and more secure.
And if you perform a fenestration there on the surface of the foot, then you must guard against the nerves that are left on the surface of the foot, and place your incision for the fenestration at right angles to it, as if you were going to cut through it.
And let the fenestration be useful.
But if the bleeding is prohibited; then you wash the foot in cold water and let the blood flow into the place where it should be evacuated.
And if the fenestration is made incorrectly in the first attempt, then redo the fenestration a little more, where the location is correct; and do not worry about its danger, but rather guard against the nerves as we have said.
And do the same for the other foot similarly.
And for the sciatic vein, as we have said before, you should cut the thigh at the place of the wild flax nerve.
And the result of the fenestration is pain in the ankle when it is due to blood clots.
And the quality of the femoral incision is that the malate (illness) enters bathed, and quickly and strongly washes the thigh of the patient from the loins above the four fingers on one thin bandage, which only becomes apparent through this.
And therefore, when it appears, then you perform the femoral incision according to whichever instrument is at your disposal and possible, or excise it through an excision, for the place of the illness is clean.
And it is often somewhat hidden; and if you find it but do not appear by the feeling of the whole, then perform a femoral incision on some branch of it, and that is the one that appears on the back of the foot between the auricular and the annular toes.
And guard the nerves, and let the quantity of the incision run where you want.
Then release the tension and place your hand over the site of the incision strongly, for it heals quickly.
For ventilation and the qualities of using those.
Frigid winds are of corners, or of air, or of vapors.
And cold is made according to two methods: one of which is by incision and extraction of blood, and the other is by cold without incision.
And this cold that is without incision is also made according to two methods, either by heat or with heat.
And for the colds that are administered by incision and extraction of blood, there are four parts of the body, of which one where cold is applied is sometimes, and it is at the very back of the head; and the middle part between the two sides of the neck; colds to the chin leave the jaw last; colds to the cheeks leave below the mouth; colds to the elbows, which are on the end of the forearm; colds to the kneecaps, which are about two fists wide; colds to the ankles; and colds to the thighs.
And cold does not extract the blood but from the small veins scattered in the flesh, and by this it does not lose its virtue as with venesection; nor is cold applied by heat or with heat in any malady caused by excess within the body until all is evacuated.
But if necessity provokes ventilation due to illness or continuously, we administer it at the beginning of the month and at the end, as well as in the middle of the month and at any time.
And therefore, when times occur due to any of those causes, and particularly if it is in the third or last part of the month, then command ventilation to be made rather than after two or three hours have passed.
And the benefit of ventillation at the neck is when you apply it to gravity in the head and to what is embedded in the heels; more correct that this be an approximate evacuation of the whole body.
And this ventillation is at the location of craniotomy.
And it is not advisable to use that which is filled with pus or in which there is catarrh, as it causes great harm.
And for this reason, it is not advisable to use those of the elderly, in whose heads there are gouty afflictions.
More so for those who continue to be over it, it causes oblivion; and for this reason, you should command the ventillator to place his hand a little on the ventosa at the affected parts, to prevent the generation of oblivion.
More so, ventillation at alkehel is at the location of craniotomy of the jugular and basilic veins: and for this reason, it affects asthma, and the constriction of blood and the splitting of the windpipe, and coughing, and swelling.
And make sure that the alembic is slightly heated, for if it is paused, it will cause weakness in the body and the stomach.
And the application of alhagdahan fomentation relieves headaches and ocular pain, migraines, precordial pain, and toothache; it is equivalent to a basilic vein phlebotomy.
And make sure that you command the fomentator not to press his hand on the scarification so as not to injure the artery and disrupt the flow of blood.
And the fomentation of the mentum relieves alcohol in the mouth, corruption of the gingiva, and appearances related to illnesses in the mouth that are equivalent to a phlebotomy of the jugular located between the two lips.
More appropriately, the fomentation applied to the two spatulas relieves cough, which is done by replenishing heat.
And the fomentation of the two internal parts of the flasks relieves youth similar to a phlebotomy of three veins, namely the basilic, femoral, and cephalic, for those veins drain the blood from all those veins that are in the flesh, and those small veins from other larger veins through which the drainage reaches the three veins.
And command the boy who fans not to approach during incision, for the place is stripped of flesh, and leave only the nerves and arteries.
And it is a fan with which the patient is fanned, and you attend to the hemorrhoids of the buttocks and to the ulcers but leave them.
And ensure that you command the fan to be a large fan, made of palm, for the place needs strong dryness; and use fine, light fans for fanning but leave it fanned during incision.
More fans on the legs I diminish by diminishing manifestly, for they carry the infection from the whole body, and attend to old pains in the kidneys and the liver, and the bladder; and induce menstruation, and attend to boils and ulcers; and stand in place of a femoral flebotomy and colotomy, and footligatures.
Otherwise they strengthen the whole body and cause syncope in many men.
And from the windpipes they hang the youth to the windpipes of both sides.
And the quality of the position of the windpipes is that you place the windpipe at the beginning view and suck through gradually cooled suction, and do not prolong the position of the windpipes, but pause them slightly, and retain them steadily, so that the humors come to the place by chance equally. And do not cease to repeat this until he sees the place already turn red and swell, and the rash of the sore appear.
And then you incise and repeat the suction little by little, and meanwhile consider the disposition of the bodies.
If the person has tender flesh, make sure you incise only once and not more, so that the place does not become ulcerated.
And command the windpicker to enlarge the incision slightly, and increase the suction accordingly.
And if in the urine it is thickened, then cut twice, for in the first time the way of subtilization to the urine and its moisture is opened. And in the second time to the acquired scrutiny of the extraction of thick urine.
And if the urine is motile and feculent, then let the cut be made in the third time so that it may heal properly.
And finally, when we want to extract the urine little by little or just a little, suffice us one cut.
And if we want the extraction of motile urine, let the cut be motile; and if we know that the urine is thick, then let the cut be made with a jagged edge.
And the term of the cut in which the depth of the needle is solely.
And if the needle is thick, hard, dark, and its points are straight, then let the places for the suction cups be anointed gently, openly, and resolved; if it is in summer, then use olive oil of aloes or olive oil of violet or balsam oil or incense oil; and if it is in winter, then use narcissus oil, or chamomile oil, or saffron oil, and to those similar.
And if the excess is large, apply, then oil of saffron, or balsam oil, or aloes wood oil, or nutmeg oil, and in their likeness.
And if the winddrawer is of wide pores with tender flesh, then it should be prohibited from oil, and to these places of winds near the winddrawing let them be washed with cool water or cold water from Solomon's seal, or water from oak, or water from hellebore, and similar to those.
And for that of which the root is due to dampness, wash its winds with wine, or water from myrtle and sumac, and similar to those.
And for that of which the excesses are large, wash its winds with old wine, or water from sage, which is marjoram, or decoction of nutmeg, or chamomile, and similar to those.
And it should be kept before bathing; having it should be administered shortly after the bath for one or two hours, and it should sleep near the winddrawer.
What must be regulated before the evacuation of winds and bloodletting?
Consider the beginning: when the patient is choleric and windy with a sharp pain and inflammation, then consider causes that cool down, such as acetic milken blisters, endive mixed with vinegar, lettuce, saffron, and julap, and things like them.
And give them foods such as lentils, roasted meats, and seasoned dishes with herbs, and things like them.
And for those of whom the complexion is phlegmatic, consider giving them to drink essarop of almond, or essarop of saffron of seeds, sumac, and wine mixed with ginger between vinegar and honey; and that they be advised to use moderation in drinking and eating, and avoid lentils, beans, pears, small roasted quails, and pigeons.
And consider that on the day of wind evacuation and bloodletting, their drinking should be greater than their food.
And it is proper that some men be given to drink tyriaca alfarac or medicines from musk, so as muscada or acelita, before ventilation or before phlebotomy or shortly after, so that the principal members may be comforted and that the sickness subside; and they must not take any scalding.
May the ventilation that is ses scarification be ventilation that is paused over the liver, and over the melsa and podagra, and over the umbilicus, in the locations of the joints, and the pit of the groin, for these members do not suffer scarification upon themselves.
And it is not desired for those, but rather an attraction of the sickness from the member, as when we pause ventilation over the mamilla in illness of flux of blood from the blood of the nose; and we use that so that the solid, viscous matter of the member may be dissolved. Just as we pause over the abdomen and the umbilicus; for that rarifies the member and scalds it, and relieves the pain by dissolving the swelling.
And it is paused over the liver when accidents occur in their operation or disorder, for by virtue of its strong attraction, the liver heals the disorder in its location.
And it seems when it is pressed on the liver and spleen, you should relieve distension in those enclosed.
And these distensions are administered sometimes only with suction; and in some cases, they are administered with heat.
And in some cases, they are administered full of clear water for the illnesses of the spleen.
And this is to ensure the distension is full and larger, it should be filled with clear water or water in which herbs suitable for the condition are added.
Form of the distension administered with heat: let the width of the orifices be two fingers, as we have formed it; and the quantity of the preon be half a palm; and place it in the middle of it, in the location that is in the circuit, making it small according to the quantity that enters it through an needle.
Let it be made of elm wood or citrus, with thick edges, lion's bark, equal and thin so that it does not lead the limb to lose its position on it.
And place a candle on the middle of the sore or wound, near the fire.
And let this larger sponge be greater than the one we have used; and use less water according to the illness and the condition of the person who uses it.
And the suction cups for children and those who are weak are different from those used for young and pregnant women.
And the quality of placing this suction cup near fire on the limb is to extend the wick of a good wooden stick in front of a small wax candle, and place that over the middle of the transverse sore at the center of the suction cup, so that the fire is lit around the area where the suction cup will be placed, to prevent the body of the patient from being burned.
And then place it on the limb of the patient, and let it be on the wick as we have said. When we have the suction cups and do not need to hold the wick, and let the vapor settle over that wick, the suction cup will soon dissolve.
And then heat the iron according to its manner, and repeat it if you need to do so.
In the case of ventosa (cupping) used for pleurisy, it is applied with water, in which there is no transverse or longitudinal scar, and it is not applied unless it is filled with water, and is placed on the limb only temporarily.
And this is the form of it: And this cupping device, the larger it is, the better, because it can receive a greater quantity of water.
Chapter 74.
Sanguissuguas are not administered on larger members but on the members where it is impossible to place cups due to their small size, such as the palate and gums similar to them; or on a member stripped of flesh, such as the nose and ears similar to them.
And the quality of using those that you have found sanguissuguas in two-boiled waters purified.
And it is advisable to let them lie in warm water until they are relaxed, and that no cause of inflammation arise in their belly; and it is advisable to purge the body at the beginning with venesection and fomentations; and it is advisable to rub the limb of the patient until it becomes red; and it is advisable to place them over a cloth.
And when they are filled up and swollen.
And if possible, apply suction to the area with a venesection tube, which is more effective for recovery.
And if not possible, then wash the area with water mixed with wine and then apply warm water; and rub and squeeze it.
And if the flow of blood continues for a long time at the site of the incision in the veins, and if this is where it accumulates, then you insert a cloth soaked in cold water, and place another on top to prevent the fluid from leaking out.
And if the bleeding increases, then sprinkle vitriol trissat, or powders similar to those used for staunching blood, over it until the bleeding is stopped; or place cloths soaked in decoctions of fennel over the area and let them remain until the fennel adheres to the area, and the bleeding has stopped.
And dig, if necessary, an iteration of bloodletting, when it is possible to change those.
And if bloodletting is prohibited by suspension, then apply heat to the area where recent bleeding occurred or insert a needle into the areas that retain blood; and subsequently pause, waiting for any retained blood to dissipate.
And when you want them to subside, powder over them a little aloes triphala, or salt, or ashes, and apply it promptly.
Thus begin the procedures of the third part: restoration. This chapter is a necessity in the art of medicine; it deals with the restoration of fractures and dislocations in the bones.
Oh, son, know that both the learned doctors and the common folk, and those who for a time have not read the ancient texts or glanced at them even once, rely on this chapter.
And for this reason, this method of the scientists in our land is kept private; I have not forgotten it even after a long time; and I have not adopted what follows, but only through extensive reading of the ancient texts and study over my understanding, from which I extracted the science.
And direct my experience and study in the length of my life.
And I have already described in this chapter all that my science contains and about which my experience has passed; thus here I abridge it for you others and deliver it from long discussion; and I abbreviate it at the end of the abbreviation; and I show it at the end of declaration; and form it with forms of instruments that are administered there, as is done by addition of declaration, just as I have done in two previous chapters.
First Chapter.
Summary and collection of fractures of bones, from those for which a preliminary discussion is necessary before we begin the recall of fractured members and various aspects of each. Therefore, let us begin this chapter with the summary of the discourse; and those chapters which must be understood at the beginning are necessary for the artisan to consider and stand firm on the truth of those. It is you and those who are quick to know or learn this noble art from others.
And thus say that when accidents occur such as a fracture or dislocation or twist or setting, when you approach the beginning with a venesection or remove it, or both together, if no cause is prohibited, such as weakness of virtue, or it is to which it occurs by effusion, or old age in decrepitude, or is a time of intense heat, or of intense cold.
And thus it is content in food consisting of fresh herbs and meat of partridges and crabs; and we prohibit fatty meats and those filled with foods and all food that fills the veins. Within which you must be sure to guard against abscess, and if you fear effusion of matter in the member.
And then return the patient to its primary regimen according to the custom of which it is accustomed.
And thus, when the broken bone begins to be restored, then you must feed the patient with nutritious foods rich in both moisture and fat, which are viscous, such as foods made from cooked wheat in water, rice, eggs, fish, cow's stomachs, nuts, fresh meat, and similar fatty foods. And with this regimen, coagulation of the fracture is facilitated slightly and more effectively.
And be aware that the bones crack in those men who are in their prime and in the decrepit, it is not possible that they be continuous and consolidated according to their nature due to the drying of their limbs.
Moreover, however, nature adjusts and ameliorates over the broken bone from any part due to a cause similar to glue in which it thickens and adheres, conglutinating and joining together, bringing about the end of strength and firmness, thus like fire at the beginning, wherein no cause prevents it from its works.
And for this reason, it is necessary to restrict the diet of the patient, a diet in which there is gravity, viscosity, and thickness, as we have said.
And be aware that the species of fracture are diverse according to the diversity of the limbs, for a fracture of the bone of the thigh is different from the fracture of the skull bone; and the fracture of the foot bone is different from the fracture of the arm bone; and similarly all other limbs are different among themselves.
And I renew my memory of all species of fracture, expounded in their separate chapter distinct from the others.
A greater diversity of fractures within themselves. And the species of fracture in bones are diversified; for some fractures occur arcuately or where they strike at the bone's surface; and sometimes fractures occur according to the length of the bone: such as those of the diastasis, astylar, and addition and non-addition, just as when preparing to write a document, there is a fracture by cut and disruption in the head, and a small fissure-like fracture.
And for each species there is a specific or torment in restoration, according to the memory of it, which will be remembered separately in its places.
Sign of fracture of the bone. And for this, a bone fracture is known: it is the distortion of the bone, and the prominence and appearance of that part when touched by your hand.
And therefore, when there is neither apparent distortion nor pain, you should test by touching the bone with some movement; if the patient does not experience great pain, then this is not a fracture.
It is possible that it is a distortion or small crack. Therefore, feel the area with your hand and apply pressure uniformly; pause over the place where you observe a remembrance of the medicine at approximately that moment which corresponds to the location; and then it will be straightened by subtle constriction.
And perceive that the area when it is curved and does not split into two or more parts as accidents do not occur in it, such as all parts of its composition being inflamed; therefore, you should start your correction from this point, having an abscess form at this place with a cautery.
And if an abscess occurs in him, then leave that for some days until the abscess ceases; and then equalize it according to any way you can of levitation and ingenuity.
And know that the restoration and ligation of it is lighter than the operation in which you intervene.
And then strengthen it according to the memory of what will come next.
More if in the bone you find it necessary, then for the extension of this broken limb into two parts, if it is the hand or the foot; or with your hand if the limb is small; or with two cords or one cord and your hand.
And place your position such that you level the limb according to its natural figure, while the parts of the broken limb are extended, then force yourself to return those additions with ingenuity and according to any way you can in their places.
And guard yourself according to your strength so that no pain or injury occurs to the patient due to your operation; and force yourself according to your power to apply one bone to its companion bone according to their best forms.
And carefully in that profitable hour touch with your hand there, and if you see any other cause different, correct it and equalize it by the quantity of your virtue.
And avoid excessive extension and compression, as foolish doctors sometimes cause an abscess through their procedures by these means, or cause contraction in the limb, as we have seen through their practices.
The quality of the fracture of the limb treated is such as I describe; that you may know that the limbs broken are diverse in their smallness and in their largeness and in the form of those.
And of those that are small like the arm and the thigh and resemble those, see that the wrapping is of fine soft cloth.
And of those that are large like the thigh or the chest, see that in those there be a wrapping tight and firm, for the tight binding connects the large and strong member from all sides at the fracture equally, ensuring no blemish enters.
And then begin, after your first application of bandage, gently tie it conveniently over the place of that fracture with three or four wrappings according to which limb needs it; and hold your hand tightly on the tying.
And then place it at the uppermost part of the location of the fracture, and hold firmly so that your binding is secure at the site of the fracture. And then slightly extend the bandage around the fracture area, gradually soften the tension little by little, while you take off part of it from that place.
And then take another bandage and wrap the other part around the fracture area, gradually aligning the bandages to the part of the fracture; and let the fracture be in the tension of the wrapping while you operate on the tension of the wrapping and in softening it as we said in the first wrapping above.
And then place the stops or cloth bandage on which the tortuosity of the fracture is equalized, if there is any tortuosity; otherwise, do not pause at all.
And then place it over the other bandage, and gradually equalize on these wraps, which should be properly made as soon as possible, if there is no swelling or abscess in that area. Otherwise, place it over what is the abscess there and what causes the swelling; leave that for a few days; then strengthen the stellate bandages.
And let the stays of the splint for the left side be firm or made of wood; or of palm ribs; and let the width of each stay be according to this form and this figure:
However, ensure that the bandage placed over the fracture is thicker and a little longer than the other bandages, and the length of the splint according to what is read about the member in magnitude and minuteness; and further strengthen around the splints with another bandage according to your first stricture; and further apply a layer of flax decently according to what we have said about the stricture, and it should be your stricture most at the place of the fracture, and the more it is stretched from the fracture, the less the stricture.
And ensure that the threads are medium in thickness and fineness, and should be of silk; if the threads are thick, as I have seen in some operations where they used threads of rope for their bandages, it is a great error when the stricture is not equal.
And such thin threads are not convenient, for you will not be able to apply the stricture with them where you want, and it must not be less than one digit between splint and splint.
And if the patient is injured at the extremities of the vessels near the site of constriction in the areas affected, then place those of stops of leather or dyed wool between them so that they do not cause injury.
Some fractures are from a blow, and accidents causing disruption in the chain, and you will find them remembered in that at the Capitol according to their singularity.
And know that for any broken limb, it is not straightened with braces on the first day; this cause is that the limb, when large, cannot be held still with braces but requires several days or seven or more, according to your safety of the onset of abscess.
And this is the method of plasters with which the Ancients restored, which are applied over fractures, dislocations, and twists.
Method of plastering for the opening of restoration for fractures, suitable for complex cases and especially for women and children, which is made from powder of millstone, the marrow of the flour that hangs from the movement of the mill in its walls.
And you must apply it thusly, but sift that white powder of wheat, and place the application not too thick nor too thin; then proceed with that.
Another method of plastering for fractures, dislocations, and sprains: take a recipe of asafetida, of lapdanum, of acacia, of garlic, and myrrh, which are razed from salvager mint, of all use 10 drachms; of frankincense use 5 drachms; of alcohol use 20 drachms; all be sifted and sieved and then mixed with alcohol water or with wheat flour if the wound is superficial; then apply this plaster, which is of good composition, to restore lightly broken bones, and you confer upon it a mixture suitable for men.
Another method of plaster for which you must apply to fractures and sprains: take myrrh and 10 drachms of white wormwood; of frankincense, 5 drachms; of acacia, 6 drachms; of Armenian bark, 20 drachms.
All be ground in a mortar with the contrary ingredient, then sieved, and compounded with water or wheat flour and administered.
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.
Mais in this plaster there is no virtue of restoration, of abscess cautery and expel pains properly.
Another way of plaster to restore sprains: take leaves of fig tree and leaves of wild poppy; mix them all and make a plaster from them.
Method of a shortened plaster to administer for the restoration of bone fracture and when you want resolution of abscess: mix root of hyssop, chamomile, and flowers of violets, flour of rye, all in equal parts; make them into a paste with wine, if the member is not scalded.
But if it is scalded, then moisten that with water of fennel or with water and use it.
Another stronger method of plaster for resolution that is better than the first, when you encounter a persistent abscess, to restore the limb: mix root of hyssop, seed of flax, pomegranate rind, sweet marigold, clover, majoram, flowers of violet, chamomile, all in equal parts and equal; make them into a paste with water of oak, or with two waters, or with wine, according to the quality of the limb and the color of it.
May Hippocrates not say in his book that it should be placed on the member soaked you must perform the restoration of it instead a cauterization made of wax and oil and no other cause; and recommend that it be mixed between coarseness and subtlety.
May Galen see that it should be placed on the member broken you must perform the restoration of it and the causes in which there is drying due to low quality heat such as myrrh, resin, and similar to those causes we have recommended.
Method of poultice that comforts injury and pain: mix equal parts of cypress, bark of a cut man or hazel branch, and salt; crush and sieve them, then make the poultice.
May the quantity according to which one should grind the paste and then disintegrate it be that you consider whether pain nor swelling has occurred and whether the bone is broken, does not move from its place, then do not dissolve it for many days. And if pain severe or swelling or inflammation occurs at the site, then you should apply or dissolve that part in the hour, and cover it with the poultice.
And take a cloth and a sponge soaked in wet mule urine, immerse that in clear water, and with that wash the area until that application and pain are subdued; then place the member to rest for an hour; afterwards lay over it the submerged wool saturated in vinegar or rubbed oil, cover it overnight until you are sure of the abscess, and let the inflammation of the member subside, and alleviate the pain of it.
And then apply that subtle stricture little by little and do not strengthen your original constriction, but keep it subtle until it is healed.
And if you see that the abscess and the redness and the pain and the inflammation and all the accidents are already subsided, and there is no need for application and stricture, then proceed to apply it as you did at the beginning equally.
And if no cause occurs in the member of those we have said, then do not remove it but keep it for three to four days or five to seven; sometimes all this is left for twenty days according to how it appears by the sloughing of the member, as we have said, until the fracture adheres and settles into the coagulation of the flesh over it.
And then adjust it more tightly than in your first binding, and adjust it according to the swelling of the patient's abdomen, as the recollection of it precedes.
And if you see the place of the fracture already dried and exhausted more than it should, then perceive that nutrition is prohibited from reaching there; therefore, soak that area with water of honey for a full day that you would use for that; and let this be done over three days; and loosen the binding a little, and by this operation bring the nutrition to the member, and it will be healed lightly.
And what the fracture restorers do another time when it is not restored to its original state, according to its condition, and is restored according to tortuosity, is an error in their operation, and a great fear. If they were right about this, they would enlarge the Ancients' works on their books and have done so with this work.
And I have not seen them do this, so it is more reasonable that they do not do it.
When a fracture occurs in the head.
The types of fractures are motas, and their figures are diverse, and the causes are distinct. For some fractures, they are caused by the impact of force, which breaks the bone completely through the skin, leaving the bone exposed, just as one would break a stick, and for this reason, this type is named ascial; or the force incides on a part of the bone, cutting the flesh but not passing through to the other side; and this type of fracture is named levatio absoluta.
And the swelling of these two types of fractures is great or small, and for a friction fracture; its cause is a blow by a heavy object or fall on a hard surface, resembling these.
And this fracture is penetrating, nearing the periosteum which covers the bone; or it is in the surface of the bone, and the swelling of these two fractures is great or small.
And for a fracture, the bone is weakened in itsç»†å°çš„å¯†åº¦ï¼Œå› æ­¤è¿™ç§ç±»åž‹çš„éª¨æŠ˜è¢«ç§°ä¸ºæ¯›ç»†ç®¡éª¨æŠ˜ã€‚
And it is a fracture that is caused by impact or percussion of the foot, resembling which causes some layer of the bone to enter the inner parts, and is formed in the concave location as happens when you percuss an anvil and its inner part enters.
And it is mostly caused in the bodies of humid bones, such as those of children.
And to all these species of closed fractures, they are painful as if by separate wounds. And I will return to remind you of all this in its place.
And we know all these species of fracture through detection by their appearance and through inquiry about the torn and damaged flesh that is upon them.
And the capillary species is known because it is discovered on the bone, is abraded, and limits along its torn edge, where the fracture appears black.
More in the cure of fractures consider the beginning of the patient's condition, and if you observe through these accidents what they manifest as signs of fear, such as vomiting of bile, extension, loss of understanding, hoarseness, fainting, acute fever, swelling of the extremities, and heat of those areas, and symptoms similar to them in more serious conditions, then you should doubt that it will not be cured.
And if you encounter accidents not common, then hope for healing, when you begin the cure of it.
And the cause is that if the patient has come to you at the beginning of the injury as injured and this is in the days of winter, then consider that you study in the bone on the following fourteenth day according to all disposition.
And if it is in the days of summer, then consider that you cut the bone on the seventh day, having that which has been left of the bone be corrupted by the sinewy tissue, and that accidents occur which we have recounted.
And if the fracture has already reached the sinewy tissue covering the marrow, and is broken into many pieces and rubbed, then consider that you incise the fractured part and rub it, according to what I have recounted to you.
And when you reason about the thigh of the injured patient, expose over the bone according to custom and your method as possible based on the figure of the injury, and let it be light over the thigh.
And if it happens to you to detect the bone, flow of blood or abscess caut, then you apply yourself to it with what is suitable, and you fill the area with infused cloths in wine and rubbed oil, and make the wound rest until the abscess is sedated, and you are sure of the flow of blood; and then begin at the circuit of the bone and in its excision.
And this is according to one of two ways of operation.
And one way is that you incise the bone with an incisor straight such, and this is its form: And then administer another incisor here, a little more lateral than the first; and this is its form:
And then administer more to the incisor more lateral than the second.
And make sure that you have the number of different incisors, some of which are more lateral than others; and some of them are shorter than the others and situated at the rear of their extremities, and be made of iron or steel.
And use their assistance in percussing over the incisions to prevent them from trembling and causing pain.
And if the bone is strong and hard, first drill in the circuit around it before you make incisions with the trephines, which you call shallow trephines.
And they are not called so, but only those that do not reach the end of the bone's thickness to where it is close, for which the trephine has a round edge or margin over that which leaves the sharp top agout like a small circle or a little circle, which you must not submerge and pass through the thickness of the bone.
And it is convenient that you use many of these trephines, each suitable for the thickness of each bone. While in all parts of the skull, the edge of which should be sharp, the length and shortness of quantity should be according to the thickness of this bone.
And this is the form of three kinds of trephines: The quality of drilling in the circuit of the broken bone is that you place the trephine on the bone and turn it with the tweezers until you know that the bone is already penetrated; then, move the trephine to another location, and pause where everything brings the quantity of the size of the ray or around that.
And then incise with a scalpel that which is between each tooth of the bone, and make that small incision subtle which you can do at the end of levitation, as we have said, during the removal of the bone, or by your hand, or by some other cause through certain instruments which you will have prepared for this, such as fine forceps.
And see that you take all precautions so that the scalpel does not touch any part of the joint.
And so, after you have circled the bone and perforated it, and if it is continuous with the joint, you will extract that part. See that you rasp and smooth it out to match the roughness of the bone using another instrument similar to a scalpel, but ensure that it is finer and more delicate than other scalpels.
And if any small part of the bones is removed and smoothed, then take that with ease using the instruments you have; then cure the wound with lint and ointments as we have said.
And another way of operation is light, far from fear, which Diyssec Gualia and the louse by great labor; this is the manner of it: at the beginning, you must begin to uncover the part of the bone in which the fracture is most violent and most evident; when you have uncovered that part and have placed the other hand on the extremity of this incisor instrument of which this is the form:
And that the lens-shaped part is lion and you do not incise any cause, and the acute part is divided into two halves longitudinally, as you see; that the lens-shaped part be adjusted to the cusp facing the acute part towards the bone.
And then strike on the incisor at one small measure between cutting through the entire bone with ease as it is turned, and you be sure of the panniculus that no accident occurs in the manner you fear; and if the medicant14 was the most foolish of all men and the most ignorant of them; certainly, and if he were sleeping.
When some cause breaks the bone of the tendon at certain places of the bone, it will cut that one from the end of the cutters, and release that one with ease, for it is released from its harm and fear.
And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the tendon, and what is severed or left from the bone is its surface, which remains rough and fine irregularities, then you must remove that roughness and eliminate those fine irregularities with sharp instruments that you have prepared in various quantities so that you can apply them most conveniently to all places of the bone fracture and the shape of the bone.
And you must apply the sharpness of the instruments in proportion to which you shave the bone at its beginning, and then use increasingly finer parts of it, and do not cease doing this continuously until you reach administering the thick part and the fine part of all.
In any other small capillary fractures or fine fractures, you must administer care according to what you have done for correction of them.
And it is because they are not accustomed to treating all those who have studied that art. And place this on what we have written about in great fractures.
And if the bandage is cut when you remove the bone, then take a piece of cloth according to the size of the wound, and immerse that in olive oil, and place it over the opening of the wound; and then take another piece of folded or triple-folded cloth and immerse it in wine and olive oil, and place it over the first cloth, and do this gently enough so as not to disturb the dressing; and then administer linseed on top, and do not press that until its quantity equals that of the wound.
And leave it to this treatment for one day or two until you are sure of the abscess; and then remove that, and then administer medicines in which excessive dryness is superfluous, such as linseed and wheat flour, and powder of thyme and myrtle, and similar.
And you make these medicines into powder that is sprinkled on the wound; and generally, administer to it all medicine of a property that cleanses and does not irritate.
And guard according to your virtue that the wound in your cure be clean; and do not let it become surdy of ointment or other; nor leave virulence in it; for when adjusted over the linen of the brain, corrupt that and spoil that, and happen to the patient about this evil malice nearby.
And it happens in the scabb of the head, as from it the bone is changed and especially when the cure of it is neglected, and blackness appears on the surface of it; and therefore consider when it happens to the patient the accidents that we have said, know that it is pernicious indeed.
And if no blackness occurs but from the medicine that is applied above, and is by virtue of that medicine that causes that blackness, then take part of honey and part of rubbed oil in equal parts, mix those lines on a cloth, and place it over the scabb; and cure it with the spices of cure as they are convenient until it is healed.
Capitol iii.
For the restoration of the nose when it is broken.
Know that it is not the nose itself that is broken, but two parts together with some additional tissue above, or one of those several layers, since in the nose there are two bones; the part you leave behind is cartilaginous and is not broken, so do not harm it, but merely rub, smooth, and curve it.
But if one of the two parts is broken, then you must introduce the small piece into the nasal cavity, and equalize that fracture inside according to your directive indication, and outside, between the thumb and forefinger, so that the nose returns to its natural shape. And do this for you with facilitation, and guard that the patient does not suffer from your operation on the ill foot.
And if the fracture is in the upper part of the nose, and you cannot reach it, then you must equalize it at the end of the bone where there is a small swelling.
And if the fracture is in two parts, then you make it appear as such.
And by application you restore him on the first day of the fracture, if possible; otherwise, as soon as the seventh or tenth day, you provide him rest from the abscess with a cautery.
And then insert into the extremity of the nose a mecha of linen cloth, if the fracture is in one part, or two cloths, if the fracture is in two parts, and let the cloth swell to such a quantity that it fills the nostril.
And some of the ancient restorers say that the cloths should be soaked in butter, and changed throughout the day. But I do not see this practiced; instead, they use a mecha soaked in honey comfit powder. And you leave the cloth until the bone is set and the cartilage becomes hardened.
And sometimes insert into the nose instead of a cloth, a pad wrapped in linen cloth; and do this if the nasal fracture is severe and the patient is not prohibited from breathing.
And this cause is not necessary for you; and if you wish, do this, and if you wish, use cloths.
And if another abscess occurs, cauterize it, apply a plaster on the nose with wax or cloth moistened in vinegar and olive oil, or with a pustulum.
And if no abscess occurs, when you need to plaster that area externally with sesame seed flour and fenugreek powder mixed in honey; then place your hand over the site, and do not touch the nose for any cause.
And if the nose bones are broken by a small fracture or have been set, you should split those areas, and extract them with instruments suitable for those parts; then, at the site of the split, treat that area with something that heals and consolidates, and apply plasters as appropriate.
And if a plague occurs inside the nose, you should treat that with waters and administer lead tubes until it is completely healed.
Chapter IV.
On the restoration of the jaw when broken.
When the jaw is broken and the fracture is not displaced, consider whether the fracture is only superficial, and not broken into two parts but bent inward, in which case its perception is slight.
And thus, if the fracture is on the right side, you should insert your left hand index finger into the mouth of the patient; and similarly, if the fracture is on the left jaw, then insert the said index finger of your right hand; and push the swelling of the fracture inward with ease to the parts outward, with your other hand from the part outward of the bone; do this properly as much as that.
And if the fracture of the jaw is already separated into two parts, then you should administer extension to both parts according to the straight line within which their alignment is possible.
And if you encounter the loosening of teeth with disruption, then strengthen those of which you expect that they will break on the edge of gold or silver or lead; and place a cautery over the broken jaw, and place another over the doubled cloth, and place one over the large star-shaped stake decently made, or a single piece equal to the length of the jaw; and place this above as it is convenient for your ligature and application, so long as it is not destroyed.
And command the patient to take rest and tranquility, and stop his eating for lion's share of his services.
And if you estimate that the figure has already been altered in any way, then on the seventh day you should cut it and remove it; and then correct what has already been altered in it and plaster it with powder of molybdenum, or with chalk of alum, or with flour of cinammon, after which you have stayed the cerot of it, and place woolen cloth over the plaster.
And then, when the plaster is applied and adjusted to it, and the position of the bone is not altered, leave it as it is, without removing it until the fracture is healed and strong; for this fracture is strengthened in three weeks.
And if another time an abscess occurs, then administer what we have said previously in the treatment of it until it is healed and drained.
And if the fracture is displaced, then consider whether it is a bad separation of the bone or displacement, and then carefully examine those displacements as you would in the removal of those from the muscles.
And if the wounds are wide, then enlarge them by means of incision according to the quantity of your necessity.
And when you have completed those stages, and there is no need to ream them out, then enlarge the wounds if they are wide; otherwise, place one of the plasters that suit this over it and allow it to heal.
Chapter V.
On the restoration of the furcula when it is fractured.
When the clavicle is fractured, examine the wound carefully. The fracture can occur in one of three ways.
If it is fractured, or separated, or separated into two parts without undergoing stages, then its restoration is easy; if such stages occur in it, then its restoration is difficult; or if the fracture is within the wound.
And the operation when the fracture is within the wound is to have two assistants present, so that one holds the aid and guides the fractured clavicle, and the other extends the neck at that part.
And then adjust the fracture by the pins called intramedullary, so that the shape of it is made according to its nature, and not in a slight prominence or concavity.
And if you need more extension, when you place the patient's foot on a pad or wool, let it be the size according to your necessity; extend and elevate the fork and press the pad with your hand so that you adjust the fracture according to its nature.
And if you cannot pull the extremity of the fork to the parts outward, because it is stuck at the pin, when you can place the patient on their side with their neck supported, and place a cushion of moderate size on their muscle.
And the surgeon presses the muscle of the patient inward until the bone of the fork is elevated to its place, and then you correct the fracture and adjust it with the pins called.
But if you feel the threads of the fork and they are loose, when you can cut over those and remove those threads easily.
And if it is retained in the bone, then you skillfully incise it with one of the instruments you have prepared for this, after placing a clamp on the furca to stop the flow; and this instrument is made of wood or iron, and this is its form:
And it resembles a spoon, of which this is the concavity; and its width according to what you have needed from it, according to the size of the bone or its smallness.
But the length of it should be according to what is possible for the operation; that it have two ends thus as you see, and one end wide and the other narrow.
And if the disruption of the wound which you have incised when you have extracted the splinter from the bone is wide, and you are sure there is an abscessed hematoma, then you adjust the two edges of the wound with sutures.
And if the disruption is small, or you fear an abscessed hematoma, then you dress the wound with cloths and powders according to the amount of the incision of the wound.
And if an abscess occurs, then immerse a cloth in warm oil and vinegar, and place it over that area.
And always ensure that the straw does not touch the broken bone; and so make sure you check the patient daily, as when the liniment becomes softened or you see the straw already moistened, then you should adjust this and strengthen the healing.
And then place the patient's head on their pillow, and leave them to sleep in that position overnight with a small cushion; so that thereby the support of the affected side is elevated, and therefore the fracture of the furcula is raised to the elevation of the muscle; or the arm on the side is laid at the level of the furcula.
And do not remove the bandage unless there is an abscess or pus at the site, within twelve days.
And then renew the plaster if you see any change in its appearance, and adjust it to fit tightly and restore it, allowing the fracture of the furcula to coagulate and heal.
And it is strengthened and made more comfortable over the course of twenty-eight days, and in some cases, it is done in less than that time.
Chapter VI.
On the Restoration of Fractures of the Shoulder.
The blade of the spatula is broken at the affected side, and you should not break it further but only the edges.
And when the place is broken â€” and it is broken in the midst of the place â€” and cannot be known except by touch, then according to the figure of the fractured area prepare its treatment and reduce it according to the natural figure in every manner of skill which is at your disposal.
And then place on the area powder of ground alum of honeysuckle and stopped lily; and then place the powder of doubled cloth; and then place over the stick under the table a thin slice according to the quantity of the spoonful, or more by a little.
If you leave the stick concave in some part of the spoonful, then level that concavity with stopped lily, and then place the stick according to equality.
And then strengthen above with firm hand on the stringent and with the stick firmly in place so that it is not displaced from its location.
And consider the binding on each day; and every time that it becomes softened, rebind another time and strengthen and adjust the stick if it is displaced from its location.
And apply the badulaque over its side.
And the spatula is restored in xx days or in .xx five (or 25).
And when this number is completed, then you dissolve the bond, and know for sure that it belongs to the bones whose beginning was not feared nor their dissolution.
And if you proceed from the place of the bone to the joint, then put on the chain, and cut over it, and hold it, doing as we have said in the fracture of the scapula with an iron clamp if this happens here.
Chapter VII.
On the restoration of the fracture of the foot.
The foot sometimes breaks in the middle of its length; but its ends remain that they are callused and comminuted.
And the accidents when the foot breaks in its middle decline towards the internal parts, causing great pain, difficulty in walking, coughing, fever, and vomiting; these are declared within the cavity of the broken bone and are not hidden from sensation.
And the restoration is that he be resupined on his back, and a cushion placed between his shoulders; then press on his muscles, adjust his ribs against the spine, and proceed with subtlety in the operation and equilibrium in every way possible until the figure of the bone returns as it should.
And then place it on the plaster and sponge, and put it over the tablecloth of fine linen or cotton, similar in lightness, as you wrap that in cloth; then proceed with subtlety over that upon the broken bone so it is not muddled; and bind it around the back several times, and strengthen it with proper tension; and always consider the bandage at all times, and when it becomes softened, strengthen it.
And if necessity causes a discharge from that, you should incise or puncture it, or relieve the pain, or treat the abscess that occurs in that place. When you do so, remove that and eradicate the plaster, correcting what has occurred with methods of treatment; then reduce the plaster, if necessary, and adjust its tension until it is healed.
Capitol. viii.
For the restoration of the ribs when they are fractured.
Know that a fracture of the ribs occurs only in large areas where they join together; and from the ends of their parts in front, such collision does not cause any fracture but because they are cartilaginous. And the knowledge of this is not hidden from the feeling; you must inquire about it with your fingers.
And the restoration should be done by equalizing the fracture with your fingers according to the possible method, ensuring it is properly aligned as it heals, and then apply a plaster and strengthen the broken bone with a splint, if needed.
And if the fracture of the ribs is located towards the internal parts, then it causes severe and piercing pain, similar to the pain that occurs when something has punctured. For this reason, you apply aæ•·æ–™; and it results in difficulty breathing, coughing, and vomiting blood; and this is difficult to cure.
And already the Ancients were ingenious in that matter using joints.
And from them they say: Place the patient on foods that cause inflammation and swelling, so that the belly becomes swollen and extended, and the fracture is driven to the outward parts.
But let us consider this so that it is not a trivial cause for generating a carbuncle; and if it has already occurred, then help is needed for this.
And some of them said that it should be placed above the belly and near where it swells with strength; and this seems like a reasonable argument, but nonetheless, it is feared that the belly will draw the superfluities to that place due to its weakness.
And some of them said: Place the area under a cloth soaked in oil, and sprinkle powders between the ribs while it is filled, ensuring the poultice is even as you wrap it around according to its roundness; and treat the patient with dietary therapy and medicine.
And if the patient is greatly constrained by the malaise which he cannot bear, and the os punh (a kind of forceps) holds the veil with puncture teeth, fear for the patient, then cut over the place, uncover from the broken rib, and place ourselves over that instrument which conserves the ciphac, the memory of which is precedented, and incise the bone with ease, and extract that.
And when we adjust the two edges of the wound, if it is large, withç¼åˆ, we treat it with plasters until it heals.
And if an abscess occurs inside, then incise and insert powder in oil rubbed and place over the area, and treat the patient with what is suitable for the abscess inside.
And let it be wrapped in a cloth on which he sleeps, until it heals.
Capitol. ix.
On the restoration of fractures of the spine in the back and neck.
Some times when there is a fracture in the bones of the neck, then apply to them friction, similar to that for the vertebrae of the back. And when this happens to someone and you want to know if they will recover or not, then consider whether their pulses are already softened, numbed, and dead, unable to grow, extend, or strengthen. When you press on them with your fingers or prick them with a needle and they do not feel pain in those areas, you should know that they are not recovering, and in such cases, the condition is fatal.
And if you press on them and they feel pain in that area with your fingers or prick them, then you should know that the marrow of the bone is saved and that the disease will recover through healing.
And if you see in the vertebrae of the neck any similarity to this, and you want to know if they will recover or not, then consider the pulses in their feet.
And if you see that they are already softened, apply what happens to the pulses in their feet. When they lie on their back and have a desire for ventilation and evacuation according to their will, and sometimes are unable to turn over on their side and want to urinate but cannot, then you should know that it is fatal, and then do not trouble with the healing of them.
If no other cause occurs, the cause is better and lighter.
And the treatment for it is to perfuse with the sedation of the abscess caut that you place over the sacral spine or buttock, or with pieces of hot wool; place this over that area for several minutes each day until the abscess is sedated.
And then place one of the comforting and relaxing plasters, and warm it over that area; command the patient to take rest and be tranquil, and not to sleep on the part where he feels pain until he is healed.
And if it happens that you find the articulation of the socket damaged or any cause that has separated from it, then make sure to dry the area and keep the bone in place; then close the two edges of the wound,ç¼åˆå¦‚æžœä¼¤å£è¾ƒå¤§ï¼›ç„¶åŽç”¨ä¸€äº›è†è¯æ¶‚æŠ¹é‚£ä¸ªéƒ¨ä½ï¼Œç›´åˆ°å®ƒç—Šæ„ˆã€‚
And if the end of the thigh bone is broken, and it is the head of the femur, then you must insert your left thumb into the buttock, and align the broken bone with your other hand as much as possible for secondary reduction; then place a plaster and bandage over it if needed, and keep it warm.
And if you feel broken stages in it, then operate on that, and stop it, and cure the wound with a cure that is performed before it is healed.
Capitol.
For the restoration of health.
The bones of the ankle are broken, and if they break, then the fracture is simply communication at the extremities of those bones and they split lengthwise and incline towards the inner parts; and accidents occur in the patient pain at the site and puncture, and the leg is paralyzed when it is fractured.
And the restoration of the leg is that you place your hand over it while it is at the location of the fracture, which is the shape of the leg.
And if the fracture is only at the extremity of the leg, then you align that part according to how it appears to you by equilibrium and alignment so that it resembles its natural figure.
But if the fracture is in the length or already inclined towards the inner parts, then you apply pressure to the patient's abdomen while preparing for the restoration of that fracture. And when you have equalized that, place a plaster over it, and then place the wooden or copper rod, and firmly hold it over the spot without fearing puncture or removal of the rod.
And equalize the cavity so that what fills it enters where the stricture is according to equality, and command the patient to lie on his back or on his side.
But if an abscess comes to head, stop the extension of it and its restoration until the abscess is sedated. Then place over it what sedates it according to what was previously mentioned; then return to its restoration and strengthen it thusly.
And if there arise in the bone fractures or are comminuted, then treat them accordingly.
Capitol. xi.
Of the restoration of the fracture of the adjutrix.
Adjutori is that which is between the codice (thigh bone) between the head of the shoulder.
And if it is broken, the restoration of it is in one of two ways, of which one you will take as a bundle of large twigs according to this form:
And let two threads be at the two ends, and then suspend it from the elevated place.
And place the patient on a cushion; and then throw its broken arm onto the bundle so that it reaches the node of the bundle where the curvature of the bundle is attached.
And place it above that with some heavy weight, or the servant extend it to the parts left; and then the doctor apply pressure to the fracture with his hands at the same time, until the fracture returns according to its nature.
And the other way is that the patient be resuspended on its neck and hold the doctor's hand from the collar with a thread; and then command two servants that one of them holds what is above the fracture with his hands; and the other holds the rest of the patient; and each of them extend to their part.
And if you want the extension to be stronger, then strengthen over the fracture with one stick and over another place another stick, and each of the two ministers extend to their parts.
And if the fracture is close to the end of the muscle, then place the middle of the stick over the tendon and leave the other end at the fracture to hold it.
And similarly, if the fracture is close to the joint, then place the stick at that location and over the joint.
Equalize that with the other side and well perform the operation. And when it is equalized according to what fits and is applied correctly, then strengthen it if no abscess occurs.
But if an abscess does occur, then leave the incision open for five days, and place a bandage soaked in vinegar and rubbed with oil over it until the abscess subsides, and then strengthen it.
And the way to strengthen it is to place a plaster over the fracture, and then wrap a linen bandage around the plaster; and adjust the arm on this support, and place your hand open over its muscle.
And place the cloth strongly over the helper's arm so that the arm is in a stable position, without prohibiting anything due to the broken bone.
And then use splints.
And you should place that splint over the fracture which is longer and stronger than the other splints; and place the width of each splint according to the break, with the length of the splints according to the break plus three fingers in total.
And then strengthen the splints at the joint which I mentioned at the beginning of this chapter.
And make the joint over the location of the fracture stronger. And when the fracture is longer, make the joint smaller.
And so, if you adjust the position of the splints and the joint as we have said when restoring the limb to its position, then do so.
And if you fear an abscess, cauterize it, then leave the joint and splints in place as we have said.
And for three days consider the ligament in all parts to prevent accident or inflammation at the site; or prohibit food from reaching the member by disposition of excess stricture; and therefore correct all this according to what we have said.
And if you are confident that no cause of this will occur, then do not loosen the ligature for at least three days or more.
And let the patient's thighs be on their back, and their hands on the stomach.
And place your hand on a support cloth filled with wool evenly, and consider at all times of the night or day that the figure of the broken limb is not distorted, or that the ligament is softened, therefore correct this entirely with your virtue.
And restrict the diet of the patient according to the order we have mentioned before, ensuring that the diet is subtle at the beginning until it begins to strengthen; then gradually thicken the food.
Four days after the application of the support and belt, they are usually strengthened for four days; then loosen them and apply a bath, and treat with ointments that correct this.
And if the fracture has been allowed to irritate, then you do not remove the bandage or the straps for one or two months.
Chapter XII.
On the restoration of fractures of the arm.
The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the ulna and the radius; of which, the former is small, and is that known as the little bone, and the latter is large and is that which is placed outside the small one.
And if the larger bone is broken alone, or the smaller one, and if they are both broken together.
And when the smaller bone is broken above, then the restoration of it is easier, and the healing of it is more rapid.
And when the larger bone is broken, the fracture is severe, and the healing is difficult.
And worse still is when both bones are broken together.
So if the broken bone is the small toe, then it is convenient for the doctor to restore its continuity with a slight extension until it is properly set.
But if the large bone is what is broken, then it is necessary to apply more extension.
And if both bones are broken together, then you must apply the traction more forcefully.
And you must place your hand to facilitate the restoration and extension of the bone over a cushion, with the palm of the hand above, more so than the others, and the auricular finger below the other fingers, and the patient's foot on a inclined board.
And place a cushion in front of the patient in an upright position, so that the patient's foot does not further strain.
And then the minister extend the arm above with his hand or a towel, and another minister extend it below similarly.
And then the doctor equalizes the bone within that which he reduces according to the best form that he can.
And if in the fracture of the bone there are symptoms, then you must reduce the whole piece to its place with your virtue.
And if there appears a separate symptom that the bone is out of alignment and it is not to your satisfaction in the restoration of it, then you set it again according to the manner we have said above.
But if the fracture is compound, I have already treated that in a separate chapter, and therefore take the treatment of that.
And if an abscess occurs at the beginning of your restoration, then you apply a cloth made of cotton soaked in olive oil and white wax, making it moderate in thickness. Place the cloth tightly over that area with a fine string to keep the abscess from expanding; then remove the wax and apply a prepared plaster made from linseed powder mixed with honey; and place a bandage over it securely. Ensure that the bandage is placed on that fracture well aside and stronger.
And you shall know that the number of ribs in the arm I saw in the major dispositions, or rather in a fracture in one bone or two bones together.
And then place your compression firmly on the location of the fracture more strongly and vehemently. When the compression is applied to the parts above or below the fracture, continue it a little more intensely according to how the memory of it is recalled at the beginning of the chapter.
And the cloths that you wrap around the fracture should be moistened cloths, neither hard nor rough. The fat of the pig which is strengthened should be a mixture between fine and coarse, as we have recommended.
And consider the limb and joint for several days. And if any cause arises for which correction is necessary, as you would previously have determined for the limb, then immerse the limb in water until that condition ceases.
And let the limb not be restrained until it rests, and then remove the compression.
And if the stricture is already softened and the bone has been rubbed and appears like those, then correct all this with your virtue.
And consider more if the nourishment is prohibited from reaching the member due to excessive stricture, for then you must soften that a little and leave it for some days until nutrition flows to that, and then strengthen it.
And if to the patient none of the causes we have mentioned occur, then it is not necessary for it to be let loose within about ten days or around those.
And place the patient's hand by its virtue of movement agitation, and make it sleep on its back.
And know that this fracture is restored in thirty days or in forty-two days, or more fully in twenty-eight days, and all this depends on the complexity and the disposition of the virtue.
Capitol. xiii.
On the restoration of fractures of the wrist and fingers.
Know that at the wrist of the hand and the joints of the fingers there may be a fracture, and do not harm them but rub with visible moles.
And when there is a fracture or dislocation of the hand, make sure the patient remains lying down and in front of the limb for about an hour according to equality, and then place your hand over the extended one.
And then extend the broken bones and the doctor align those between which good reduction has occurred.
And then apply plaster and cotton, if no abscess develops use a cauterization; then place a candle above according to the size of the area, and you have already wrapped that in linen.
More so if the tear is within the palm, then make a pad of linen, and command the patient to hold that with their torn palm; then tightly bind it with long linen.
And let the candle be placed on linen upon which the cure is applied, so that the cure is pressed against the palm; then hold that tightly as needed.
If the fracture is at the outer parts, then place another piece of the part above the stone and another piece from the part on your palm, so that your hand is open and straight; then place the constriction in this manner, as you turn your hand like a wheel between your fingers with grains.
If a fracture occurs in one of the bones of the fingers, then if it is the base of the finger, equalize it according to what you can see and then strengthen it on the palm. If you wish, place a small piece straight on it so that the fracture is elevated and not weakened.
If the fracture is in the other fingers, as in the middle finger, or the index, or the ring, or the little finger, then equalize and ligate it on the finger where that bone is; or ligate all of them according to their continuity, which is better; or place a small piece over it, as we said for the base of the finger.
And consider, in your restoration, and especially that, the placement of cautery marks and oppositesâ€”during your operationâ€”according to what you see when a cause from those occurs, as indicated by the repeated narration of it.
Chapter XIV.
For the restoration of fracture of the hip bone.
The hip bone fractured is felt as pain, which is localized in front and behind.
And the restoration is done by strengthening the ligaments over the fracture and another ligament below the fracture, with the patient lying on their belly and facing down.
And then the surgeon extends the ligament to its proper place according to the quality of the fracture, when it is in the middle of the bone.
But if it is close to the groove of the hip, then the ligament is extended to the hollow below the pelvis, so that the extension fits there, and another ligament below the fracture.
And similarly, if the fracture is close to the hollow, then the ligament is attached to the hollow, and the extension is to the parts below.
And then the doctor equalizes the bone by bringing his hands close to where you have reduced it according to the natural form; the bone is joined by good union. Then apply a plaster and bandage, so as not to cause an abscess in the limb. But if an abscess does occur, then you let it be for some days until the abscess is ready to be cauterized, and then return to your treatment.
The bandaging should be done as follows: first, wrap a hard bandage around the fracture, fold it two or three times, and secure it to remove any excess; then wrap the bandage until it reaches the heel and the back of the thigh.
And insert a long piece of flax between the thigh and the upper part of the leg where you left the divisions, ensuring that the ends of the flax extend well beyond both parts, then wrap this area with the bandage.
And place the splint on the thigh at the location of the fracture, and place a stick over the bone of the leg.
And then fill the space between the waist and the thigh with several cloths, so that the constriction is constricted.
And then start the strong constriction around the middle over the place of the fracture with three or four layers, and the more you move away from the site of the fracture, your constriction should be smaller and lighter and softer.
And then extend the two ends of the bandage to the parts where it will reach the foot cavity, and tighten both ends of the straps on the other side so that the plaster does not shift from its place.
And then place the constriction over it so that it does not affect the limb with corrosion, abscess, or inflammation; and if any of these conditions occur, treat it accordingly, and correct what has happened as soon as possible, according to what we have said previously.
More so if there is a bad fracture of the bone where it is placed, then you must align that as much as possible; and if not, treat it and let it set, and cure what preceded the recall before it is healed.
And sometimes this fracture of the pelvis is strengthened by this method or that which fits to it straps, as we said in the assistant and on the arm.
But more importantly in the restoration in such a manner made no accident occurs to the patient claudication; and if it is restored alone, or that the other leg is applied, then it is necessary for that one to claudicate which is at the moment.
And know that the pelvis is strengthened in four days or a few more days or a few more months, and all this is according to the diversity of the complexities and other dispositions.
Capitol.xv.
On the restoration of the fracture of the tibia.
Know that the fracture of the tibia occurs rarely, but often it takes several weeks to heal.
But if a fracture does occur, it is often not a complete break but a crack or a tear in its parts, and this is either a single crack or several cracks, and on top of that, it is always accompanied by pain.
And the restoration of it is attempted to be equalized as much as broken parts are laid between the fingers and then added and joined according to what is possible by equilibrium, ease, and construction.
And then place the plaster and cover over that round stencil, if you need it; strengthen above at the structure to what is convenient.
And then consider all the disposotions which we have recommended in other fractures, thus as for abscess caut and appearance to those that oppose themselves to every accident at what is convenient until it is healed.
Chapter XVI.
On the restoration of the fracture of the ilium.
Know that in the ilium there are two bones, of which one is thick and is named the ilium; the other is thin and is named the flail.
And accidents to the species of fracture that occur in both bones of the arm, and for this reason, the restoration of it is done as equally as the restoration of the arm, and its operation is one.
And if you break two bones together, the fracture will be treated in all parts.
And if the finer bone is broken, the fracture will be treated from all parts in front.
And if the thicker bone is broken, you find the fracture, and this is one of those conditions that are not within your control.
And then administer extension, reduction, and ligature of the tendons according to this method.
But more importantly, if the fracture of the bone is badly done with visible marks, let the extension be less and lighter, and aid it with your virtue.
And in the bone, if there is any cause for operation on the arm, and when you equalize the stars and complete your entire surgical operation, then take pieces of pine wood which are placed under the causes that are held in the soles, and make them thus from palm branches; select those with little grain, not too thick, and let their length be according to the length of the bone, and place them inside the thicker part.
And then wrap each one in two cloths according to the length of it, and place one over the middle of the leg on one side and the other over the other side, and they should be below at the base of the foot.
And then place the two stakes in three locations of both extremities and the middle location, for at this structure the leg is prohibited from leaning to the right or left side, and it should be in good position.
And already a brass rod has been placed according to the length of the leg; and place the leg so that it maintains its movement.
And especially ensure that you do this in fractures, for when there is a fracture, it is properly called.
And then consider the leg on each day and study it from your previous observations, and you should guard it against an abscess or inflammation or other similar causes; and whenever any of these causes occur, then pause treatment until it is healed.
Capitol XVII.
Of the fracture of the ankle and the bones of the foot and toes.
Fracture does not occur in the ankle itself; more often fractures of the foot bones do occur; and fractures of the toes of the foot rarely occur, and do not fracture but are rubbed in their proper place.
And if fractures of the foot bones do occur and sometimes those bones are elevated over each other, then place the patient's foot on prepared earth in this manner.
Then place the other foot on what is elevated from those bones, and compress, press, and align those bones back into their places.
Then apply a plaster and set a small table above it, on which place two pillows.
Then strongly bind the foot with a structure in proper order, since you have already wrapped that area with cloths and other causes of which you are aware.
And when three or four days have passed, then you untie the bandage, for you will find that the bones are equalized, or are broken, or are dislocated, and the operation in those cases is as you know.
And if some are said to be broken, then restore those, and equalize them as I and recounted to you in the restoration of the fingers of the hand. And then place the broken finger straight according to the length of the finger, and slightly to one side. Then lay the skin on this table which you have recounted to me, and tighten that bandage properly.
And if what is broken of the bones are two or three or more, then you place each broken bone straight according to its quantity wrapped in a linen cloth, and tighten the table under the base of the foot, and standing on one of the corners of the table, make a hole in the sole of the foot so that it has good retention.
And it is convenient for you not to forget that you should not consider all the causes which we have told you in the other fractures of the accidents that we have discussed; and pause thee at every occurrence as it comes.
Chapter XVIII.
On the fracture of the thigh bone and the patella and the groin of a man.
When the thigh bone is fractured, make that incision in a sloping manner, and slightly incline it towards the outer side, and keep it behind.
And the midwife fills the fracture with cotton, and it should be done in the thigh as desired; and the woman is anesthetized, and her leg is slowly elevated little by little, for all this must be done within the outer part of the thigh as desired and the fractured bone returns.
And place powders on the leg, and when she wants to urinate, moisten the cotton to facilitate it; then let her urinate, return to her original position, and restore it according to the manner in which you initially placed it, and finally return to her first powder.
And do this for seven days or until it is restored.
And if you wish, take a bladder of sheep and strengthen it; place a hollow reed on the patient's trunk; insert the entire bladder into the wound, then blow through the reed with virtue until the bladder inflates inside the wound, for the fracture returns.
And it should be filled with pus and left for some days as we have recommended, until it is healed.
And when the bone of the pelvis of a man or woman is fractured, then administer in the restoration and reduction of it what we have recommended for the bone of the hip.
And what is right is not hidden in these nearby fractures that occur rarely, especially to those who have some study and use and understand this my free will; for that fracture means to you through the major disposals via rightful in the restoration and in the constriction of it, and therefore understand well.
In the case of the thigh bone of a man when it is fractured, protect it from infection, and insert the thigh into it; then place your hand over the wound wrapped in cloth, wrap it well, and leave it for three days or about that time, until it is healed.
Chapter XIX.
For the restoration of bone fractures when they are displaced.
It is convenient to apply this treatment to those who have suffered a displaced fracture, especially if the bone is large, such as the femur or tibia, or similar. You should bind and leech that area frequently, provided that the conditions for leeching are favorable as we have mentioned above.
And if the displacement exudes pus, then apply binding to retain it and attempt to sprinkle saffron on the wound, unless another cause is present.
And immediately begin to restore the fracture on that first day, and do not delay this if an abscess does not occur.
But if an abscess does occur, carefully wait until the ninth day, when the abscess is ripe, before resuming the restoration of the fracture. Do not approach it on the seventh and tenth days, for then you will likely cause harmful accidents.
But if the bone is broken and protrudes outside the knee joint, then you must pierce it to reduce it and equalize it with your hands with ease and little extension.
But if the extension is not at your prepared hand and cannot be equalized with your hands, then you must reduce it with this instrument; and this instrument is made of iron, its length being seven or eight inches and its width according to the quantity of the wound; and for this, the doctor must take three or four of them according to the quantity needed in the cure for all kinds of fracture.
And it should be round, and of small thickness so that it does not bend during the operation.
And it should have sharp ends, with margins at the outer ends; and be thick on the underside, but thin in the middle.
And this is the form of it:
And it is named in Greek as "labre volentz atelarem," so it is a small spatula.
In order that the extremity of the limb be elevated above the end of the prominent bone.
And gently push it all at once into the place where the bone will return, and equalize it with some equation.
And therefore strive to equalize the extremities of the fracture between them, and if the broken extremity is delicate and does not take that instrument for good reason, then you must introduce the extremity of that bone where the instrument has the power to do so.
But if you cannot reduce the bone completely as we have recommended, then incise that part with the appropriate incisor, which we have mentioned; it may be one of the blades in any manner that is possible for you.
And then clean the bone of roughness and small chips.
And when the bone is reduced, and after the reduction, if the patient experiences intense pain in the bone, then you should know that the bone has not returned to its natural place; and then do what you have agreed will greatly benefit the patient.
When your restoration of the mouth is completed, and then submerge a cloth in vinegar tied with a black string, and properly in summer, and do not pause over the wound to cauterize or any other cause which may be oil, so that no accident happens leading to suppuration and corruption.
And then administer steams at the hour of the full moon after the restoration of the bone, and leave the wound uncovered to see if it improves with clamps and use dressings according to the size of the wound.
And guard yourself with all caution that you do not irritate the wound near the fracture, for many times doctors have caused harm to their patients, leading to death or severe corruption or gangrene, which is unhealthy. And if the lunar eclipse is slight, moist, different from the strictures of other fractures.
And if the wound is large or a bad wound, and you fear certain adverse accidents which we have mentioned, and find pain in that area, then do not pause over placing steams there. Instead, use cloth bandages in place of steams and strengthen it with those.
And when after one or two days the plague begins to spread where a blister has formed, then lift up the cloth you had placed over that area, and then apply calxes, ointments which according to our custom we use to treat plagues, thus with tetrafarmacum and resembling those.
And you should loosen the bandage and observe the plague each day in the morning and evening until it is consolidated and closed, and ensure that the member is prepared in such a manner that the suppuration flows from it to the areas left open for drainage.
If the plague passes many days and is not consolidated, nor has the blister been removed from it, then you should know that here you are dealing with the smaller ones, so examine the plague by puncturing it. And of those abscesses that are separated, remove and extract them. Those from which the pus does not separate, causing pain in the member, forcibly incise them according to what is possible for you.
And if the plague becomes hot or foul-smelling, it is stiomenial, or another species of corruption and putrefaction. Then you should know that this is preceded by a narration of the treatment for which there is a separate chapter in its own section.
And from there where his main voice is heard and you make yourself present near the affected part: when the bone is broken, examine the member as with the bones of the thigh and the helper, seeming like those of large members, and do not suspect fracture or extraction due to these visible signs, which may lead to death; having left that, it will heal by itself within about 20 days or 30; then cure the wound if you can see it, otherwise leave that.
Capitol.xx.
For the cure of nodation that occurs in the vicinity of any fracture.
Visible signs occur for this nodation in the vicinity of the healing of a fracture, especially as it is near the joints, and often distorts the shape of the member; and strongly you forbid the member from its natural operation.
Then consider if the nodation is recent and administer those medicines that have astringent properties, such as aloes, saffron, look at them, search for them, clarify them, and compare them to similar substances; try taking some or all of them, confirm that they are astringent, or are white of hawthorn, or are sweet, place them over the nodation in wool, and constrain them on it with good constriction.
Let the stricture remain untied for not many days; then untie it and tie another, during which time the knot should be remoistened; or strengthen upon that lead strip descending, for lead has the property of remoistening whatever is swollen in the limbs.
But if the knot is already in a rope-like condition and tightened, and necessity demands to loosen it, then split it along its most convenient part, and incise the excess or loosen it by applying some hot iron until it is remoistened; and cure that until it is healed.
Chapter XXI.
On the restoration of fractures when restored and then, approximately, the member subtle and fine do not according to their natural nature.
When a bone fracture is restored, and then the subtle and fine member is rejoined, this is done for various reasons: one reason is the excessive solution of the ligament and its joining not according to what is convenient; or due to excess stricture of the ligaments while nutrition is prohibited from flowing to the member; or due to excessive ointment application; or due to excessive unnecessary movement; or due to insufficient strength in the body of the patient and its weakness.
And the treatment for this is to give the patient something to eat and make the body soft while the disease multiplies within it; administer baths; and insert tubes and joy into it.
And place your hand over the limb, so that the hand draws in nourishment, or continue the application of the strong decoction, while the nourishment flows and returns to its natural form.
Chapter XXII.
For the treatment of broken bones when they are reduced tortuously and prohibit the operation from which this results.
When the limb, already reduced, is near recovery from tortuosity and prominence of the broken bone and healing, and this is due to the form of the limb, yet nevertheless the limb does not prohibit its natural operation, then do not receive the word of one who thinks that member is newly broken.
Yet there are many foolish physicians and reducers who have done this in our land; this operation is greatly reproachable, leading to great fear from the sign of which is fatal.
If claudication and nodulation are recent, then immerse them in a solution of thin water mixed with herbs that soften, such as hyssop, razè‰æœ¬æ¤ç‰©, and melilot, similar to those mentioned; then apply a soft plaster, well-prepared; or use mucilage of razè‰æœ¬æ¤ç‰© and wrap it with cotton gray or olive oil, applying the paste; or use fatty figs wrapped in pigeon dung, resembling those used for medicines named as Arabian consolidatio.
Sometimes it is dissolved through frequent light friction applied to the most humid areas, and movement of the limb should be maintained at all times in all hours.
If tortuosity has been present and becomes strong, forming a stone and requiring treatment, then it is necessary to remove the pus above the cecum and dissolve the continuation of the bone. Using sharp scissors, excise any superfluous nodulation from that method on the bone, and administer with ease in that area, often stimulating and studying it.
Chapter XXIII.
On speech concerning dislocation.
Dislocation is the displacement of a part of one of the joints of that locality, for it is forbidden movement, and distorts the shape of the limb, causing great pain and injuries in the patient.
Therefore, when a dislocation occurs, it is important to promptly attempt to reduce it, and not delay the reduction, for if delayed, the area may become gangrenous, making the reduction of the dislocation much more difficult.
And for this reason, you should neither cut nor stretch in the hour of gangrene, for hot applications can cause spasms and severe pains.
More specifically, when this occurs, you should immediately attend to the incision for an inguinal abscess, and allow it to rest until the gangrene has subsided; then, the limb should be soaked in hot water and oil, and finally, the dislocation should be reduced with ease.
And every member be treated with water of which the memory will come to its place.
And I have already and ordered the chapters of dislocation according to what is preceded in fracture; from the part of the body first up to the part last.
Chapter XXIV.
For the treatment of dislocation of the jaw, proceed.
When both jaws are dislocated without fracture; and the dislocation of both is made according to one of two manners: either they are slightly displaced from their places with little movement and somewhat softened a little; or they are completely dislocated, and at the part of the joint where saliva flows from the patient's mouth, neither can have that nor can close their mouth, and the tongue of the patient is wrapped in its cloth.
More often, when the dislocation is slight, it returns to its place in major displacements by itself for little cause.
More often, when the dislocation is complete and full, it is necessary to administer a gentle reduction, and not be delayed entirely.
And the minister should hold the patient's head, and the doctor should insert one of his hands behind the dislocated jaw in the mouth, if the dislocation is on one side; or he should insert both his fingers together, if the dislocation is on both sides, and the other fingers should be outside equally; and command the patient to stop moving his jaws and bring those going from any direction back to their place; and the doctor equalize the jaw and push it back into its proper location.
And if the reduction is difficult, especially if both jaws are completely dislocated, then administer evaporation with hot water and oil, while performing a light reduction of both and not delay the reduction of both entirely, as we have said before.
And when returned and equalized, and the mouth of the patient is closed and not softened, then place it over those powder substances of cloth mixed with cerate, made of wax and rubbed oil; and apply them to facilitate the healing with many bandages.
And let the patient sleep on their back, with their head standing between two pillows, so that it does not become wet on either the right or left side; and do not force them to spit for any cause; having their food ready in a lion skin, when the pains are relieved and the jaws are moistened, then wet what they wish.
And this should be given easily, and you must not work on the opening of the mouth for eating, drinking, and breathing, until the jaw is moistened and healed.
And if the reduction of two jaws when dislocated at any time and cannot be returned to their proper places, then pain and fever often occur, and there is a strong urge to defecate. The abdomen of the patient is also strongly distended with pure bile.
And when you see this, then know it is dangerous; and severe pain often occurs to those upon whom this happens in a few days.
Chapter 25.
Of reducing the dislocation of the furcula and the extremity of the muscle.
The furcula is not dislocated from the hip inward by its continuation to the foot; and sometimes it is dislocated outward at the other end, and this is declared by the sensation.
The restoration of it is that the patient lie down and extend his arms. Then firmly compress the area with your palm, for it will return.
Then place your hand over the area, apply the plaster and powder, and strengthen it.
More so, the extremity of that which is connected to the thigh is not dislocated in any day; therefore, it must be reduced and aligned as we have said and as is appropriate for your situation.
Then place your hand over the area, apply the plaster and powder, and perform an extraction, and command the patient to maintain tranquility and rest until it is healed.
And in this therapeutic procedure, the extremity of the muscle is reduced when it is separated from its place.
Chapter XXVI.
On the reduction of the dislocation of the muscle.
Know that the muscle is not dislocated in any of three ways, one of which is when it is dislocated from the tendon to the bone.
And the second is when it is dislocated above the muscle, which is called tart; and it is not dislocated at the rear parts by the shoulder; and it is not dislocated at the front parts by the nerves.
And mostly it is dislocated externally when situated at the rear parts of the tendon, and bone. In those where the muscles are few, it is easily dislocated; more so in those where there are many muscles, it is done with difficulty.
And sometimes, due to the striking or injury of some individuals, a swelling occurs, and the muscle is affected by a boil, which has already caused it to be dislocated.
Then cover what you have sprinkled there, especially over him, and proceed with the cure.
And the dislocation is known when it is in the shoulder joints; by shaking you distinguish between the displaced muscle and the attached muscle, for which you find a clear difference; and at the head of the muscle you find a concavity. By shaking the head of the muscle, it feels like a hollow, and the patient cannot bring his hand to his ear nor raise it with any movement.
If it is dislocated, you should shake the foot or up to the thigh, and then you will find a clear touch, which is not hidden.
And for this dislocation, a gentle reduction is made when it is fresh and the patient is unconscious.
And the reduction is that the minister raises the patient's hand above the shoulder joints; then places his fingers on the shoulder to shake the patient, and elevates the joint with strength at its location. The minister raises the patient's hand and extends it properly; then places his fingers there so that it returns gently.
If, however, it does not return through what we have said and only from the beginning of the dislocation, for several days, then it should be bathed in cold water and a moistening lotion applied as if with roots of althea, fenugreek, and melilot in water, and this should be administered.
And then the foot should be pressed on its sole and placed with the toe waiting for the wool that equals between levity and stiffness, and the doctor places his hand on the sole, elevating the head of the muscle by virtue, and pulls the foot of the patient so that it is not damaged at the joints, and another minister holds the head of the patient to prevent it from being injured at the joints, for it soon returns to its place.
And if you wish, return the second in this manner: and it is that you have someone present who is longer than the foot, standing on that side of the sole, and interposes his muscle under the toe of the foot, elevating the toe towards the parts above while the foot is suspended in air, and another minister pulls the foot from the joints of his abdomen. But if the patient is light, then find what other cause is suspended, for fear that gravity will return the dislocation quickly.
And it is reduced by another method: and it is that a long stick with a round head, like the bristle of a mortar, neither too thick nor too thin, is placed under the patient; then cloths are spread over the head of the stick, and the patient is laid according to the length of the stick. Then extend your hand at the parts left on the other side; and stretch the body from the other side with strength, for the joint returns to its place quickly.
And if the reduction is difficult due to all the causes we have said, then use this cure: and you should take a stick whose length is that of two braccia, its width be four digits, and its thickness be increased in the palm of your hand according to this form.
And over the round head, spread lion's cloths so that the stick does not press on the patient.
And then place the patient's head, extend your hand or arm along the spine between the parts, and tie the spine onto the helper and the arm and the extremity of the hand.
And then place the arm on a step of the ladder according to its breadth, and the hand extended along the parts left, and the other side be suspended from the other part, that the joint may soon come together.
And when the instrument for it is completed according to any manner that is possible, and then cover the head with a woolen cloth of equal quantity; then place a plaster prepared from powder of mallow leaves and honey over all the muscle, thus thoroughly mixed above, and strongly tie the head with a decent bandage; let the plaster be applied over the bandage, and the hand be attached to its neck, and let it be left alone, without disturbing the hand for seven days.
And ensure that the food of the patient is light, until the member is comforted, for it is easier to recover.
And then more food should be given about seven or five times a day and exercise should be performed; and thus if it is closed and not softened, then it is already healed.
And if the joint is dislocated due to several days of humidity that affects it or for another cause, then you must apply a cautery three times, as stated previously in the chapter on cautery.
And if all this is done and within seven days the ligament and joint are not closed, and the plaster and bandage remain on it for several days, yet still are not closed with stitches and do not allow that arm to raise above the parts above, then you should know that the nerves of the area, which are at the head of the muscle, are either incised or stretched or softened, and you should know that the joint will never be fixed in its proper place.
For the dislocation of that which is caused, you should move the foot and the ankle or the parts behind, the reduction is done by impulse and extension with the hands, while it returns.
And it should be administered in the other constriction, and cure that within which is healed.
And if there happens to be gravity in the healing and tardiness in the movement of the limb, then the patient uses baths with warm water until the gravity is alleviated and returns to its natural state.
Chapter XXVII.
On the cure of dislocation of the shoulder.
Know that the joint of the shoulder is dislocated with difficulty and seems to return with difficulty; it can be dislocated in all directions, but most commonly in front and behind. The dislocation is not concealed from youâ€”whether you see it quickly or feel it upon touch depending on the shape to which it is dislocated. When you set the dislocated shoulder in place, this is manifestly clear to you, for the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm or reach its own muscle.
And note that when it comes to the shoulder, reduce the dislocation as soon as possible before an apostema (abscess) forms, for if it does form, reducing it becomes difficult, and even with great effort, it may not be fully healed. Especially when it is in the rear part, for it is worse than all other types of dislocation, causing more pain and often leading to death if not treated promptly.
And the restoration of it, when that is what can be reduced, is that his hand be extended by two others, and his arm be stretched out, and the hands of the doctor be on his knees and let him, and push the joint with the heels of his hands or with the edge of his palm as it returns to its place.
And if the dislocation is in the front parts, then return it thus by folding his hand against his own hand, between striking the knee with the edge of his palm.
And if the dislocation does not yield to reduction, then administer violent extension and strong motion.
And let two ministers stretch out the arm, and hold that position with two ministers so that it is not reduced during the extension.
And then rotate the arm completely, as it is wrapped in a long folded cloth around his hand, or bandage.
And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, anoint that area with some oil so that it helps in the lubrication of the joint for ease; and then push the joint vigorously as it returns.
And after the reduction of the cavity let it be placed on that cushion in which there is a plug of linen soaked in oil and vinegar, and it should be maintained with a belt tightened, and the arm be suspended from the neck, and let it be left for some days.
And then release it; and therefore if the joint is formed in that location, then you release the ligament and leave it.
And if you see the joint not well strengthened, then repeat the application of the plaster and the ligament, and leave it for some days until it is tightened; and then release it.
Mais if it happens to him gravely after the reduction of the joint, and its position is in motion, then administer moistening in bath and gentle friction, and compression, until it is healed; or pause over the joint for a while, so that the limb is at rest; and then bind it, and leave it over the bone day and night. And then expose that, and put it in bath; and when soaked, then friction the joint with gentle friction, and then repeat over it for a while, so that it is treated once, and the second, and the third time. am intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.
And if you wish, place your hand over that moist and cracked crack on the skin and press firmly upon it; do this several times, for that is moist and will return to its proper position.
Capitol.xxviii.
For the treatment of dislocation of the shoulder, it is the joint where the arm meets the hand.
Shoulder of the arm is sometimes dislocated, and the reduction of such dislocation is easy. The opposite is true for other joints; however, more importantly, it is crucial that there be speed in the reduction at the moment of dislocation, before the area becomes inflamed or an abscess forms.
And the reduction of the shoulder dislocation is that you place the patient's arm joint on a table and have them extend their arm. The doctor then places their hand or palm near the joint and gently push it back into its proper position.
But first ensure that the palm is already placed on the belly of the hand, then the patient places both hands on a table for extension and reduction; and if the dislocation is prior, place both hands, then the position of the hand of the patient intrinsically on the table, so that the doctor's hand falls over that potential of the joint.
And so if it returns quickly, that is good; and otherwise, then strengthen the area by packing it yielding to the abscess and leave it as it is; and do not repeat this, for if you do, you will neither be able nor permitted to proceed with the reduction of it after a day or two passes.
But first according to the joint's tortuosity; and do not note any cause to the patient, but rather that the hand is softened and cannot strengthen any cause; then you know that the nerves are twisted or thrashed, and thus there is no strength in it but rather strengthening it with a cautery near its location and fortify it with this you confer some cause.
And since the swelling has returned, then place it on the packing which we have recommended, and let it be softened for five days; and then release it and let it be, and exercise the hand of the patient.
If the movement is restricted and some gravity has occurred in it, then apply that which is cold and with friction several times, until it is relieved.
Chapter XXIX.
On the cure of dislocation of the fingers.
For some time, the fingers are completely dislocated.
And when one of the fingers is dislocated at the base of the palm or in the palm itself, then hold the finger and push the dislocation back with your thumbs, until it returns to place.
Then hold the base of the finger, and suspend that part which is dislocated, leaving it for two days.
Then suspend that part and extend it until it is straightened in that day.
And when it is night, lay it according to that narration, and do not cease to stretch it during the day and exercise with movement, and lay it at night; and do this for several days until it is straight.
And make it seem as if you do this, if it is dislocated in the hand, and join that to that part, and do this with your first operation, until it is healed.
And make it seem as if you do this when it is dislocated in other parts.
Capitol.
For the cure of dislocation of the spine in the second.
When a complete dislocation occurs in any of the spine or neck vertebrae, and multiple vertebrae are displaced from their proper positions, then there is no cure, for death ensues.
And the sign of this is that the patient's excretion is forced out against their will, and they cannot retain it; often, parts of the body or one or both hips or one arm of the patient become soft. Or a vertebra is displaced from its proper position, for many times a vertebra is displaced and multiple operations are performed to remove those displacements into four parts.
Then it is already remoistened at the rear parts and is named gelbozitat.
May the cure of it be that when you consider if the gelbozitat accrues from puberty, for in that case there is neither cure nor will it be cured entirely.
May it be that in those cases which arise from birth or by percussion or by resemblance to them, the Ancients have already spoken of the methods of cure at length, concerning which the main point is prophetic; but I shall now abbreviate what I have exposed and formed from various instruments of that with which I will show and expand it here.
And of those, only the one that arises in two places properly is cured as I recommend.
And that the patient be extended on his back close to the wall, and be covered with a moist cloth to prevent his feet from freezing.
And place a straight stick, placed in the ground at the end of the back near its head, and another stick across its feet at the other end of the stick.
The minister hold the stick, and it should not be fixed in a hole; another minister hold the other end according to that form.
And wrap a cloth around the patient's head and tie it tightly with a ligature; extend the end of the ligature to the stick which is fixed at the head, and tie that end to it; and tightly tie another ligature around the patient's waist below the armpits, and hold his arms; and adjust all the ligatures and tie those to the other stick which is fixed at the feet.
And the minister should extend the ligature to the part of the stick, and do not loosen both sticks and the ligatures in which they are fixed, but still do not fix them as we have said.
And the doctor places his palms on the spine with strength so that it returns, or he places one hand on a table and adjusts his feet on the table as it returns.
And if it does not return in this way, then take a table of which the width or length is about three braccia, andæŒ–ä¸€ä¸ªä½äºŽæˆ‘ä»¬ä¹‹å‰æåˆ°çš„é è¿‘æ‚£å¤„çš„ä½ç½®ï¼Œåœ¨æ¡Œå­çš„ä¸€ç«¯ã€‚ And place the majority of the table on the spine, and the doctor places his feet on the other end, and presses well so that the spine is compressed and returns to its place.
And if you want, open the groin which is relaxed in your hand; and when you are on the ground, place the patient's head at the heel of one stick, whose length is that of a man's arm, and place his head at the heel of another stick; and let the distance between each stick be a palm, and already make it so that each post is firmly anchored to the ground to prevent them from moving.
And there should be a round rod for the turn, and it should be turned in the two holes of the two rods.
And at the end of it is a hole through which the rod passes, the length of which is one palm's breadth as it is turned; and in the other two rods, it is similar to that.
And then strengthen the ligaments you have stretched in the feet of the patient in the hole through which you place the head of it, and the ligaments you have stretched in the thighs of the patient in the turn through which you place its feet.
And then you should place each turn and have a minister twist the turn with his hand, and the doctor align the spine as we have said.
And when the spine is returned and the area is aligned, then cover it with a paste of honey, and some wool; place a piece of cloth over the paste, whose width should be about three fingers or slightly more, and its length should fit the area affected by the yellow bile, and over the part of the spine.
And then apply the litharge which we have mentioned, using the patient as a substrate for the subtle nourishment to become healthy.
And if there is any danger at the site near the end of the healing, then it should be ensured that medicines that mollify and soothe are administered through continuous use as we have recommended; and already a lead plate has been applied in that location.
And sometimes dangers occur near the end of the spine, and are caused by that dislocation; and it is that bone for which you should beware so as to avoid any suspicion about this medicine, because it will greatly affect your condition and may lead to death.
Chapter XXXI.
On the treatment of dislocated hip.
Know that the joint of the hip and the joint of the muscle should only be dislocation to such an extent, and not occur with those things that occur in other small joints with little movement and cavity.
And the joint of the thigh is dislocated according to four manners; it is dislocated to the inner parts, or to the outer parts, or to the front parts, or to the rear parts.
And primarily it is dislocated to the inner parts, and rarely to the front or rear parts.
And the sign of dislocation to the inner parts is that when you adjust the belt of the healthy thigh against the diseased one, the former appears longer and the latter more prominent than the healthy side. The diseased thigh cannot bend its knee; it must be ligatured, so that the head of the hernia is here already secured.
And the sign of those to which dislocation occurs to the outer parts is that their symptoms are contrary to this condition.
And the sign of those to which dislocation occurs to the front parts is that the swelling expands according to its complement, but it does not bend the knee in pain. If it is forced to go forward and cannot do so at the front; his urine is retained and his engagement becomes an apostema; you should ligature him on the tendon.
And a sign of dislocation in the rear parts is that the hollow does not expand, nor can what is front folded be bent to fold it backward, and his waist is shorter than the other, and the affected area is softened, and the groin cap is deviated from that location.
The main sign of this dislocation is that you consider, at the time, if the dislocation is old and already hardened, then after examining it closely, you apply reduction to it according to its condition; but this is not part of the complete treatment. Then, you should not presume anything in that treatment.
For the case where the dislocation is recent and one of the four types of dislocation, you should turn the joint and extend it to the internal and external parts, and move it to the right and left sides, as it will naturally return with force, and you do not need any other treatment.
Moreover, if it does not return in this manner, you should prepare a strong counter-pull and extend the waist on the side where it is more relaxed, or on their hands, or use a piece of wood that is dipped in oil over the hollow part; then another person should stretch the hand from above so that it touches the back of their hands. Then apply strong ointment of lion's grease to the affected area, and have another person hold the end of the wood.
And it is an extension of his arm or from inside the armpit to the side of the furcula, or from behind to the side of the thigh.
And it is the extension of all these in one go, lifting the patient's leg from his body and allowing it to dangle freely.
And this type of extension is common for all four.
And therefore, if the dislocation returns as we have said, it will be good; but if not, then for each type, what I say about its own treatment is necessary.
In the reduction of its own, when dislocated, and the dislocation is from inside, make sure the patient's leg is returned to its normal position; then place the ligaments over the ribcage at that location where between the head of the rib and the location where the armpit is placed. Extend the ligaments above the side of the armpit to the other part of the furcula.
And then another minister firmly takes hold of the thighs, and compresses the thick part of the bad hernia and extends it outward forcefully, for that which returns to its place.
And this species is of a gentle cure for which that member is reduced more than with other species.
But if you excuse yourself and do not follow this treatment for this cure, then firmly bind both feet of the patient together tightly over both the calves and both the thighs.
And let the length of each be that of four fingers, and let the bad hernia's cushion be extended more than the other by the amount of two fingers.
And then the hernia be suspended above the head of the stake, and let it be in the hand; and let the length of it from the ground be that of two cubits.
And command a strong young man to hold the thigh, and let him suspend the hernia with another young man, while the other man holds the thigh with great strength, for the joint returns to its place quickly.
In the proper reduction, when there is dislocation at the outer part, move the patient's leg according to what we have recommended in our treatise on healing; and strengthen the ligament over the injured thigh and over its knee.
Then place two stakes firmly in the ground, one under the patient's foot and the other under the head; then stake the stakes securely above which damp cloths are wrapped, so that the patient is not injured by the stakes being between their thighs, for you must maintain the extension of the limbs left as they are.
Then each minister extend to their part, and the doctor with his hand equalize the reduction according to the art.
When the dislocation is in the front parts, then you should extend the leg slightly, and according to this method of narration for the thigh; the doctor places the palm of his right hand on the inner side of the diseased knee, and then cauterizes it with the other hand, and by that cauterization he extends it to the front part leaving it at the side of the knee.
And if the dislocation is in the rear parts, then you should not extend the leg to the sides leaving it, and it is elevated above the ground; having done this, you should place it on a hard surface, just as would be done if the broad end of it were dislocated to the front parts, according to what we have said about its position on two broad surfaces; and it should be on its face with the ligaments extended, according to what we have said, not in any other way.
And a compress should be applied on the area where the joint is dislocated.
So, when the reduction is completed as it should â€” and the sign of the joint's reduction is not hidden from you, which is that you extend two legs of the patient, and when you see those equal parts and the leg returns to its natural position and expands that space, then you know that the member has been returned according to what is needed â€” then you place two cushions, apply a bandage so that the width is maintained in any part; and adhere the leg to rest for three or four days.
And then separate the thigh from the hip, comparing one leg to the other.
When you see them equal in size, you know that the dislocation is already fixed, then allow the patient to go.
And if you see any sign of swelling, then return and apply a plaster to that area, and stretch it according to your original structure, and leave it for three days.
Then return the area to its original position and allow it to recover ambulation over each part for some days until it is comfortable.
Capitol.xxxii.
On the treatment of dislocation of the shoulder.
The shoulder can be dislocated in three ways: it can be dislocated to the outer parts, to the inner parts, and more towards the back than the front; it is not dislocated towards the front.
And the sign of shoulder dislocation is that when you command the patient to apply their leg to their hip; you know that the shoulder is dislocated.
And the restoration of all these methods is that you make sure the patient lies straight, try to extend its leg as much as possible; attach your two hands to the face of the leg, and place his foot between your feet; then make sure the sole of the foot touches your palms, hold those between your toes on the sole of the foot with strength, and another helper extends his leg so that the sole returns to its place.
And the sign of relief is that its leg adheres to the thigh with ease without effort.
And then apply that and make the leg adhere to the thigh, and wrap those several times with a bandage for three or four days, and later remove those.
And do not use the patient's leg for walking for a few days until it is healed and comfortable.
But if the reduction of the hernia is excused, then administer strong extension to those ligaments involved in the treatment of the hip as previously narrated.
Capitol.xxxiii.
Of the cure of the dislocation of the ankle.
The ankle is sometimes reduced by a slight movement, and sometimes dislocated according to the complement, and the dislocation of the ankle is performed either on the inner sides or on the outer sides.
And the sign of the dislocation of the ankle is that you see the swelling of the ankle proceeding from the side on which it is dislocated.
More the cure of the reduction of the ankle is by a gentle return, and it is that it be extended with ease and equalized so that it returns.
More in the cure of the ankle when it is dislocated according to the complement, make sure you straighten the patient, and have a strong and brave assistant at the back of the ankle near the middle of the leg.
And then place your right hand on the upper part of the foot, and with your left hand hold the lower part of the foot near the ankle.
And then draw the foot to your right hand, and to your left hand twice, and extend your left hand; and push the foot with your right hand while bending the knee.
And do this twice according to how we have counted.
And then push the foot towards the knee for the third time, and you are at the ankle.
So if it returns in one or two pushes according to this manner, and if you close the foot properly, that is good; otherwise, then iterate the operation, for it may not have returned.
But if reducing the foot as we have recommended is forbidden to you, then place the foot in a basin on the ground, and put a wet cloth in a firm basin, and let it fit between the patient's thighs, and you have wrapped it with a cloth so that the foot does not get cold.
And then the minister should hold their thighs, and another minister extend the foot with their hands or with flax that is tied around the ankle of the foot; and each minister extend themselves against the extension of their part, and the cloth should be spread between the patient's thighs, retaining it there, so that the body of the patient is not pulled towards the sides you bend them.
And then the doctor equalizes the dislocation with his hands, while another assists holding the healthy thigh at the parts left, so that the dislocation returns with ease.
And then as the dislocation returns and its reduction is declared to be sound, then apply a strong paste externally to it, and bind the foot with lint to the leg.
And be careful not to press on or guard the nerves behind the ankle, lest the lint over that area be too strong and severely irritate them.
And leave it for two or three days; and if the lint has softened, remove it.
And remove it on the third day or the fourth, and prohibit the patient from walking for forty days. More if it is necessary to walk before that time, then there is no assurance that the dislocation has not become dissolved and corrupted, and what does not receive healing.
And if an abscess occurs at this point, then ensure that you administer in the extraction of it what we have previously narrated in another section on healing and fomentation, until it is well resolved.
Chapter XXXIV.
On the treatment of dislocation of the toes of the feet.
First, ensure that the one that is dislocated is gently reduced within a small extent; and what is not difficult, is easily done.
But if the dislocation is in several toes of the foot, then you must place the sole of the affected foot on the ground or a table, and keep it thus as if it were walking.
Then stand on the foot, and place your own foot over the area near the joints, and press that part with your foot using its natural strength to help it return to place, and observe that it is reduced and does not appear as an elevation in the area.
Then place the abdomen of the foot on a table that can support the entire foot, which has two ends, and firmly and decently hold that part with three strong bandages for three days. Then release that and allow it to rest by walking for several days until it is strengthened and its reduction is assured.
Chapter XXXV.
Of the species of dislocation that occur from strain or fracture or any combination thereof.
When any of these causes occur, and you are involved in the cure of that and its restoration, mistakes can lead to death.
And for this reason, you must not presume in the cure of it, but only one who is wise in the art, long accustomed, merciful and pious; and who delays, neither impatient nor presumptuous. He should use at the beginning of medicines that cause abscesses only with a cautery, leaving the evil to divine judgment, rather than to someone whom you hope for relief from suffering, or alleviation of the illness, in which case any hope should appear. And then strive to perform the reduction at the beginning of the cause, before it develops into an abscess.
And then, if the limb returns as we wish, proceed to administer treatment that causes an abscess with a cautery and heals the strain using what is appropriate for it from drying ointments.
And if dislocation is associated with a fracture and accidents in the bones separated, then you must reduce their joint, doing so as we have said in simple ailments that precede these in the places of those.
And guard and avoid according to your virtue that of the instrument in the ways of fear according to which my preaching precedes you; for this is better to you from your Creator, and more permanent to your glory, and more greetings to your true essence those in your time. Thus you finish the words of Albucasim perfectly, for which may God bless. Amen.
