O, sons, thus I have completed this book, which is the last of the science of medicine, for through its completion and the end it has brought to itself, and through its explanations and declarations, it is evident to me that I have filled you with this treatise, which is part of my surgical operations.
For our region and in our time, surgical operation is almost entirely private, despite the great importance of its science. Its investigation has been neglected; and only some minor descriptions can be found in the books of the Ancients, which correct many errors and hesitations, but close off the understanding of it and extend its force and art.
And it is clear to me that I should vitalize that part of this treatise according to the way of explanation and declaration and abbreviation; and in order that the forms of the cautery tools and other instruments of the work be added through the declaration, and for their preparation, which cause is necessary.
More so, the reason why a good artisan doctor does not use his hand well in this our time is that the art of medicine is long and involved, and one must be trained before being able to practice anatomy, which Galen knew well, understanding the youth of the members and their forms, as well as their joints and separations; and having knowledge of the bones, nerves, and tendons, their number, and their diseases; and of the pulse veins and quiet ones, and the places of their propulsion.
And for this, Hippocrates is said to have said that by name is good, more in the small work, and most of all in the art of the hand.
More so, we have already spoken of this in the introduction to this work; for those who do not know what we have said about anatomy, will not be free from error due to which many people will die, as I have seen too many of them. For some are formed in this science and act without that other knowledge and experience.
For I have seen a foolish and inexperienced doctor who caused an apostema scrophula in the neck of a woman, and damaged some arteries so that great bleeding occurred, causing the woman to die among her greatest sufferings.
And there was another doctor who almost extracted a stone from a man who had been suffering for some time, and the stone was large, and it came to him, and he removed that stone with a piece of the bladder, so that that man died on the third day.
And I have already called for the stone to be extracted, and I saw that due to the size of the stone and the position of the patient, he would likely die.
And there was another doctor who took payment from a duke of our land for surgery, and he came upon a black slave who had a fracture in the thigh; and because of the doctor's ignorance, he removed the fracture, over the wound, with pillows and splints of strong structure, and did not allow the wound to breathe.
And then the dislocation according to his desires, and then the rejoining, and then the leaving for a few days and commanding us to release the bandage; and we remained thus until the thigh and foot recovered, and then proceeded to our detriment.
And I was called to him, and prepared to dislodge the stone, and peace and an attempt to relieve his pains were achieved.
But however, corruption was confirmed in the member, for I could not arrest that, and did not cease to walk the corruption in the member while the malady persisted.
And there was another doctor who perforated an oncological abscess, and it became ulcerated over several days, during which the malignancy of the lesion grew significantly in the presence of its lord.
The cause is that the pain is purely due to melancholic humors, and does not affect the entire body, but rather affects a member that suffers from being attacked by all.
And for this reason, my children, it is necessary that you devise the operation into two divisions: one in which the operation is associated with health, and another in which the work is dangerous in its major dispositions.
And I have already existed in all parts of this book in which the operation is accompanied by error and fear; therefore, it is necessary that you keep this and leave that, so that the leaves do not find a way to speak and deceive you.
And therefore take your arms with diligence and protection of God, and the patient with facility and firmness.
And use the best way by the grace of God seeking salvation and praiseworthy success, and leave behind the terrible illnesses difficult to cure, and stand firm in your arms against what fears you, so that sitting in your faith and in your name you are not forsaken: for more remains to your glory, and better elsewhere and later in the world and beyond in your sanctity.
Gout has already been dissected in some monastic texts: Do not treat ill diseases, lest bad doctors go unnamed.
And I have already dedicated this book according to three chapters.
Begin the division of the book, and first of the first part. The first chapter ordered of the foot, on the forms of the instruments and on the tools of the cautery, and on what is necessary in the operation.
The division of the second part. The second chapter, on dryness and perforation, and on cups, and on sores, and on the extraction of arrows and similar, all categorized and ordered by the forms of the instruments.
The third chapter, on restoration and dislocation, and on the cure of扭伤和类似病症；按仪器形状分类的章节。头部涉及脚部，以及仪器的形式。
I will describe the quality of the irons of that cautery and its effects, and in which complications cauterization is prohibited.
Therefore, I say that the discourse on the quality of the cautery iron and its effects is long and prolix, subtle by science, and secretly hidden; much has already been said about it by wise men, and they are in disagreement. It suffices me to give a small part of their sermons, fearing lengthiness.
And thus it is said that a cautery applied to any complexion universally works on all matters or bodily substances, except for two complexes, which are complexes of solid matter.
In the complex of solid and dry matter, dehydration occurs; for some said that a cautery is beneficial for this, while others said the opposite, that a cautery is not appropriate in illness which is due to quality and dryness, for the nature of fire is quality and dryness, and it is inappropriate that an illness that is solid and dry be healed by what is cautery and dry.
And argue against those who say the opposite, that by cautery one is cured in all solid and dry illnesses that come in the bodies of men, for when you compare the body to its humors to the complex of fire, you find the body is parched.
And I say according to the speech of those who have experienced this, that they have already discovered it several times through experimentation.
But I do not claim that it comes to me as one who has already been experienced and exercised in the capital of cautery by recent exercise, and who knows the diversity of human complexions and the disposition of illnesses in their manifestations, and the causes of those, and the accidents related to them, and the space of time for those.
In other complications, there is no need for you to fear, and especially in the wet and inflammatory diseases, for all doctors are agreed on those, and do not differ in using a cautery in them.
And I say, children, that concerning the secret of curing by cautery with fire and its goodness, about the burning medical cautery, it is because the fire is simple, and its action reaches only the member being cauterized and causes no great harm to other members in contact.
But the action of the burning medical cautery reaches that part in the member which it touches, and greatly causes illness in the member that is diseased and difficult to heal.
But fire, by its sublimity and the goodness of its substance, does nothing but superfluous things. And we are already known for this through experience and long service to the study of the art concerning the true causes; and for this reason, I am excused for the length of my discourse. If it were not that it is not written in my liberty in this pause, and that you know a secret about the fire, and the quality of its operation on the bodies and the way by which you expel diseases, then this discourse would be philosophical and demonstrative, which would be acute for your minds.
And be wise, children, that they do not agree on the time at which it is convenient to make a cautery and pause in late spring.
And I say that a cautery is convenient at all times, because the damage caused by the accident of time is submerged in the youth of what is burned by the cautery, and especially if the cautery is for pains or necessary pains, strong boils, which do not suffer delay because it is feared that those that come from evil intent are greater than small damage entering through time.
And this is not good in your feet, children, for they only consider the common people and the foolish doctors, because in that illness which is cured by a cautery it is not convenient all the time, and they pause that consequence.
And the cause is not thus because they care for this, for a cautery is not other than in a place of medicine which alters the composition and dries the humors which are the cause of the venous pains.
Yet, however, an excessive cautery over the medicine for the sake of its efficacy and virtue of its operation and greatness of its lord.
It is possible that the patient's illness may return at some point in time, according to the complexity of the illness, its location, the virtue of the individual, and what is prepared within the body through the accumulation of superfluous substances, or what is acquired by the body in terms of foods and similar causes; but if the illness in which a cautery is administered is a subtle illness in a member with few superfluous substances and humidity, like a dental cautery for pain and similar to that, it is possible that such pain will not return, more so as this is done in small amounts.
The vulgar saying is that the cautery is the last remedy of medicine, and it is a saying of doctors, not what we understand by it, for I believe it is not a cure that helps either medicine or any other cause close to the cautery.
The cause is the opposite; and I understand that the cautery is the last remedy of medicine only when one has administered the methods of cure for some illnesses, and those medicines have not been effective, and near the end of the illness, one administers the cautery, which then helps. And at this point, the last remedy of medicine is the cautery, not according to the understanding which I understand the vulgar and most of the foolish doctors.
And the ancients said that a gold cautery is better than an iron one, and they did not say this only because of the equality of gold and the sublimity of its substance.
And they said that the place for cautery does not burn, since it is not absolutely perfect; for I have already proved and examined that it does not do this in all bodies as others do. A gold cautery is good and better than iron, as they say; but when you make a cautery with fire of gold, it is not up to you to declare, because it ignites according to the quantity you want due to the hardness of the gold, and prepares to receive fire; if you adjust over the ignition, the gold melts by the fire, and some sheets are cast into the fire for the craftsman to catch from that.
And for this, when making a cautery with iron, you should touch it more lightly and more precisely to the correct position.
And I have already ordered this chapter on the cautery according to chapters, and I have ordered those of the foot in the leg, so that I delay the patient what he wants from me.
The first chapter.
This cautery addresses the cold and humidity over the servel accident of which there are two causes, these being the cause of rheumatism and various pains in the head, from the forehead to the ears flowing, as well as many sleep disorders, toothache, and giddiness, and generally all illnesses that come through coldness, such as paralytic conditions, rheumatism, and apoplexy, and similar symptoms in those diseases.
The form of this cautery is as follows: Primarily, you command the patient to be evacuated with a saline medicine for three or four nights, according to the strength of the patient's condition, their age, and their habits.
And then command him to shave his head with a razor, and place that razor between your hands on a sloping bench and let his hands rest on his own foot.
And place the razor from your palm near the throat between his heels. More over, since the right place has been determined, mark that place with a point, and then heat the olive oil cautery, which is in this form:
And place that cautery over the marked spot with a point, in such a way that it descends gradually, and you rotate it.
And lift your hand lightly and look at the spot, and if you see any part of the bone being uncovered by a small amount of oil, as much as a grain of pepper, then lift your hand. If not, return your hand to that cautery or another, if it is cooled, and wait until something is visible on the bone as I have said to you.
And take a little salt and dissolve it over the spot, and leave it there for three days.
Then place your hand over the inflamed groin area, leaving the other one on the inside where the fire scar has been destroyed. Then apply the ointment of tetra pharmacon to the area until it is healed.
And we have already said that when the wound is opened wide, it heals better, because it is better and more beneficial.
And some of them say that the knee should be cauterized inside the bone, and that the cautery should be left until it has ignited some part of the bone.
Then scrape away what is charred from the bone, and then treat it.
And others say that the cautery should reach the marrow, pressing firmly on the bone until it cools, and this is the method of Alphécatti. And they believe that from that area, the vapors of the head expire.
And keep the wound open for a long time, and then treat it until it is healed and consolidated.
But I have not seen these two types of cautery in all, except in some men according to fear; leave that one, I advise you, it is better for health when possible; as the head is developed by the solution of continuity of the same kind as we have testified in other members, especially when the head of the patient is of cold nature.
And the first type of cautery is safer and better, I advise you; use that one and do so for health.
Capitalize second.
Of the cautery of the head.
When in the whole head chronic and long-lasting pain occurs, and this is prolonged in the patient, and he uses bandages, pillows, head poultices, plasters, compresses, hot water bottles, and similar remedies, and especially if the head has already been cauterized with a cautery which does not relieve him of any of these causes, consider whether the head of the patient is of strong constitution in its nature; and if it is not cold nor finds much pain, then that cautery should be replaced by another. And then cauterize that on the top of his head between where the vein is divided. Incise the vein and the quantity at the mouth which we have counted, and cauterize that with a cautery at the rear part of the head in the place which is called vas, — and this is the place where suction is applied. And lift your hand here, and do not uncover the mouth, for the patient finds great pain different from the pain of all other head cauterizations.
And I will say this cauterization in its place, for I know that the cauterization with which one cauterizes the horns of the head and the occiput is a finer cauterization than that with which the middle part of the head is cauterized; and this is the form of it.
Top of the head.
On the cauterization for old migraine.
When there is a sharp pain at the back of the head, or a dull pain between the ears, the head should be treated with purgative medicines, and then the other treatment I have described for diseases should be administered; and if this does not help, cauterization in that area can be performed in two ways: either with a burning sharp medicine, or with iron.
May cautery in medicine that burns you take a hot coal, and extract that and bind the extremities of it from both ends. And then apply the place of the pain in the temple with a lancet laid into it, and let the needle be concealed.
And then strengthen it by stopping the descent by compression, and let it be for the space of three hours; and then draw out the cloth, and leave the wound for two or three days, and then place it over a small opening submerged in balsam until the area heals.
And then cure that with ointment until it is healed.
And if you speak, use those medicines that burn which I have written in the second treatise of burning medicines.
May the cautery be made according to this manner: heat by cautery of which this is the form:
and it is called a key clamp, for the head of it is thus shaped like a key, and in the middle part there is a small projection.
And then place your hand over the location of the pain, so that the artery which is left is not adhered, and gently rotate the small iron bit gradually.
And if the quantity that is adhered by the bite of the needle is as great as its thickness, and lift your hand so that the artery which is left is not adhered, so that there be no flow of blood.
And then immerse it in salt water and place it over the area, leave it there for three days; and then place it over a warm cloth, and cure it with ointment until it is healed.
And if you do, cauterize at the tip of the scalpel according to the cautery, and guard yourself from cutting the artery in this not-very-old migraine.
Capitol quart.
Of the cautery for old migraine.
When you cure migraine as we have said in the previous treatment, and as we have said in the divisions of diseases, and if the treatment does not improve, and sometimes due to the disease it is insufficient what we have said about the first cautery with medicine or the cautery with fire, then you should ignite the surgical cautery when it is white-hot. Place your line on the area of pain equivalent to its thickness, or place it there; then lift your hand for a moment and strongly apply that part without incising the artery and enter into the bone.
But you must guard against the continuity of the jaw, which is used for chewing, and ensure that the cartilage is not adhered and the nerves which supply it are not damaged, and that no spasm occurs.
And if it is about the custody and caution of the flux of sand from the artery that is amputated, for in its amputation there is fear, especially for one who ignores what he does and is not studious or cautious; and leaves the operation to chance.
And I will return to recall the regulation of the flow of sand incident to the artery according to its manner, in the place of this free text.
And if you see this illness that does not allow the use of this cautery and you find the patient's condition tolerable, cauterize it in the middle of the foot as we have recounted, and cure the wound until it is healed.
And if you see, administer the cautery which we have said in the chapter on the stretching of the artery with cautery, using two knives. This cautery is better and more appropriate.
Chapter V.
Of cauterization for ear pain.
When there is pain in the ear due to cold and it is treated with cautery and another treatment as mentioned in the division, and the pain does not subside, then apply the cautery with fire, which is called the point. This is its form:
Then place the point near the beginning, and move it around the entire ear as if rolling a wheel, or in the circuit of each part if the pain is in that part. Slowly move the cautery along the edge of the ear gradually after you have touched the area with your finger.
And if the cautery of these points on the entire ear, and leave it there, then continue to treat the areas until they are healed.
Chapter VI.
Of cauterization for tetanus.
The torture which is cured by cautery is not but of the species which venom through phlegm, according to what we have said in the divisions of illnesses.
Avoid cautery of the species that proceeds through drying or spasms of the nerves.
When you cure that species of torture by jarring, cerebrospinal fluid drainage, and conservations, and your cure does not agree, then when you cauterize the illness with three cauteries: the first you place on the edge of the ear, the second a little below its temple, and the third on the junction of two lips.
And place your cautery opposite the site of the illness, for softening occurs only at the site that appears healthy.
And the method of cautery is to apply it along the outer part of the base of the ear just above a small spot on the top of the head, and another on the temple, the length of which should be according to the length of the thumb, and then place your hand over the cautery until the quantity of the species of scorpion is completely burned.
And this is the form of the cautery, and it is special to the barber-surgeon, the form of which is shown before. But more subtle is that when you see it slightly thus; and cut there a little less out of superfluous crudity.
And place the area where it is shown to be treated until it is healed.
Capitol. vii.
On the cautery treatment for ancient apoplexy.
When apoplexy is ancient and you treat it as we have said, and the patient does not have fever, then cautery treat it with four cauteries: especially on all corners of his head; and with a cautery on the middle part of the head, as we have said; and on the scrotum. And the method of the cautery is made as described above.
And it has already been cautery-treated on the mouth of the stomach; and it is more posterior; and place it to be treated as you proceed.
Chapter VIII.
Cauterization of oblivion performed by flame.
Cover what is given to the patient at the beginning with large pieces and pills of the refreshing medicine.
Then cover the head of the patient entirely and place it on the chest as described in the treatise on plasters.
Then place it for a few moments, as this is the method of cautery. Then do so according to that method and order as I have already said.
And therefore if it is cured by those good means; and otherwise, then make three cautery marks on the rear part of his head, which should be descending from the upper part of the head to the lower part of the neck. Then place the thickness of your finger between each cautery mark, and proceed to treat the cautery as described.
If you have added more and the illness is tolerable, then apply the cautery in the middle place; if you have greater addition, then cauterize that above the two horns.
Then cure that within which is healed; and let the cautery be olive-shaped according to the form given above.
Capitol.ix.
On the cautery for the palate and the softening of the entire body.
First, when you process the softening of the head with stones and as we have said; then near the head of the patient, apply a cautery in the middle of the head, and with a cautery over all the horns of the head, and with a cautery over the back part of it, and with three cauteries over the vertebrae of the neck.
And if it is necessary in the illness of softening of the body to add more and the illnesses are tolerable and the illness is severe, then apply the cautery with four cauteries over the vertebrae of the back, and behind that with a cautery where the spine meets it, and raise your hand. And then cure that which is inside so that it is healed, and this be done with an olive cautery.
Capitol.
Of the cautery treatment for epilepsy.
No is it cauterized the epileptic, but only if the epilepsy is due to phlegm.
And therefore make certain that you modify the brain at its beginning, both on one side and on the other, as we have described in the division when the illness is large and tolerant of the exception of the medicines.
And if it is a child who does not tolerate the medicines, then administer guar gums and masticators to the servant for several days beforehand, with improvement of the food.
And then place the cautery near the head of the patient, and apply one cautery in the middle of the head according to the preceding method, and another cautery at the occiput, and over each corner of the head he should cauterize. And if the pain is strong and tolerable, then apply the cautery as mentioned, while keeping the body in a state of paralysis and softening over the vertebrae of the neck and the vertebrae of the back.
And use an olive cautery as described.
And if the pain is in a child, then use a subtle cautery in this manner.
Capitol. xi.
Of the cautery for melancholy.
When the causes of melancholy are corrupt humors and large phlegm, then use the cautery as described, while keeping the body in a state of paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is excess moisture turning to melancholy, and the body of the patient is humid, then give him to drink that which purifies his brain according to what was described in the division.
And place your hand on the head of the patient, and properly make a tortora mark on him over the circumference, and then pause that one in the middle of the head.
And if the patient is senseless and is held from all sides.
And then apply a liniment; and it is more worthy to be rubbed on the backs of sheep. And heat it over the fire for mild heating by measure, which the patient can tolerate when more is applied. And then place it in the middle of his head in the circle, and let him remain until it is rubbed.
And do this for the patient every week once, and use the other regimen until he is healed; or if you wish, make a cautery of it by making small points according to its size. Otherwise, keep your hand on an appropriately ordered cautery: this is a kind of cautery which you moisten equally.
And then place that cloth in oil or in gray matter of linen.
Chapter XII.
On the cautery using water flowing down.
When you have declared the beginning of water in the womb by the signs which I have said in the division, then begin and give to drink to the patient what modifies his head, and keep the other free from all moisture.
And let it sit in bathwater for a few days.
Then command him to rub his head, and cauterize that with a cautery in the middle of the head; then cauterize that with two cauteries on the temples if it is the beginning of hydramnios of water in two wombs, or on one temple if it is the beginning of water in one womb.
Apply the cautery to all veins and arteries which are left unclosed; let the cauteries be in that length along the temples.
And guard against flows of blood when it is cauterized; and if you see flows of blood, apply some medicine which is within your reach.
And I will come forth with wisdom which is in the extraction of arteries and in the cutting off of those, and caution about flows of blood.
And sometimes it is cauterized on the neck leaving two bones thoroughly produced.
Chapter XIII.
On the cauterization of ancient tears.
When tears from the feet are ancient and often occur through the veins and arteries which are in the manifest location of the head above, it is verified that these are superfluous phlegmatic fluids. Then cauterize that area with a cautery as we have recounted in the chapter on starting water flow in the ankles, and with a cautery in the middle of the head, and with two cauteries on the neck leaving two temples, and with two cauteries on the neck leaving two bones. And if you need to add a cautery, then cauterize that area at the entire length of the sole of the foot near the end of the brow with a small cautery.
Chapter XIV.
On the cauterization of nasal foul odor.
When you treat that person as we have said in the division and your treatment is not effective, then you prepare and give to drink to the patient cherries for three nights; then shave his head, and cauterize the area with a cautery made of iron and another of olive wood. Then cauterize that area with a cautery made of iron on both supraorbital regions, leaving the hair slightly singed.
And be careful not to burn that area.
And this is the form of the cautery made of iron.
Capitol. XV.
Of the cautery for the eyelids of the heels.
When the eyelid of the heel is softened due to disease or humidity, then cauterize that eyelid with a cautery made from this lunar cautery; and this is its form:
And if you cauterize that area on both supraorbital regions a little with two cauteries in total, making them long from the temples. And the length of each cautery should be according to the size of the sore.
And do not press too hard with your hand on the cautery, but according to the extent that the inner part of the eyelid is touched.
Chapter XVI.
Of the cautery for the eyelid when the skin is converted to the inner parts and fistula occurs.
When the skin of the fistula is converted to the inner parts, one must puncture the fistula. The cautery for this can be performed in two ways: either by using a cautery or by applying burning medicine.
If the cautery is to be made with fire, command the patient to present himself before you that the skin may be cauterized as those which are cleansed, when they are prolonged and equalized; and if you puncture it, you should place it at its origin. Then strengthen the fistulas of the patient with a bandage so that they do not rupture until the skin is grown back.
Then when they are born and equalized, place the head of the patient on your knee, and hold over the eyelids of the patient with a sign, which should be in the shape of a leaf of hawthorn, and is the beginning of the mark for the skin.
Then place the head in a pillow of cloth or on a mucilaginous substance over the eye.
Then ignite the cautery of which this is the shape.
Then apply the cautery over the shape marked, little by little in small spots, until the surface of the wound is burned, which appears like a hawthorn leaf, entirely apparent and proper.
A sign of healing from your work is that you see the eyelid of the eye now contracted and the skin around it elevated after the puncture of the eye.
Then lift your hand and leave it there for three days, and then place it over the head between the eyebrows until the scar is healed. And after apply the ointment where it shall be healed.
And if it returns through the skin for some cause near their origin and the eyelid is softened, then apply the cautery again over that area as you did first.
And if the skin is on the eyelid, then apply the cautery there, lifting it to its natural place and ensuring that the skin does not remain loose.
And the cautery being medicinally burning, you command the patient to extend and equalize the skin, then make a cloth letter in the shape of a mulberry leaf.
And then take a well-known and effective ointment and some vinegar. Mix these well, and prepare this mixture without rubbing it; then spread it over the cloth which is made in the shape of a mulberry leaf, and place that over one or both wounds; and leave the cloth slightly loose, with the patient's head at the top.
And place it on the medicine and press it a little but do not wet it inside so that the patient feels the bite of the medicine, for the bite is like that of fire.
And so, to perceive the bite of the cauterization, when you leave the medicine and wet that as you have said; then when the bite ceases, place the medicine again and wash it well with water; and then consider if the eyelid has already been raised, as it is washed, close it again with fire or incision, for then it is good; and if not, return to the place of the medicine where you did not press the medicine, and do not deface your operation until it is equalized.
And then place it on the swelling between the time that the bond of adherence is eradicated, and then treat it with a thick ointment or another method until it is healed.
And you must, with diligent vigilance, ensure that the medicine does not fall from your operation onto the whole. If the eyelid becomes softened in a few days or any of the skin blisters on the whole, then repeat your medicine over that area where the eyelid has softened, and do so precisely as you did at the beginning, and continue to apply it until it is healed.
And this is the form of leaf of mistletoe.
And know that the humors of men are diverse according to their size and smallness, and therefore according to this you should make your contraction.
And the way of the straight path should not be hidden from him who studies in this art.
Capitol. xvii.
On the cautery treatment of a fistula that is in the lacrimal humor.
When you treat a fistula as we have said in the divisions of the maladies and do not refer to our treatment, then when you cauterize it according to this manner: command the patient to place his head in your lap, and have some minister hold his head with both hands in such a way that it is neither too tight nor agitated on his head.
And then place a cloth soaked in oil or in a mucus of ptilli on the eye.
And then heat the cautery of which this is the form:
which is convex, as the form of a cane or a vuelto pin, from one end of which the cautery is made.
And if it goes, penetrate into the other end. And if you want it to come out as it tries.
But nevertheless, that which is concave is better for your work.
And then press the fistula if it is open, and cleanse and dry that area. And if it is not open, then open that and extract the pus from it.
And then place the well-heated cautery on it, and with your hand hold the cautery at the end of the nose, so that your hand does not err or the patient be disoriented, and then place the cautery in the nostrils and destroy that.
And if at the beginning of your cautery it enters into the bone, that is good; but otherwise, then iterate the cautery one or two times, if necessary; and leave it thus for three days, and afterwards place your hand over the spot to keep it warm and apply an ointment while it heals.
And if it does not heal after ten days, then place your hand over the corrosive sharp medicine until the bone is exposed and cut as needed according to your chapter.
And another way to cauterize a fistula that some first say: Apply the cautery at the site of the fistula and immediately place your hand gently over the fissure, forming its shape. Pour one ounce of melted lead into this fissure; keep your hand there with good retention, so that the bad humor does not enter and prevent the melted lead from reaching the spot. Then leave your hand over the opening of the bad humor as if in a thick paste of honey or water, for the lead adheres to the site of the fistula and heals it through marvelous healing.
And if the fistula is healed as we have said regarding the cautery and the cure, that is good; and if not, then it is necessary to administer atracone of the nose and reduce the fistula to the nose's body according to its proper place.
Chapter XVIII.
On the cautery of the fissure of the pus.
Spotting occurs and causes fissures in the labia, especially in the labia of children.
Then, since you cure those fissures as we have said in the divisions and do not prolong your cure, then heat the small surgical cautery according to this form that is shown:
And let its cavity be according to the subtlety of the blade.
Then place that heated cautery over the fissures until it reaches the bottom of the fissures.
And then cure it with cerate until it is healed.
Chapter XIX.
Of the cautery treatment for fistula in the mouth.
When an abscess forms in the uvula or on the palate or around the teeth, and after it bursts and heals, leaving behind a fistula that does not fully heal, you should then cauterize with a firebrand according to the size of the fistula. Place the ignited brand inside the fistula, keeping your hand close so that the flame reaches the entire length of the fistula. Do this one or two times. Then treat the area as we have described for other healing processes until it is fully healed.
And if the abscess is incised and heals, that is good. Otherwise, it is necessary to expose the location and excise the corrupt bone as described in its chapter.
Chapter XX.
Of the cautery treatment for the teeth and the softening of the gums.
When the arteries are softened by humidity and the teeth are rotten, and you cure those with medicines without applying them, then place the patient's head in a basin of cold water, and soon light the cautery in the form which will be shown to you shortly, try that you place the quinula over the tooth and insert there the burning cautery forcefully, and have it remain just long enough for the patient's teeth to feel the heat from the fire.
Lift your hand, and repeatedly apply the cautery several times according to your desire.
And then make the patient spit out salt water and hold it for an hour, after which apply a salve, as the rotten tooth is closed, the softened gum is tightened, and the corrupted humidity is dried.
Chapter XXI.
On the Cauterization of Tooth Pain.
When tooth pain is due to cold or rot or you cannot cure it with medicine, then the cauterization in that area can be done according to two methods: either with a cow's horn cautery, or with fire.
With the pointed cautery, you should take horn from cows and bulbs therefrom in the place of iron, then take some and wrap it around the tip of the needle, then immerse that with the horn bulb, and place it over the tooth in pain urgently before it is rubbed.
And then repeatedly apply that several times until the virtue of the fire penetrates to the root of the teeth.
And if wool or some cloth is immersed in the horn above mentioned, place it over the aching tooth, and hold the ignited iron over it until the iron penetrates to the root of the tooth.
However, the cautery with fire should be applied when there is a wart or iron, and if any large part of it is in its core, do not allow the heat of the fire to reach the root of the tooth.
And then apply the cautery in the shape it will take, and place it over the tooth while holding your hand there until the cautery is rubbed. Do this several times so that the pain may be intensified or on that day or the next.
And ensure that when the cautery reaches the affected area, it fully opens its mouth to good measure and keep it there for about an hour; this is the form of the cautery.
And cauterize where you feel the extremity according to what is possible.
And this is the form of the cannula:
Chapter XXII.
On the cauterization of extrophy.
When extrophies are of phlegm and humors that are not responsive to digestion by medicines, and you have lightly digested them, then heat the cautery to the form which follows: having two open ends so that smoke can escape from one end, place the cautery over the abscess for one minute, and another if needed until it reaches the root of the abscess.
And if the abscess is small, then place the cautery according to the quantity of the abscess, and leave it for three days, placing it over the deepest part until what the fire has burned is sufficiently healed.
And then cure that by anointing and test and cloths until it is healed.
Chapter XXIII.
On the cautery treatment for hoarseness and the constriction of throat.
When humidities enter the channel of the lung, and especially when this is due to a complex coldness, then it is necessary that the patient be treated with medicines that act as laxatives at the beginning. Then, cauterize the vein of the gallbladder in the area where there is congestion.
And be careful that you do not apply the cautery to the gallbladder or burn its chain, but only a little.
And cauterize that with another cautery at the junction of the neck in the lower part of the spine. The cautery for it should be applied as described previously.
And after, care for that which precedes until it is healed.
Chapter 24.
On the cautery treatment for lung disease and cough.
When cough and lung disease are caused by humidity, and the patient does not have fever or consumption, and it is an old lung ailment, then apply a cautery with two cauteries over the furcula in the anterior axillary regions; and one other cautery on the medial part of the foot between the two mammary glands; and let the cautery be of the form previously described.
And if you wish, let your cautery be punctate with the cauteries called puncta, the form of which you describe in the section on cauterization for ear pain.
And make points in those areas; and after, care for that which you have applied until it is healed.
And since the cautery has three tongues, this cautery is for that: with one pass you can make three cauteries according to this form:
Chapter 25.
Of the cautery for titillium which is the head of the helper.
When the head of the helper is dislocated due to lubricous humidity and is not fixed in the hour of its return, you must reduce its dislocation within the time it customarily returns, and then by a small movement it is displaced thus as one seeks, thus as we have testified. Then first reduce the dislocation, and place the malformed part on its back or on the side; and lift the codena which is in the inner partition of the citillus to the upper partitions above your left hand, if the joint is dislocated in the inner partitions.
And then heat the cautery having two heads; this is its form:
And then cauterize the codena before it penetrates into the other side; and the figure of the cautery will come when using two heads.
And sometimes the cautery is adjusted according to this count and because the cauteries are .8.
And then place your hand over the cautery for some time with salt, and then make the patient adhere to rest, so that the limb is not used for some time until it is comfortable.
And if the dislocation is above and the treatment is done here, then cauterize over the muscle with a cautery on the clavicle or with pointed cauteries, so that the joint is confirmed and the humidity is eliminated and the patient heals.
Chapter 26.
On the cauterization of the stomach.
When cold and humid humors enter the stomach before it is extracted from its composition and multiply there, if you continue the curative methods and do not confirm it, then you should suspect that the gout affects the sole of the foot. It extends its hands and its things, and then cauterize it with three cauteries: on one cautery, place the foot for the width of a finger with a clavicle cautery, and on two cauteries, place the sides of the cautery, so that the figure forms a triangular shape; and keep the gaps between those that are not adjusted to prevent suppuration.
And if the depth of the cautery equals the quantity of two thirds of the thickness of the cord.
And let the shape of the cautery be as shown in this addition. If you wish, use a larger cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form; this is a cautery in the shape of a circle according to this form:
And let the stomach be cautery-punctured where one is afraid from this cautery: and you should prick the stomach with a point according to the quantity you desire to test, then immediately cauterize that with the cautery at the points; then cure that with the cure that precedes until it is healed.
Capitol.xxvi.
Of the cautery for the heel pain.
When there is pain in the heel due to coldness or humidity or excessive moisture that has exited from its normal structure through excess excretion, and the malady is treated with what we have said and does not improve, then you should ensure that the malady is reinserted into its neck, and prick three cauteries according to this form and quantity placed on the heel below the hypochondria, letting it reach the recumbent position of a person.
And let the space be which is between each cautery according to the size of the finger, and let the cautery be according to the length of the body straight.
And do not let your hand move while applying the cautery.
And if the amount that is applied equals the size of the width of the codena, and it is not adjusted further; and if the disease is located on the feet; and if not standing, then lying down, which has already extended its parts, and elevates its knees.
And when you are capable with your subtlety and prudence in the art, you may apply these cauteries with a surgical cautery.
And be careful not to overheat the cautery, and let the width of the application cover the entire codena so that the heat affects the whole body and penetrates into the intestines, for the codena here is thin; and know this.
Chapter XXVIII.
For the perforation of an abscess on the foot, use a cautery.
When there is inflammation or an abscess on the foot and you want to know if the abscess is in the flesh of the foot or in the skin of the foot, then if it is in the flesh of the foot, the patient will experience a greater degree of swelling and acute pain.
And if it is in the skin of the foot, then the pain will be acute and often so severe that it exhausts the doctors treating it.
Therefore, ensure that the patient is lying on their side; and place the location of the abscess under examination; then heat the cautery, which resembles a reed in shape, as described on the previous page. And cauterize it, ensuring that the entire cord is burned through, reaching the tendon, until it becomes healthy.
And treat it with the treatment for other abscesses until it is healed.
And one should use only that cautery of which the study in the art of medicine is extended, and in which many ill-fated matters are known; but this man has sometimes experienced several times burning in this operation, yet I leave that to you, and it pleases me.
Capitol xxix.
Of the cautery for pleurisy.
They said that the ancient cautery for the ribs in pleurisy should be made according to this manner, and it is what you should take from the ribs of aristologia a long dry stick with a sharp end, which has the thickness of a finger.
And then immerse it in oil and heat it over the fire. Then cauterize with a cautery in that place which is between the continuation of the furcula and the neck; use two small cauteries slightly inclined towards the part below the chin, one slightly declining towards the fifth rib and the thirteenth, respectively; use another cautery in the middle of the foot; use another on the stomach, and three cauteries behind; use one cautery between the two shoulders, and two cauteries on each side of the foot, placing the cautery between the two shoulders.
And do not hold your hand on the cautery, but rather in the middle of the sole working.
And some ancient doctors said that certain men use a cautery resembling a red-hot iron and apply it to that place between the ribs, until we bring about the desired healing by removing the infected tissue, as we have said regarding the inguinal abscess.
Yet in this puncture with the cautery, there is no need for fear; for if it happens in the location of the fistula, which does not heal, it will quickly occur.
Capitol.xxx.
Of the cautery treatment for melena.
When you treat the illness of melena, as we have said regarding the treatment in the division, and do not apply your cure, the cautery for it is according to three methods, all of which are correct. One method is to make three or four lines according to the length of the melena, following the figure of the cautery used for an inguinal hernia, the figure of which we have already described.
And between each cautery, the thickness of a finger or a little more, and the manner of the cautery be the manner which we have said for the cautery of the thigh equally.
And do not place your hand on the cautery; let the patient be held over its back.
And another manner of cauterizing, so that you ignite the cautery having two vessels, which we have said in the chapter on dislocation of the muscle, and lift the chain which is in the direction of the vein through which the poison of the left thigh flows.
And your elevation should be such that you lift the chain according to the length of the body, so that the cautery is applied according to the breadth of the body.
And then place the two vessels close together, ignite the wick, in that space where you insert the chain from the other side.
And then remove the cautery; and thus he makes four cauteries.
And if you boil, cauterize with a cautery having three verticils.
And then cure the cautery well after it has been let to burn for too many days, as this is more comfortable than the other previous causes in the cure.
Capitol.xxxvi.
On the cauterization of dropsy.
Cauterize not in dropsy but in the ankle properly.
When you cure the dropsy, follow the methods of cure that we have said in the division and do not deviate from your cure. Instead, you should cauterize with four cauteries in the circuit of the arm and one on the stomach, and another on the flanks, and another on the liver, and two between the vertebrae of the back, and one along the right side of the foot, and another on the stomach. And the depth of the cautery be proportionate to the thickness of the skin.
And leave the cautery open so that it gets cool for a long time.
And you do not evacuate the illness from the wound by placing the cautery where it can come out so that two intentions are added to it, and it will be hastened by the aid of healing.
The shape of the cautery used to cauterize the abdomen should be similar to a cross according to the form shown in the preceding illustration, and this is the same shape used to cauterize the thighs as shown before.
Capitol.xxxii.
Of the cauterization of feet and thighs.
When the feet are swollen and filled with yellow water, make sure to cauterize the feet on the surface of the foot between the heel and the toe, using a hot cautery that you hold steady; then lift your hand with the cautery and do not retract it completely, as the yellow water should drain.
The cautery is to be used in this manner: Then place two cauteries on each thigh, and on each thigh make the cautery touch the extremity of the surgical blade. The cautery is to be used according to the length of the thigh: place one at the top and the other in the middle of the thigh; on each thigh, use two cauteries.
Leave the wound open for a long time so that any water exudes from it.
Then proceed to treat those causes which we have mentioned.
Capitol.xxxiii.
On the cautery of the abdominal wall.
When the abdominal wall is affected by cold and humidity penetrating through its thickness, this is due to the digestive and retentive virtues, which are located in the stomach and intestines. This condition is treated according to the methods of treatment and you do not refer it, and sometimes the patient suffers from a cautery of virtue exhibiting, so cauterize that part with a large cautery over its own stomach according to what was mentioned in the cauterization of the stomach, using the ring cautery and four cauteries around the circuit of the subtle strings, using a fine-hand cautery; or use one cautery on aloes great, or two cauteries.
And if you find excessive humidity and the illness is tolerated, then cauterize that over the navel and over the intestines, and strengthen it by placing two cauterizations near the stomach and close to the inguinal areas, which is a perfect cure from which you will not err.
Capitol. xxxiv.
On the cauterization of ancient hemorrhoids.
When they are in the nature of ancient hemorrhoids or due to gross humors or corrupt humidity, and are cured as we have said in the division and do not apply our heat treatment, then cauterize with three cauterizations over the base of the two small triangular areas, and with one cauterization above the navel extending two fingers.
And if you observe that the patient's stomach is inflamed and the food they eat is not digested, and their face appears pale, then cauterize that over the stomach with a large cauterization as previously described; and with one cauterization on the side, and another on the arm with a pointed cauterization. Let the cauterization remain open for some time, and cure them until they are healed.
Chapter XXXV.
Of the cautery on the thigh near the amputation.
When you amputate the thigh, then apply the cautery that is similar to a ray. Then insert the ignited cautery into that amputated thigh, and keep your hand there until the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which the blood flows.
And do this one or two times; if the veins are too many, then cauterize each of them according to what we have counted, and place them under care until they are healed with the ointments you apply to them.
And if you use a large cautery on some areas, it is more effective in healing.
Chapter XXXVI.
Of the cautery for fistulas that occur in the natural passages of the body.
When nature does not obey the work we have recommended in its place, and the patient is frightened by this, treat with a cautery.
So when there is an old fistula in nature behind, and it is corrupted with decayed pus, then what is most worthy to cover it is that you try a fine thread, and then know the depth of it with the aforementioned thread.
Then heat the cautery that resembles a ray. Then place the heated cautery in this fistula, and according to the quantity in which you insert the thread.
And iterate over that with the cautery until those corrupted tissues are burned up quickly one time or two or three, according to the quantity of your necessity.
And guard yourself from burning nerves and veins; or if the fistula goes to the body of the bladder or the body of the intestine, then guard yourself from all those areas; and do not do this unless the fistula is in a fleshy location and you know it is not penetrating.
And then care for the area until it is healed.
And if the area is sealed, and the materials are separated from it, and remains this way for a long time, then you can perceive that it is entirely healed.
And if the materials do not stay from it, then you can perceive that it is penetrating or in the process of corrupting the bone, or it is due to one of those causes which will be recalled in its place.
Capitol. XXXVII.
On the cautery of warts.
When warts ache due to moisture or excessive dryness, and as a result the patient's suffering is diminished, then you should cauterize that area with a cautery, cauterizing each wart individually using a pointed cautery. You will find more details about this in the following text.
And cauterize it lightly with the second touch for a short duration, as three linear cauterizations will follow, and thus they will be more effective in healing.
Chapter XXXVIII.
Of cautery of the bladder.
When there is debility and softening of the bladder due to inflammation and humidity, such that the patient cannot retain urine, then cauterize that part near where the skin of the perineum begins, and cauterize with one cautery on the right side and another on the left side.
And the length of each cautery should be according to the size of the toes; cauterize that part with a cautery on the lower side of the two, or with two cautery marks if necessary.
And the cautery for the clavilh should be according to how it is performed.
Chapter XXXIX.
Of cautery of the thigh.
When there is inflammation and humidity in the thigh, and as a result, intercourse is prohibited, and her menstruation is corrupted, and the induction is delayed, and joint pain occurs due to this condition, then it is necessary to cauterize that area with three cautery marks in the circuit around the navel, just as we have said for the bladder cautery; and place a cautery mark on the lower part of the thigh, or use two cautery marks, and let the thigh cautery be done.
Capitol of the day.
Of the cautery for the dislocation of the ankle.
When mucus humors infiltrate the area around the ankle, and cause displacement of its location, a sign of this is that the swelling extends over the other foot when compared between them. And the location of the dislocation is treated with the affected foot.
Then cauterize the foot around the ankle with a round cautery, as you will have marked the circuit of the area as it is twisted, so that the area falls in the middle of the circle.
And the cautery mentioned above is used in the cauterization of the stomach.
And if this cautery is not present, then use three small olive cauteries instead.
And make the cautery according to the intensity of the pain in the entire leg; and then cure that which remains after it is healed.
Chapter XL.
Of the cautery of the sciatic vein.
When pain is felt in the sciatic region and its cause is cold and humidity, the patient is treated with what we have said about it, and you do not apply anything else. This is an ancient method. When you treat the patient with thick humors, use fetid pills or artificial ones that resemble them; and then cauterize the area.
The method of cauterization in this case is according to two methods: either with burning medicines, or with fire.
According to two scientific methods, of which one is to cauterize the area over the width of the foot with three triangular cauteries in this form; and do so with good depth. And let the space between each cauterization be the width of one finger, whether the cauterization is small or large.
More often, apply the cauterization in the middle of the location on the top of the foot, as there are four cauterizations.
And if you wish, cauterize the circle around which the form of the dislocation of the ankle occurs in the cauterization of the ankle dislocation, let it be a circle that burns the sensitivity of the entire chain.
And this is the way to cauterize for pain adherent to the ankle and not extended into the thigh.
But if it is extended into the thigh, then cauterize that with two cauteries on the thigh over the area through which you will pass the ankle that causes the pain; and with one cautery on the heel, you should slightly elevate the lateral part.
And for the surgical cautery, the depth of the cautery should be according to the amount of sensitivity of the tissue.
And if the ankle passes through the pain that is extended near the base of the toes, then cauterize that area where you pass the cautery with three or four points or more if needed.
And if the ankle passes through pain to be felt in the shin, then cauterize that area with a surgical cautery.
And in all cautery that you do, do not end with the cautery to such an extent that you burn nerves or great artery, and because of this you are badly affected or cause a contraction.
And I have already seen and others where they cauterized on the nail and ended with the cautery, and the burning bed inflated between where the tumor reached the foot, and burning perforated and corrupted all the skin. And then follow a strong purge for the stomach, and then this leads to death.
And if the pain is in two parts, cauterize each one according to this manner.
And the wise will say about the cautery for aqua cauteris: this is the manner: make a circle of iron where the circumference is the width of one palm; and let its orifices be according to the size of an finger bone or at most a little more.
And inside that circle, there is another third; and let the space between them be the quantity of a foot's thumb; and those circles are opened in two parts; and let the length of those cays be one thumb or two thumbs, and make on those iron edges decently fitted to the circles; this is the form of it:
It is heated in the fire until it turns red and gives off sparks, then placed on the part of the ankle, with the patient lying on the latz. And then cauterize it with three round cauteries in one go.
And then leave it for three days; then apply a plaster with bile and leave the wound open for many days; and cure it by anointing it until it is healed.
Albucasis says: Oh, my son, we have used this type of cautery little because of the fear of its appearance, and because we have found few cases that relate to it.
Yet in those who have suffered from good cauteries, you find the place of it.
Good cautery with medicines that adhere should be made by making two circles having a perforated wheel in which the smoke from the iron door passes; let the length of the walls where they are to be two nuts or quarters.
And if the space which is between each part of the size of the swelling of the digit; and be opened down and up, and contain themselves among them according to this form:
And then place your hand on the side of the ankle where the patient feels pain, and hold your hand on the side of the ankle; and then take some hot water and pour it between two circles, and the quality of that water should be warm little by little, and keep that for the quantity of one hour, and let the patient feel the biting and adjustment of it — for that atrophy bites like fire — until the biting ceases.
And then lift your hand with the instrument and remove the hot water from all around the ankle with cold water.
And then let it be for three days and place your hand over that border until the blackness of the adjustment fades, and let this be for some days, and the redness will go away; this is called juvament.
And then cure it by applying ointment until it is healed.
And if the pain is extended into the thigh or leg, apply a statue to it that contains water according to how it is done in the water.
And this is the way of applying water, and I have already written that in the treatise on the preparation of medicines. Recipe for alkali and for the extinguished caustic from both parts one, three times fill a new vessel in which the part left has been perforated by a small tube, according to the quantity that enters into it.
And place the bottom of another vessel over the perforated one, and pour water gently over the alkali and live caustic so that they absorb it with a thumb, and then, when you feel them well absorbed by your hand through good compression, let the vessel receiving the sharp water pass to the part left in the perforated vessel.
Then adjust all that water, and pour it over another live caustic and renewed alkali, for then it will be of much stronger acuity, which is administered in many operations of medicine and in the cautery of other members, for the operation is done with fire.
And some of the medicines, when they are mixed with those that are cauterized wide, such as terebinth and honey, and it has been assayed that they be combined.
And Gualia recounted an operation and a cure from the ancients for joint pain and sciatic vein pain. The method was very good, as she said there was no need for another treatment, and that the person was cured in one session just as recommended, for her intervention was strong in bath and effusion, and she knew of that.
And it should be near certain arnica vert, and if arnica is not available, a fresh fig; and it should be boiled with a little gray and placed in the water where the pain is, or on the thigh, or on the chest, and then applied.
And it should be left for the quantity of three hours or for the amount of time the patient endures the application.
And then place it in bath and then when the patient's body is heated, interpose it on the floor, for the pain ceases and the patient is cured.
And be aware that none use cautery in these medicines except near the evacuation of the body.
And Escorides says that when making a cut in the sinewy vein it should be cauterized, which will heal better; and the cautery is made in this manner: take wool and soak it in old oil, and place it between the toes of the foot and over the bone.
And then take a dry cut of wool and char it in fire until it becomes charcoal; and place it over the wool and let it cool. And repeat this, and continue doing this until the spark of the bite penetrates into the water and stops the pain.
And this method of cautery is called the cattle cautery.
Capitol. xlii.
On the cautery for pain in the toes.
Sometimes pain in the two places is caused by multiple reasons, such as compression or percussion or excessive evacuation, and other causes similar to those, through the infiltration of wet matter.
And the cautery is not used to cut, but only in this single species which is caused by the infiltration of wet matter.
Therefore, open, and place pills similar to them for the evacuation of the patient on both sides where the pain is, three lines according to the width of the area. Then prick or pierce in each line five times, according to the quantity that comes from the tolerance of the patient and the virtue of the area.
And perform the cautery with a pointed cautery.
And if you want, perform the cautery with three or four medio-clavicular cauteries in this manner:
Capitol. xliii.
On the cautery at the beginning of gilbositat.
Motions observed in this illness among small children; and the sign of the beginning of it in children is that they experience difficulty in lifting and moving their legs.
You find in the lower vertebra of the back and those nearby that they are beginning to overgrow the other vertebra.
And when you see this and want to treat it, then cauterize that area with a circular cautery according to this form: let the cautery cover all parts of the vertebra equally.
And if you wish, cauterize around the vertebra with a pointed cautery two or three lines wide. And let the points be close to each other.
Then place the area to be treated over what we have said until it is healed.
But beware that the cautery not be applied in inflammation caused by nerve spasm.
Chapter XLIV.
On the cautery treatment for gout and joint pain.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
And thus, gout caused by cold is treated in a manner of treatment and not by simply relieving the pain, but by using cautery.
And you do so by cautery at the site of joint evacuation on the foot with heated cautery instruments.
And the olive cautery is used for which this is its form:
And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. And if the pains rise into the toes or other joints, and you need to treat this, then cautery the affected toe with three or four points using the olive cautery from any direction.
And if you need to use cautery irons for these cauteries, then apply the cautery and do not press your hand too much against the cautery before, only around the width of a finger.
And if the pains penetrate to the groin and thigh, then apply the cautery which we have mentioned in our chapter.
And if the pains are only in the toes and it is called "suagra," then puncture along the circumference of the veins as they twist, puncturing at those two lines.
And if the pains remain in the fingers, then puncture along the circumference of the veins on each finger and at the tip of the hand.
And if the pains persist for several days in the elbows or muscles, then cauterize around all parts of the joints.
And if you do not evacuate the gout properly and with the right administration of medicines, then even if the regimen is good and the inflammation subsides, this cautery will be sufficient for recovery, God willing.
Chapter XLV.
Of cautery for ruptures.
When there is a rupture in the groin and intestines are protruding behind the skin at the inguinal region, when this begins to happen close to you, then as you command the patient to fast on that day and use mild remedies so that the abdominal wound may heal.
And place the patient between your thighs over his or her abdomen, and command him or her to keep the area firm until the skin heals or the mesh appears.
And then return the area to its proper place, and apply pressure to the rupture over the bone of the pelvis, marking the extremity of which should appear like the size of a circle in the upper parts of the body.
And then heat the cautery, the form of which is as follows:
until it becomes red hot and begins to spark. Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
Then place the cautery over that mark on your hand where the cautery is straight, and put it there so that you can reach the bone of the heel in the middle of the sole; and repeat with another pass if you have not reached the bone in the first pass.
Observe wisely the state of the hernia during your cautery, so that you do not burn it too much, lest it come to harm the patient or cause another great mischief.
Be mindful that when you use the cautery, you should not touch the bone, as this would compromise your operation.
Make sure the cautery for children is fine according to their size and measure.
And then take care of the place of the cautery for three days, keeping between that it heals the scar from the fire.
And then take care of it with other ointments until it is healed.
And the patient remain on their back for 10 days until the place and wound are sealed.
And ensure that you support the patient according to the length of time for the healing of the wound which closes his abdomen, and that the intestine does not come out, requiring great effort to heal.
And then, when it is time to lift after 10 days, properly apply a salve, and keep it for another 10 days.
And let him rest and replenish his food and drink, and use strong voices, for when he follows this regimen of healing entirely, he will be cured.
And I will say the healing of ruptures in other parts of the abdomen, and at the beginning, and if they do not heal, then cauterize the rupture with a round cautery according to its quantity, and what is drawn from the cord should be done like the tender part of it; then take care of that with what we have said, and it is not adjusted.
And some have said that a rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery according to this form, rather than sewn with a needle.
And a line is placed there for the width in the slashes above the rupture, and another line on top; then place your hand with a triangular cautery, but the first cautery is lighter and better.
Capitol XLVI.
Of the cauterization of the cord.
When pain in certain members persists due to inflammation or percussion and does not respond to medical treatment over a long period, then you should cauterize with a pointed cautery.
And the cautery should be of the size and shape appropriate to the member, its strength and depth, and the location of the cord and its pain.
So if the pain is cured by the first cautery, that is good; but if not, then repeat the cautery on it; for it is customary that those pains are pierced in the same member near the one where the pain is located, so that you may achieve the cure through cauterization before the disease is healed.
Capitol XLVII.
Cauterization for leprosy.
Lepers are sometimes cauterized with a very hot cautery, especially when the species of leprosy is caused by the putrefaction of flame and melancholy.
And so, if you want to cauterize him, consider whether the leprosy is common and as it is healed according to what we have said in the division, neither this nor that, and fear that the corruption might comprehend his entire body and all the complexity of his being; then cauterize him on the head with five cauteries: one in the middle of the head, and leave the second space from it, place the third at the forehead towards the end of the hair; two on the horns; and one behind, on the neck or servant bone.
And finish your hand with a cautery just inside where it makes a small impression in the mouth, so that the exhalation of thick vapors is alleviated; and cauterize on the palate according to necessity.
If leprosy is already spread over the thigh and manifestly apparent, then you should cauterize that area as well as those cauterizations which we have said in the head; on the extremity of the nose, and two cauterizations on both eyebrows, and two on two vertebrae of the neck, and six on the vertebrae of the back, and a large one near the shoulder blade, and one on the spine, and two on the axillae, and one on each axilla, and two on the nipples, and one on each nipple, and two on the armpits, and two on the muscles, and two on the tendons of their foot; cauterize that over all the joints of the fingers of the hand and the feet, and on every heel of their feet, and on the bones of their thighs.
And guard the nerves which are over the heel that you do not burn those.
And sometimes cauterization is done with one cauterization on the bone of the pelvis and another on the entrance to the stomach, and another on the navel.
And know that the more tightly you adjust the cautery, the more beneficial and effective it is; and know that the patient does not feel pain in the cautery, as they do with the seams, because the body of the patient is already numbed.
And know that the cautery should be large or small according to the members and joints, as determined by the size of the instruments.
And then cure the cautery with a mixture of ground rush and honey, as well as other treatments until it is healed.
Capitol. xlviii.
On the cautery for stupefaction.
When some member is numb or paralyzed and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, and does not heal, then you cautery that numb member with cauteries according to the size of the member or its smallness.
And let your cautery penetrate the depth of the wound slightly. And then cure that oil until it is healed.
And sometimes a cautery is applied to some stupor which affects the hands and feet, and the spine of both sides, and the vision of the nerves which run through that member, and the stupor is increased.
But do not presume on this except those who are skilled in the anatomy of the members and the course of the nerves throughout the body.
Capitol. xliv.
On the cautery treatment for swellings that are morphia.
When swellings are old and do not respond to any of the medicinal ointments, then cauterize the area with a cautery, using a small amount according to the quantity of the codex. Do this until the whiteness and color of the swelling change.
And then cure that oil with a mixture of flour of ergot and lentils in clarified oil and leaves of arnica, and with dove's blood or quince seed, taking one part of each, and all mixed together. Then place a cloth over the area until it is healed.
Capitol I.
Of cautery for the thigh.
When cancer begins and you want to stop it, then cautery it with a circular cautery around its circumference as it is revolved.
And the wise will say that it should be cauteryed with the latest cautery in the middle place; but I do not see this, for I fear it is ulcerated, and I have seen this several times.
And it is better to cautery it around its circumference with a circle, as we have said, or with multiple cauteries.
Capitol II.
Of cautery for adenitis.
When some adenitis is delayed in maturation, this occurs either due to excess causing it, or due to the patient's condition, as they are old and decrepit, have few sins, or due to time. If you want to hasten its maturation; then cautery it around its circumference with several small puncturing cauteries; and leave that which will mature on its own.
But if you want to make the puncture with a cautery, then ignite the cautery of which this is the form: and place it in the middle of the location where the needle will penetrate.
And if you place the cautery there, let it be, so that the arm will be relieved; and then cure what is inside to make it heal.
Chapter II.
On the cautery for corrosion.
Corrosion is a gradual corruption in the limb, which eats away at that part like fire consumes dry wood.
Therefore, if you find corrosion in a location that requires a fire cautery, then ignite the cautery with several small and large points of fire as appropriate for that corrupted area.
And then cautery that area completely as you remove all the corrosion and do not leave any cause of it.
And allow that for three days, and place a heated cautery over the affected areas after three times applying oil mixed until all the blisters are gone and all the corruption is removed.
And cure that by applying ointment to the生成中，请稍候...
And if within three days the flesh grows healthy in the area where there is no corruption, that is good. But if not, then apply the cautery again to the area that is rotten in the affected places.
And after medicating with some applications of acute medicine, use half the area for cautery. But however, a light cautery with fire is more beneficial for juvenile ailments.
And I have already explained the treatment with acute medicine in the division, so use it when you need it.
Chapter III.lix.
On the Cauterization of Wounds and Other Similar Conditions.
Small stones or gravel in the foot that cause pain, and are large, penetrating, which affect the foot; for a cautery in these cases there are two methods, one is a hot cautery and another with a cautery using water.
A hot cautery is when you heat the concave cautery tip resembling a turning poker, which is made of iron according to the quantity it contains the stone from all parts, and has thin edges.
Then place the ignited part over the stone, and quickly move your hand with the cautery in a circle around the stone until the cautery reaches the depth of the stone. Let it be for three days before it begins to scab. Then apply a plaster with wild chamomile soaked in salt, and let the plaster remain on it for one night until the stone is thoroughly removed.
Then treat the area with a cream of generative flesh until it heals.
If so non-converting, and motas veguadas accidentossi in the superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cover que tu aministres en aquels cautéri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.
And do the same for the other entering which you come over all of them in their part of the body.
And then cure those pus that the roots of the claws have been eradicated from what of the ointments which the flesh comes in contact with.
Capitol. liiii.
Of the cautery for trembling.
When there is a tremor due to friction in the nerves or from fever of some cause, or for another similar reason, then you should cautery it with four or five cauteries on the spine, placing one cautery between each vertebra; and one on the foot, and one over the stomach.
And the tremor subsides, and the disease is cured.
Capitol. lv.
Of the cautery for accidents in the body.
When in the body there is an abscessed boil, and sores or fissures are made from corrupt thick materials; at the beginning, as they appear, let them be cauteryed with a fine cautery dipped in mirt oil, the end of which is extended over the fire; or with a rod of erestologia; or with a lens-shaped cautery.
And sometimes the cautery is applied additionally at the beginning of its expulsion according to this manner; and not considering it, they break the excess, making those, and heal those.
Moreover, I must ensure that this is done near the evacuation with flebotomy.
Capitol the sixty-sixth.
Of the cautery for flux of sand infection due to incision of artery.
Often times, due to flux of artery that is incised and where a hole has formed, or due to the incision for apsema or cautery of the member, then the swelling appears, and it is difficult to remedy that.
Therefore, when such a case occurs, first touch the wound with your hand at the opening of the artery, and place your hand there to strengthen that part for several moments until the flux of blood is stopped, then remove your hand so it does not swell.
And then place the olive cautery in the fire for a few moments and larger ones, several times, and blow on them until they are hot.
And then take one small or large, according to the place and wound where the artery is ruptured, over that vein press forcefully as you have already applied your said cautery, and keep the cautery close so that it restrains the bleeding.
And if the blood is expelled from the orifice of the artery when you move your said cautery and tighten the cautery, then take another freshly prepared cautery from among those in the fire, and continue doing this one after another so that the bleeding is restrained.
And make sure you do not burn the nerves here, lest another mischief come upon the patient.
And know that when blood flows from the artery, it is not possible to restrain the bleeding in those cases, especially when the artery is large, unless one of four methods is used: either with a cautery as we have said, or with extraction when it is not extracted, or when it is extracted, the extremities of it are burned and the bleeding is restrained, or with lixiviation with liquorice or with strong bandaging, or with poultices applied over medicines whose virtue is to restrain the bleeding; and they should be tightly wrapped in a suitable constriction.
More than that, he who administers the restriction decently to him with the flax and with constriction of cloths or by position due to burning causes and similar ones, does not conferees but tart.
More if this should happen to someone and neither the doctor is present nor medicine, then open decently with your finger on the orifices of that vein as we have said, and feel for the great constriction within which the sore has remained from the upper part of the wound, and over the archery let the finger not be retained; and over the archery be sprinkled with cold water fomentation until the sore is closed and thickened; and more burn with cautery or medicine if necessary.
Of incision and puncture and vents and of bloodletting and of wounds and of their resemblances.
We have already said in the first chapter all illness in which cautery with fire is convenient and medicine burning, and the occasions and causes of it, and the instruments necessary among those for the forms of cauteries; and I have ordered the chapters from the upper part of the head to the feet.
And I will proceed in this chapter in that manner, so that the one who desires this may be relieved, regarding what he has requested.
And before I begin this, listen, son, that in this chapter what is treated is as described in the first chapter on cautery.
And because you must be very careful, for in the operation described in this chapter, you will encounter cases where you need to perform evacuation by draining the abscess or making an incision over it, or performing drainage or purgation of the wound or extracting an arrow and beginning a cautery, or similar procedures. And in all of these, there is fear and trembling, and in the most severe cases, death.
And I warn you that this applies to you in your own situation, for at times you may find yourself handling cases of patients suffering from diseases. And some of them will go to their illness and are slight cases, you must give them death, for the severity of what they find due to their illness, and because of the long duration of their illness, and in their illness is fear which means death.
And of those which give to you their affection and have told, you expecting from that health, and their disease is pernicious.
And therefore you must consent to that which comes to you from him who is this manner; and your caution be greater than covetousness and your rapacity; and do not presume on any cause but rather certain science which verifies what you should do, and to which through success a praiseworthy result follows.
And use in the cure of all your patients by prognosis and indication of him to whom health is converted, for in that you have assistance in the acquisition of fame and memory, of praise and glory.
O, children, God infuses His own understanding into you and does not deprive you of direction and protection, for this is in His hand.
And I have ordered this chapter distinguished by chapters according to what was preceded in the chapter of cauteries, concerning the cure from head to foot, that you may be relieved with what you asked and of which you have need.
First chapter.
For the treatment of water contained in the head of children.
Know that this illness, which often appears in children, should be treated during childbirth and when the mother's body strengthens the child's head.
And sometimes appear for hidden causes that are not known.
But I have not seen this illness in adults; and for all those I have seen with it, death has followed, so I am left to work on them.
And I have seen that a child's head was filled with water, and his head remained constantly swollen until it could no longer bear the weight due to the size of his head, and more so because the moisture increased until death.
And this moisture is either added between the membrane and the bone, or added by placing something over the head.
When the operation in that place where moisture is between the tendon and the bone and the abscess is small, then cut in the middle of the location making a crack in the width, such that the length of the crack allows the moisture to flow through, and this is the form of the spout:
And so, if the moisture is greatly increased and the abscess is larger, then here make two cracks in this manner:
And if the moisture leaves the bone, the sign of this is that you see the edges of the tendon widely separated and the water spews out when you press on it with your hand at the inner parts; this is not what you want to hide. Cut in the middle of the location making three cracks in this manner:
and then extract all the moisture; and strengthen the cracks with bandages and feathers; and on the fifth day, pour oil over it; and remove the dressing and treat the wound with ointments, strengthening the tendon with equal parts; let the patient eat dry food of little moisture until the limb is comfortable and healed.
And another method of incision, which consider as great the magnitude of the abscess and the collection of the water, for in some occasions it is more in the occiput, or in the front part, or on the right side, or on the left; and therefore attend to the incision where the abscess appears and the filling with water, and do so according to what is most convenient to you.
And observe that you do not incise the artery and attempt to let the venom of the boil flow out through that flux of blood, as this would cause harm to the patient.
Chapter II.
When an abscess or wound is found in the ear or on the foot, this method is ancient, and you should not rely on the treatment of medicines for it; instead, the proper treatment involves incising those two arteries.
And when you want to incise those that the bad humor reaches its head, then rub the area with rough cloth so that the arteries appear, and strengthen the neck of the patient with some cloth; and consider where the pulse is in the vein; and the locations of each over the locations which are near the ears pressing, and they are hidden in almost all people.
And place the hand over the artery with force, and incise each with the blade of a sharp knife penetrating into the mouth, and do this for the breadth of the head.
And if you want, insert the blade leaving the artery and cut it at the points where the incisions are above.
And let the length of the incision be two digits wide, for when any vein is incised, the wound is healed at the pulsating exit, which leaps forth due to frequent pulsation.
And if the artery does not appear at the incision, then measure from the ear the quantity of three digits, and place the hand with force, and make the incision into the mouth.
And that which flows from the wound is a quantity of blood one pound, and rather more or less, and all this is according to the quantity which appears from the virtue of the malady and from the fullness of the artery of the part.
And then consider the wound, and thus if any cause of infection remains on the bone, cut this away so that no abscess forms.
And then strengthen the wound with down feathers and linen cloth, and place it in ointments until it heals.
Chapter III.
On the extraction of the arteries which are in the temples.
When an old or acute migraine occurs due to humid atmospheric conditions and the quality of the air in the temples, or if it is a strong old headache similar to those, and is treated according to the methods of medical cure, and since this does not alleviate the condition, then we have resorted to the extraction of the arteries in the temples or cauterization of those as we have shown.
And the manner of the operation and extraction is that you grasp the parts where the skin is on the temples; and understand the apparent artery in the temple where it is shown to you by your pulse, and is hidden in only a few men due to the strength of the cold.
And if it is hidden to you, then hold the neck of the patient tightly with some cloth; and then rub the area with a rough cloth or evaporate the place with water until the artery becomes clearly visible. And then you take the spatium of which this is the form: And then you insert the needle there with ease until you reach the artery; and then get oil in it and extract that part above as you remove that from the needle and uncover those of the tunics which you leave there, from all parts.
But if the artery is fine, then you envelop it with the tip of the forceps, and then divide a part thereof according to the quantity for which the extremities of it are long and contracted, and thus will not allow the flow of the vein; for if they are not divided, the blood will not rise up.
And then evacuate from the vein one third.
And if the artery is large, then divide it into two locations using a piece of flax double its thickness or with long cords, and do not touch it before the consolidation of the wound and ensure a flow of blood.
And then incise the superfluous tissue between two ligaments; and do so at that time or soon after.
And if you wish, cauterize it with a cautery on the bone and with a surgical knife at the points where they have been incised, and it will serve in place of that operation.
And it is better to do so if the patient has fever or is of a febrile nature; for a cautery is among those causes that help in resolving humidity, and therefore it is better for healing.
And then remove the arteries that you have placed in their proper location, and cover them with dust properly made, and apply medicine to cure them; for flesh to grow and for them to be healed.
And if during another operation you encounter a flow of blood from the artery, then you should constrict that blood, with a cautery or by filling the area with cotton, and firmly hold your hand to keep the blood flow restricted. And if for any of those reasons it is not at your present, then place your hand over the area firmly to constrict the blood, and apply the area with water of strong refrigeration to allow the acute pain to subside, and strengthen it as needed.
And for the easier part of arterial extraction, you should cauteryize the vein with this cautery using two knives, after marking the two areas with probes, and hold flamed sticks over them until they reach the bone and incise the vein in two places, so that what is between the ends of the vein can be extended, which are not fully cauterized by this cautery.
And this is the form of the cautery:
And let the sharpness of the two knives be evident. But otherwise if the pains are acute as two knives, it is better, for they approach each part quickly like two knives, and do not cut the flesh hastily.
Therefore, when there is some swelling, hold the heat from the fire there and the flesh is cut slightly.
And this method is better in all works and more gentle.
And let the space which is between two knives be the amount of the swelling of the digit.
Capitular fourth.
Of the treatment of bodies with acute and acidic tears from the eyes.
When the tears are acidic, and the body of those veins which are above the root of the head do not respond to any cause of treatment by medicine, and sometimes the face of the patient turns red and feels a crawling sensation on their forehead as if it were being crawled over by ants, and the eyes become weak, moistened, and seem to be known, with the eyelids scalded by the acidity of the tears, they use traditional remedies in the treatment of these cases during this operation, and name that treatment "passa.
And you command the patient to stretch the skin on their forehead, and then incise the forehead with three equally spaced cuts according to the length of the forehead. And if the length of the incision is two fingers: the first incision should be equally distant from the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second according to the length of a small movement of the tears which are in the lacrimal, and the third on the other part.
And beware of the beginning of the arteries which are in two branches, and keep your hand away from the continuation of both jaws. And if the space of each incision the quantity of three fingers adjusted.
And if you have a piece of sponge apparatus or dry cloth at hand, place them on those areas to stop the bleeding.
And then insert the point of two sharp extremities, of which this is the form of the incision: that is from the temple part into the second incision. Excise all the tissue that is between two incisions near the cavity which is above the bone, and then do the same for the middle incision into the second incision. Then stab this flap and insert it into the first incision. Alternatively, use another instrument called a cuttelet, sharp on one side and blunt on the other.
Then place the sharp edge to the adjacent flesh, excise the tissue, and insert the sharp edge inside the bone. Push it into the middle crack and cut all the vessels that descend from the head to the feet.
More than that, continue the incision to where the tissue appears, and then do so in the middle crack between the other crack.
And after the bleeding has stopped in equal quantity, squeeze the areas of the feet where the clotted blood is located.
And then place over any gouty crack in the old foot, place over those powders mixed in wine and oil and honey, and ensure that it does not lead to an abscess.
On the seventh day after the ligature, administer a large fomentation of warm water or wine, and then apply an ointment of basilicum mixed with sweet oil to other areas where the sores have healed.
Chapter V.
For the cure of tears due to catarrh and those drops descending from the parts inside the head.
When there is an acuter and continuous catarrh, and the drops from the foot are small and exhausted, and their regardament shows debilitation, and the eyelids are ulcerated and of their case the skin, and in the prepuce of the head there is acute pain and subsequent extension, then you may perceive from these accidents that the materials and catarrh do not come from veins within the parts.
And the best cure in such cases is this: you command the patient to raise his forehead, and then incise a small crack in the middle of the forehead, about the width of your thumb (and start from the left temple between the right temple; and where the incision is into the bone, extend your hand over the wrinkles of the temples which are prominent, and should be thoroughly excised), until the bone is exposed.
Dry all the blood on the sponge or dry cloth and then place it between the two lips of the crack with a piece of old skin or a cloth. Strengthen on top with powders mixed in wine and oil so that no abscess forms.
And when you remove this and see that the abscess has diminished, then apply fomentations to where the new flesh begins to form, and then cure it with a drying regimen which causes the flesh to dry, as if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of resin and mix them, and from them make a poultice and administer it to these wounds of the native flesh.
Chapter VI.
Of the cure for what cats in the ears.
All causes that cat in the ears are of four species: one is mineral gravel or a cause similar to gravel, such as iron or sand, another is from plants such as cucumber or bean, another is a fluid cause such as water or thickened wine and their like, or some animal.
And when there is pain in the ear or another cause seeming like those causes that do not affect nor swell the ear, and you place the ear in the sun, and if one touches it, then it distills in some cause of olive oil or sesame, then return the extraction of it, and make him sneeze with a condiment, and close his nostrils to prevent the onset of sneezing. And place some pieces of cloth or wool in the circuit of the ear, and extend the ear to the parts above, where small particles seem to be affected by these causes.
And if it is not affected, then administer the extraction of it with the instrument called gesti epicicarios subtil, the form of which is as follows:
And if it is affected by the gesti, that is good; otherwise, then administer the extraction of it with the fine-once subtil of few duplications.
And if it is not affected by this, then make a cannula of wire and insert the end of the cannula into the meatus of the ear and close around the cannula with wax and with oil softened so that only the cannula is open. And then extract the spleen with strong traction, for too many times as we have recounted.
If it is not completely removed in this manner, then take some alum or vinegar-soaked cloth on which the galls are placed and place that at the extremity of the vein, and then properly wrap around that area sufficiently. And then insert that into the channel of the ear with ease, and then dry the ear of its moisture.
And if it is not completely removed by all the causes we have recounted, then incise to excise that which intends to become an abscess or spasm.
And the method of incising it is that at the beginning you mark the location of the evil in the pharyngeal vein and extract the sanc according to the virtue of the vein, then make a cut between your fingers and turn the ear upwards, and make a small fissure in the root of the ear, insert its grey matter into the well-compressed area. And let the crack have the shape of the moon and lead to the heel, and if the heel is darkened, obstruct it if possible with appropriate instruments; then close the crack while it is in that state with speed, and cure it while it is healed.
And if the cause lies in the ear, being one of those waxes that accumulates and is inflamed, then administer the treatment and extraction of it; but if it does not yield to your attempts, then take fine thin spathae according to this form: And administer to it the extraction of that wax which is embedded in the ear.
And do not do this when you think that it is already moistened by the vapor of the ear, and place it on fine wicks, and then extract it with tweezers or by gentle grasping, or by incision as we have said, for this makes the extraction easier.
But in the water which has entered into the ear canal that the patient uses to sneeze with a gesture at the onset, and fills his ear with some old wax, pour hot liquid over that ear in which is the water, and if it is thereby expelled, that is good; but if not, then take small pieces of pears or lemons according to the length of the digit, heat them in the fire for a little while, and have the patient insert one of those into the passage of his ear and sit over a portion of that mixture and percuss it with another piece of pear on the pear which is inside the ear. Do not stop applying the heat until all the water has been expelled.
Do not stop applying the heat until all the water has been expelled. And once the water has been sufficiently expelled, take a paper or wick, and insert one end into the ear and extend the other end into the fire until the material is burned.
And put another wick and do this several times until all the water has been expelled, then remove it with a catheter as previously described.
In the extraction of a small object entering that ear, handle it more carefully and as similar to how we described in the division. But if it is a large object causing pain quickly, then perform the extraction with speed and precision, as the cause is less severe compared to all other causes that affect the ear.
In the extraction of a worm generated in the ear, when you treat it as we described in the division and in the treatise on distillations, and if your treatment does not seem effective, then look into the ear in the sunlight.
And if there appears any cause of worms here, then extract that with forceps or fine tweezers, but if no cause appears, then take a cannula and stretch it open. I insert the subtle extremity into the ear according to the amount that the patient can tolerate; and then suck it out forcefully, performing this multiple times until all the worms are extracted.
But if it does not respond to your attempt, then you open and close the circuit of the cannula with wax as we have said; then administer distillations that have already proven effective in the treatment of worms, and you will find this in the treatise on distillations.
And let your effusion be with that which you pour medicines into the ear with this instrument, of which this is the form: And make it of silver or copper, stretch it out, in which there is a small tube, and with a flat surface above.
And thus as they push so that it is in the cavity of the cannula here where it will be necessary. And if you wish, take the wick and wrap it properly around its end, then place oil in the cavity of the ear, or the juice of some herb, or any of these medicines in the cannula — that is in the ear —, and then insert the wick carefully above and squeeze your hand with a gentle compression so that the oil is expelled into the cavity of the ear and the patient feels the oil inside.
And what is infused in the ear should already be heated over fire for a little while. And make sure that the medicine you will distill in the ear is not too hot, for ear medicines do not tolerate this.
Chapter VII.
On the Treatment of Ear Abscesses.
Sometimes children are born with abscesses in the ears of their parents who do not have perforated ears, and this happens occasionally in adults as well, with an abscess forming in the meat of the ear due to infection or injury; sometimes these abscesses occur in the preauricular area which does not reach the surface.
And that which happens in the pubis of the patient, which does not admit the hand, is in the major positions difficult to heal.
And in that where you can reach the surface, make sure that you place the patient in the sun and examine it carefully. And if you see an apparent swelling, open the small incision beneath it from which this swelling arises:
If the extremity in which the width is small, and one part is sharp while the other is not; and the incision is of two lion's teeth so that it does not irritate the ear:
And if the opacity is due to hidden flesh in the ear or in the meat of the ear, then make small incisions and cut deeply enough to remove all the flesh.
And if the opacity is in the pubis of the ear, then take a thin lion's claw and heat that iron slightly in fire, and then apply it to the flesh of the ear.
And therefore if you sense an effusion in that which the patient suffers from with ease due to the weight of urination, relieve the oppression with ease; and be careful not to injure the nerves of the ear.
And then place the cloth in the ear according to the size of the wound which you have covered with Egyptian ointment; and do this for several days until you are sure of the healing of the sore; or that you moisten it and insert it in water, and powder it over the healed area, using it. And if you see the ear already protruding, then scoop out what you have damaged and replace it with another kind of substance which you wrap in a cloth made of rubbed oil, until the abscess is reduced; and cure that as it heals.
But if a bleeding occurs, then submerge the sponge or cloth in cold water, apply it to the ear, and use the other treatment which constricts the flow of blood, as mentioned in the treatise on distillation.
Chapter VIII.
Of the care of tetanus which affects the eyelids.
Tetanus which affects the eyelids; some cases are humid, while others are dry.
Therefore, ensure that you have those ready, either needles or lancets, and incise those with the foam of their rash, and place your hand over the areas after trepanning.
But if there is pain with a flow of scrotal venous blood, then you cauterize those with a pointed cautery.
And the best cauterization is near the incisions, and the sores heal when there remains any cause of their rash; and when they are cauterized with fire, those rashes are burned and do not return.
Capitulum ix.
Care of the swelling that affects the eyelids.
Swellings occur in the eyelids of the patient due to some cause which resembles swelling in its strength and hardness, and therefore is called swelling.
And it is an addition of thick humidity in the eyelid above and below.
And the operation in them is that you consider whether the enlargement is present in them, arising from what appears in the eyelid and is felt throughout the part; and the cause of it is slight.
And make a incision for the width, and then carefully expose that of the entire part with ease as you evacuate it, and suspend that and cut it off.
And if the figure is large, then you adjust it with sutures; and care for it until it heals.
And if it is small, you will not suffer ill from it because the ointment restores and heals it.
And if the enlargement is decreasing in the parts inside the eyelid, you expose the inside surface, then evacuate the eyelid and suspend the enlargement with a needle, or one that you indicate for incision, and press it from all sides. If the eyelid is extended by incision, this is not noticed for any reason.
And at the beginning, wash the wound with salty water; and dress the area with a solution that should be healed within.
Capitol.
For the cure of excision in the upper eyelid.
Excision is caused by gray matter that is generated in the tunic of the upper eyelid, especially in children, worsens their conditions and affects their digestion; and they cannot look at the brightness of the sun for this reason, as tears collect around them.
And for this reason, they often cry on their cheeks all the time, and sleep with tears on their cheeks; only their eyelids are wet, which are already covered by inflammation, and the apparent precursor to excision is evident in the wound; and when you press the area with your fingers, you feel the excision within them.
And some method of operation is in that the patient places his head under your hand, and then covers himself with a cloth, and makes a cut according to the quantity it contains of tumor from all parts, and then places this over that and presses with your fingers throughout so that excision may be added in the middle of the circle, and then cuts into the moisture at its center with a spatum for the width, and let the fissure not be greater than the fissure made in flubotomy.
May it be in the prepontal region that you open the cord entirely until you reach the archernach, for in the more severe cases you proceed with an archernach incision according to the form of whiteness.
Therefore, remove those from the cloths which you have wrapped around your feet and stir between your right and left hand until they are dispersed.
And make sure you do not press on the incision so that you do not damage the flesh and flap it open.
May it be, however, that your archernach does not appear at the beginning of the incision. Then, press on the incision a little with a small cloth until you proceed with the archernach; then remove those as we have said; and place cloths in water and wine over the area and strengthen them with powders.
And also take some that transmit salt and place it in the cavity of the incision so that what remains of that humidity is absorbed.
And then care for that which is within until it is healed.
And if an abscess occurs in the place cauterize, then care for it with compresses until it is healed.
Capitol. xi.
Methods of palpation of the whole body.
When in the eyelids of the eye, the skin is stretched and becomes tight or torn, then those disturbances are signs of illness such as constant tearing and softening of the eyelids and tissue. This can be a cause of destruction of the eye, which is called tactinir del huel. The treatment can be done in four ways: by cauterization with fire; by acute medicine as previously described in the Capitol of cauterization; by incision and suturing; or by cannulas as I will say later.
And thus check that you place the head of the patient on your right side; then turn the eyelid of the eye with your left hand. If it can be turned, it is good; otherwise, insert a needle into the part where there are threads in the edge of the eyelid, and make the needle penetrate with thread above, specifically near the edge of the eyelid where the skin arises. Pull the thread towards the parts above the eyelid and turn that portion.
And then place the skins fitted with spatum incident from the major lacrimal into the minor lacrimal; and extract the fluid and place powdery bits of cloth or linen over the eyelid, and cover the lid with a tent, as illustrated by the shape of a mirt leaf.
But more importantly, ensure that the shape is according to the amount of swelling of the eyelid, for this already varies in women, for those in whom a considerable amount from the large eyelid must be incised according to the extent to which the eyelid is softened.
And then place the spatum along the two lines you have marked, starting from the major lacrimal into the minor lacrimal. And if your incision near the natural skin is as thick as the king's thumb.
And then place the needle in one of the two angles of the incision, and scrape away the entire area, and suture the two edges with a stitch or fine woolen thread, and clean the wound, and attach what remains from the threads to two splints for some viscous causes. If you want to do this, and if not, you are done.
And after that, let the stitches of the wound be removed in three or four days, and then cure this.
And if you wish, let the wound remain open without stitches, and cure it by what makes it dry and constricts it, for when the eyelid is swollen, you should apply a seal to the wound and its addition; more stitches are better. Therefore say this to the ancients thus.
But more importantly in it be active about the patient, and it is of good operation, and not in fear.
And another method of treating it is to figure the swelling like a leaf of myrtle, and then raise the eyelid by three inches, separating and bringing together according to this form:
But if it is not possible that way, hold the needles, and this is unequal, then take a needle on which there is thread and put that in the middle of the figure, and insert the other thread near the major lacrimal gland, and the other thread near the minor lacrimal gland, and adjust between the ties said threads to equality, and then with those raise your hand for elevation equally, raising the whole codena over which it is marked as we have recommended.
And then adjust the two edges of the wound with stitches, and cure that which is within until it is healed.
If you happen to make an incision or a fissure, stitch that apostema with a thread and sew it up neatly, and apply ointment to it.
And in some cases on the eyelid, if its edges need to be converted, then use the incision method we have described earlier; but stitch them in several places more artificially.
To cauterize with cauters is done in this manner: And you convert the eyelid and split the figure that is inside according to what I have recounted; then, with art, make two cauters or two thin strips whose length should match the length of the eyelid and their width should be similar to the width of the space. And you have incised at the extremities of some parts, where you have the threads.
Add some fine thread over what you have removed from the eyelid of the eye, and tighten the canals of each part with strong stricture, and leave it for a few days, because the clot will die due to the stricture and will be rejected, so that by itself it will fall.
If it is delayed, then cut the thread at the tendons, and cure the wound until it is healed.
Then, since it is solidified, the eyelid is elevated and the skin does not hurt.
And this is the way of two canals which you will make according to this form: and has the quantity of length and width neither more nor less.
Capitol.xii.
For the elevation of painful skin on the eye with an awl when the skin is hard.
When they are unnatural, hard, rough, and painful eyelids, the operation on them is that you take a fine awl and place it at the edge of this thin layer of skin, and then adjust the ends of the awl very delicately with your fingers. And let the length of the threads be the width of a palm.
And then compose another fine thread and place it briefly under the area, using the ends of that one if you wish.
And then place the patient's head in a warm spot, and let it be close to the sun so that your work is validated, as it is a delicate and fine operation.
And then insert the needle into the edge of the set eyebrow, adjusting it with a tool you have prepared, and let that penetrate the eyelid firmly, while withdrawing the needle from above the natural skin.
And then pull the skin upwards and insert that into the incision, using one or two or three skins and no more.
And then pull your hand there so that the skin is loosened in the incision on the eyelid with the skin natural.
But if the incision is made with aloes and the skin is not loosened, pull the aloe towards the parts where you have placed the thread, into which the aloe from the wound will overflow.
And then with that in view of the wound, when you will stitch it, cut each thread and close the wound, let it remain open for two or three days until the hair adheres to its place and grows over that good flesh.
And if the hair is shorter, then you adjust a longer piece of skin from the natural hairs, elevate it at that place, or let it remain until it stretches somewhat over the space, and then elevate that.
Chapter XIII.
Of the cure for an eyelid prolapse.
When the eyelid prolapses, and there is a contraction of the eyelid when it contracts towards the upper or lower part, due to poor healing of the wound, division, or cautery, it is called leporine. This prolapse can be natural or accidental, caused by the consolidation of the wound, divisions, or cauteries, or resembling them in its condition.
The method of the operation is that you cut away the consolidation and separate the eyelid layers. Place a strip of linen between them, and tie them together until they heal.
And do not use the cure for those causes which dry up and constrict, for if you do this it will make the evil worse and never be cured.
Use for those causes that mollify thus as with fenugreek, and apply it wet with water in which they are soaked or linseed oil, which is liquefied by some oil, immerse the medicament in that, and cure with that.
And the treasure of your cure is that you perforate only on what is not consolidated according to the form it was at the beginning.
And this operation which we have said is nothing but a simple correction of hernias that do not return to the form they had before.
Chapter XIV.
Of the cure of hernias which are performed in the eyelid.
This hernia which is performed in the eyelid is called specifically a vertic hernia; and it can be either natural or accidental.
More accidentally it is caused by wound or by cut or by cautery or by other similar means.
And the way of operating on it is that you take a needle on which you make a double thread, and place that in the flesh, and make it pass from the lacrimal of the left into the lacrimal of the right, so that the thread reaches the two ends of the flesh.
Then extend the flesh at the upper parts with the needle and sew that with the needle, and incise with a broad blade. And so, if you return the shape of the eyelid as it should be, that is good; otherwise, take the ray and place that in the torn figure, and with that turn the eyelid, and make the two fissures in the edge of the eyelid.
And let the ends of the two fissures be at the angles of the incision, which you have made where they converge, and let an angle be made by them when they come together to form their figure.
And this figure is Greek: the lambda.
And apply the flesh there as much as the sharp edge allows, what remains is the eyelid.
And adjust the separated parts with threads of wool; and cure those with what we have said about the soothing medicines and the plasters until it is healed.
And if you incise for a fissure or suture or cautery, then make the incision a flat one on the skin of the eyelid as previously described. And separate with the plaster between two lips as we have said.
In the summary of the discourse on the cure of incision when above or below, let it run in the operation, as prepared in the form of the incision, and that is in the form of varied spots.
And the skilled artisans always prepare engen in any manner that is possible for them to return the figure to its natural form or close to it, and the patient according to what suits him in the operation and the instruments in the major dispositions.
Chapter XV.
Of the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
When this consolidation occurs in men, they attempt to solidify the eyelid above on the white of the eye, and prohibit its ease of movement and its natural actions. Therefore, you should introduce a needle through the edge of the eyelid, and raise or extend it over the eyebrow, or along the upper lid.
And then you incise the adhesion with a fine blade, which should not have the sharpness of the incisions, having a small obtuse edge so that the patient is not disturbed by the operation, and remove the fluid to prevent it from impairing the vision.
And let your incision be such that it loosens the adhesion with ease, allowing the eyelid to return to its natural form and completely heal all the adhesion.
And then put salt water on the eye, with which you wash it; or use distilled water in which zinc has been dissolved.
And then separate between the eyelid and the redness of the eye, and place over the redness infused wool in honey album, and for the third day use conservative causes until it is healed.
Capitol XVI.
Of the incision of the gland and the swelling of flesh of the lacrimal glands.
Know that the gland can be of two ways: one is nervous, and it resembles a hard, thin chip; the other is non-nervous, resembling a white congealed moisture. When you touch it, if it must be removed, it should be incised, and the fluid should not be inserted into it.
And both species do not begin but from the major lacrimal gland, as it gradually covers the eye and prevents light and the movement of redness.
The way to proceed with the incision of the gland is that the patient places his head in a tilted position, then opens his eyes, and lifts his eyelid with your hand. Then collect the gland with a small amount of moisture and extend it to the upper parts. And then take a needle and insert into it either a horsehair or an oxhair or a cowhide hair or a strong thread, or gradually double the tip of the needle little by little and place that in the middle of the nail, and penetrate that with the needle, and seal the nail with glue; extend that to the parts above, and scrape off the skin the pus from the nail which heals the pupil. And then you follow that with the skin into the depth of it.
And then you incise the eyelid at the root of the tear duct with a fine spatula or small forceps, and let the natural flesh of the eyelid remain so that by means of the incision it will not cause continuous flow of tears.
And sometimes the nail on the sole of the foot or with glue, as we have said, and then scrape off with a lion's claw spatula, which is the form of this:
And beware that with the spatula you do not touch the corneal membrane, and even if there is a rupture in it, and that the pupil is not pierced.
Near the incision make a small cut on the skin with salted iron or steel made from tin, and leave that inside another day; then cure that as it heals.
If the wound is not nervous and you cannot put in the needle, then apply this kind of dressing with medicines, and it will be healed as recommended in the division.
If you want to incise it, then open the space of the patient and take a thin slice of fresh lemon according to this form: with subtlety. And if you see that it is rarified and congested and embedded in that mass, then distill from your mouth into the wound of iron made from tin or with rusty iron or salted steel, and cover the wound with another day.
Then repeatedly perform the operation until all that is from it is removed, otherwise if a carbuncle forms in the wound, then leave it, and cure the carbuncle as it heals.
And then repeat your operation as much as necessary until it is healed.
The gland of the tear duct, if noted to be in great distress, should be suspended with a needle; and incise that part, but do not complete the incision so as not to cut off the flow of tears.
And then let the tear duct drip with a cloth and keep it moist until it is healed.
Chapter XVII.
On the incision of the salivary gland and what is derived from flesh pressed against it.
In some cases, flesh has grown in the eyelids and is pressed over the pupil, or strengthens near the eyelids, forcing them apart and adhering to the edge of the orbit.
The operation in this case is that the patient places their head in a slight incline; then open the eyelids and remove all that flesh with appropriate incisions using forceps or tongs; then incise the flesh at the beginning, ensuring it is complete with the incisor, and carefully keep the incised parts to ensure you do not lose any during your operation.
And let your incision be where you make those or with forceps which we have recommended in the finger incision, or with small pincers from which ascetic is gathered according to the form it will take near this chapter.
So when your incision is completed and the entire flesh is cauterized, then fill the wound with brine, or sprinkle on it powdered substances resembling those of corrosive medicines, and place over the wound externally as a piece of burnt cork until an abscess is assured.
And if there is any cause of necrosis and it is seared with cauterization, and you fear an abscess, then leave the wound open and treat that abscess with what will heal that abscess, and repeatedly perform on that area until it is healed, and similarly do in the flesh adjusted which you have encountered in the wound of this kind.
Nevertheless, you must ensure that all healing of the wound by natural means or by accident occurs through iron, and do not place your hand in any of these operations until you see that that limb is suffering from that operation.
Chapter XVIII.
From the collection of knowledge in the whole.
Knowledge so veins rogues which are rough on the whole and prohibit their operation, and expand the whole for a length of days.
Therefore, at the beginning, you must consider whether the whole in which knowledge is present is strong and contains only that knowledge, then you collect that knowledge.
And you command the patient to place his head in the heat bath, and then suspend those veins at one or two inches according to your prudence; and let that inch be of subtle double folding according to this form:
or two inches gradually in one piece according to this form:
And let those veins be collected with forces subtle, in subtlety, and cleanse the wound hour by hour, while you see those veins being raised from the whole and rotated.
And be sure that you do not touch the outer parts of the patient's mouth; and if your operation in the morning before the sun, and remain firm in your operation that you enter only those veins.
And when you have completed, then distill in the whole vein or herb so that its acidity corrupts what is retained in the bladder.
But if this is not possible for you to collect entirely in that hour, then plaster the whole with what relieves its pain, and let it be for a few days until its pain subsides and an abscess is secured.
And repeatedly work on it according to the manner of the wound as it heals.
And this is the method for abscesses:
Capitol.xix.
On the reduction of tonsillitis in the nose.
When you cure tonsillitis with a cautery or with sharp burning medicine, according to whether the narration of it precedes and is not healed, then do not engage in it but instead cut over the abscess to bring about its maturity, and extract all the moisture which is within it and let the pus out until the bone is uncovered.
And since the bone and veins within it are corrupted and blackened, then you must treat it with an instrument of which this is the form:
And it is named aspre cap, and made of iron, and has a round head such that this head is made punctured by the filing of a file or smoothed with a fine point (as in the form following).
And place it over the corrupted part of the bone, and then rotate it between your tongs, and press your hand gradually into the area until you know that the corruption is superficial.
And do this several times, and then restore the area caused by drying and astringent conditions.
Then if the area is consolidated and there is good hidden flesh, and the wound of the body from the pus is closed for 40 days, and does not reappear or become suppurative and no accident occurs, then you know that it is healed.
And if not, then reduce the fissure to the shape of the nose, and according to this method: you should uncover the bone with iron or sharp medicine. Once the bone is uncovered, then take hold according to this form:
Let the extremity of the tool be triangular, and the shaft thereof be thickened at the extremity as you see.
And then place that [tool] on the bone, and it should be near the lacrimal; extend your hand a little forward, and then rotate your hand in the groove until the entire bone is penetrated, and that which feels the pain through the air that escapes when you move your hand.
Then restore the area with drying styptic medicines as they have been prescribed.
Then, since the flesh is dried and the area is hardened, the matter which was exuding from the parts outside returns to the nose; therefore, this is lighter for the pain.
Chapter 2..xx.
On the reduction of the prominence of the heel.
When the heel protrudes completely and there is no damage or diminution of sensation, then you should relieve the pain, follow this by scarification on the neck with bleeding and good suction; then place a liniment made of acatra, aloe, enses, and sarcocolla over the heel, and strongly apply the plaster to the heel with pieces of cloth.
And the manner of powders is that you take linen cloth, and each cloth be folded into four parts; and make thereof.
And then place them one over the other according to the quantity that it has to fill. And then tightly bind the cloths around them; and repeatedly apply the cups with suction several times; and then place the cups and leave it to draw for the day and night.
More if meanwhile the ligature becomes softened, then make it tightly firm again.
And then place the ligature during the day and night as we have said.
And if the swelling has already been reduced, that is good. Otherwise, then repeatedly apply the plaster with the powders and the binding and cups until it is healed.
Chapter XXI.
On the incision of the prominence of the uveal tunic.
When there is disruption in the tunica uvea, and it protrudes and proceeds outside the eyelids as if a degree of rash, and this forms the shape of a man through this, and you want to incise here, then the operation on it is as we have recommended, that you insert the needle into the slit of the uvea from the part left in the part above, and then place another needle with a double strand from the part of the lacrimal, and make that penetrate and leave the first needle according to its position; and then incise the location of the double strand and lift the part of the uvea in the circuit of the needle, and strengthen that movement.
Then extract the needle and place it over the hot wool infused with honey, letting the thread cool in the uvea.
Then apply the hot wool to this so that it comforts the area while the wound is healing.
And sometimes gather all the parts in a circle of cloth around the hot wool, then place a fine perforation under the wool, which allows the humid and purulent moisture to flow out, and lower the wool so that it fits well.
And then strengthen as it is healed.
Chapter XXII.
On the treatment of ulcers.
This illness called an ulcer is nothing but a sore that appears similar to water descending and is not the other type.
The method of treating it is to place the patient on a prepared and straight surface, then take the head in your hands at two parts and pull it gently until you see the sore begin to draw towards the extremities, ensuring it dries up completely and does not descend. Keep the light nearby so that you can observe the causes as they appear.
And if it does not descend to the feet, know that it is water.
And if the descent of the sore is not prepared as we have said, then place the patient on their back and take a thin spatula. Apply it to the conjunctiva near the cornea in the socket (in the location indicated), so that the sore dries up completely.
Then, as is forgotten, when you distill into the full vessel of water in which you have mixed honey or water in which you have already boiled fenugreek and honey.
And then treat the other causes until it is healed.
Capitol.xxii.
Of the treatment of water descending from above.
We have already mentioned the species of water in the division and which is appropriate to perforate when speaking, according to its suitability.
Then you must fix the patient's thighs on a bench and tie the affected area tight.
And then place your left hand near the eyelid of the affected area, if the affected area where the water is located is the left side; or with your right hand, if the affected area is the right side.
And then with your right hand take the wad, if the side is left; or with your left hand, if the side is right.
And then place the extremity of the thumb near the crown for the swelling of the eye from the excess of yellow bile in the white part of the eye socket, and then apply the thumb with virtue and rotate your hand there.
And then penetrate into the white part of the eye and feel that the thumb has already been permeated by the vision.
And ensure that the size of the thumb's path is measured when pressing the space which is from the pupil to the edge of the black, for this is the crown of the eye; so you will see the pupil with the vision of the eye through the clarity of the corneal layer.
And then place the thumb in the location where the water is, and then draw it down slightly a few times. Therefore, if the water descends quickly, then you see the patient below where his vision extends quickly, and the thumb in his eye.
And then rest for a moment; therefore, if the water has descended, then you continue with another downward motion before the thumb is fully inserted.
And when it has been drawn out and does not descend, then you extract the lump with ease, and roll it a little with your hand, and return it completely into the water a small amount of clear salted gemmy egg and with that wash the whole inside; and place outside the whole cloth or stop or infused wool in olive oil and yolk of egg and tie with that the whole cloth.
May it and those who are of our times pause over it with olive oil.
And if your lump does not yield to the instrument of the cloth due to its hardness — which is often the case with some men whose skin is hard —, then cut that you take the spathe which is named albedid of which this is the form:
And then puncture at that joint, and do not withdraw your hand from the tract, but rather make way to the site of the lump.
And then introduce the instrument as we have said.
And you must complete your work, so prepare the patient's sleeping place decently made in which he lies on his back in a dark house, and prohibit all movements.
And pause in the nature of the patient so that his nature is regulated, and do not let his head tilt to the right or left side during the procedure.
And apply the ligature according to its disposition on the third day.
And then remove that one in the darkest and most severe area, expose the raw wound, and make some incisions, and then return the ligature on the seventh day.
And do not perform this during the hour of cure or soon after the infusion. And you should remove this so that the water can drain slightly due to its great and forceful position.
And if an abscess should occur before the seventh day, then remove the pus on the seventh day, and adjust this to that which gives way to the abscess.
And when you finish the wound, pause over the face of the wound for which the vision should be regulated, and let it exist in the most severe area for some days.
And then it should be gradually withdrawn and changed into its causes.
And know that in surgery it is not excusable for the disciple to have some visions, and then you should be attentive to the operation.
And we have learned from some of those who suffer from Artach that some say to make a fire in Ayrac magma and perforate it, in which the water is boiled.
But I have not seen anyone in our land who is perfect at this, nor is it mentioned in any of the ancient books; and it is possible that this is a new method.
And these are the forms of the species of magdaan so that he may know them:
And they should be made of silk or iron properly, and their ends should have this subtlety in the form of a triangle, with one sharp end similar to the other.
Capitol. xxiv.
Of the treatment of flesh nothing in the nose.
When in the nose there arise various flesh masses from which arises some cause that is associated with a heavy object or a growth in the region; this illness is called polypus, which resembles that growth depicted. And the polyp is cancerous, dark in color; and from it comes flesh like a lion's, not of a dark color.
Therefore, in that which is among these lion-like flesh masses that are neither fraudulent nor cancerous, cut the illness away between your thighs and place it in the sun, and rub the nostrils with it, and apply a paste of it to those flesh masses. Then remove it to the openings, and carefully divide what you have grasped with a sharp thin instrument from which you can see that all the flesh has been reached; if any part remains due to some cause for which the division is possible, then quickly use one of the fine instruments to facilitate its division. If the lord complains of pain or an infected abscess, then you place yourself near him where it is suitable; if it is a malignant abscess, then you incise and cauterize that area from which the pus is to be drained and all the cavities are to be opened.
And then insert something in the nose near the incision either powder or water. If the nose is opened and there is a process of humidity in the palate, then you know that it is already healed.
If the humidity does not penetrate as it should, then you know that inside there is no pus and no bones of the nose for which incision has not been made.
Then, when it is appropriate that you insert a piece of the animal from which there is any lump, use nuts in its place, and place the quantity of a finger or less between each nut, and probe the patient and insert an extremity of the cord into the nose either with forceps or by another cause which is possible for him.
And after this has been done, let him breathe in the fumes thereof until they reach the nostrils' canals, and sit on his couch; for too much laughter at this action makes children cry at school, and it is a light reason for someone who wants to do so.
Then place the two ends of the thread, one end that ties over the nose and the other that hangs in the nose, and then apply a flesh wound near the joints in the thread, doing this while you can tell that the flesh is on the joints of the thread.
Then extract the thread, and place a clot near the opening of the nose, and do this for three days or more until the ointment dissolves everything that is rotting from the flesh.
Then, at the end of the treatment, place a lead cannula in the nose for several days until it is healed.
If you need to speed up the cure, use the other one.
And this is the form of the instrument for pouring oil and medicines into the nostrils:
And make it of silver or gold, which is similar to a small open lantern, like a small basin, and the mouth resembling.
And if you wish, make a closed cannula like a reed, and the mouth of the instrument for pouring oil into the nostrils flat and open; place a handle at the rear end of it, with which you can hold it when you heat oil or what you want from the secretions and causes that are to be suctioned.
Chapter 25.
From the nostrils at the ends of the nose.
Nodules appear in the nostrils at the ends of the nose, and these are enlarged and smoothed over in a few days as the swelling diminishes.
And for this, you should enter that which is at the beginning of the appearance of the lesion, and eradicate all of it. And place yourself over the area or the cautery or burning medicine where it was located.
But if the inflammation is delayed before it enlarges, consider whether it is hardened, dark in color, and has little sensation. In that case, do not touch that with a sharp instrument as it is an abscess; for nodules often accompany this abscess due to its great malice towards the area where it was located.
And if the abscess is due to a blow and not dark in color, and the inflammation can occur throughout that area, then drain the poison and cut there without fear, and treat the area with what dries and constricts until it is healed.
Chapter XXVI.
For the suturing of the nose and lips when continuity is dissolved by ulcer or by similar conditions.
Know that when there is dissolution of continuity in one of these cartilages, you should not rely much on that operation but rather on several skilled workers.
Then probe, when you have to deal with any of these causes, whether it is a fresh ulcer and its discharge, and then adjust the two edges of the ulcer with sutures, and proceed to cure that until it is healed.
And if the edges of the dissolution of continuity are already separated, and any one is made healthy, then probe that you should remove each part of its underlying tissue until it discharges pus. Then adjust the two edges with sutures and strengthen them, and sprinkle dragon's blood powder and triple distilled vinegar over them, and place a piece of diaphonic plaster or another consolidated plaster on top of the powder, and leave this paste for two to three days. Then remove it and change the plaster, leaving it until the roots are absorbed, and proceed to cure with ointment until it is healed.
The manner of suturing is that you add the solution of continuity or use needles as we have recommended in the belly suture, or add the solution of continuity with thread as you are made to know.
Chapter XXVII.
Of the extraction of those causes that venous problems occur in the two lips within the internal parts.
Patches appear in the internal parts of their lips, turning into hard abscesses resembling lard. Some are small, while others are larger.
Therefore, carefully incise all parts of the hard swellings in the lips and cavities, then fill the wound with three layers of cloth until the wound is tightened, and subsequently wash it with vinegar and treat the area with water that has astringent properties until it heals.
Chapter XXVIII.
Of the incision of flesh adhered to the gums.
Great care must be taken over the gum attached to the flesh, which the ancients called albulus. Then extract that which you hold with one instrument and divide it carefully, and let the healthy blood flow or the venom.
Then place something warm on the area for about three minutes or another styptic or excitatory powder.
And if that flesh returns, then divide it again, and cauterize it; for after the cauterization, it will not return.
Capitol.xxix.
On the reason for teeth hurt.
When on the surface of the teeth that are split inside and outside, and between the gums, there appear sharp, hard edges, some times they are blackish and are caused by yellow or green deposits between the gums due to corruption, which cause the teeth to become loose.
And therefore make sure that you cut the patient's thigh between your thighs and place his head in the crook of your arm, and rub the teeth where these edges and similar causes appear with sand so that they do not break for any reason, and do this from blackness and yellowishness and other changes in them.
So if what remains of the matter at the beginning of the reasoning is clear, that is good; and if not, then you iterate the reasoning to those matters the next day and the second and the third until it comes to the final statement in what you want.
And know that teeth have needed to be extracted in various forms and with different figures according to how your operation is prepared. And so, for that reason, the extractor used when the tooth is extracted from the inside is different from the extractor used when it is between the teeth according to other forms. These forms of extractors you should prepare, which you will often see.
Capitol.xxx.
For the extraction of teeth.
Cure the tooth with great skill and take your time in the entire extraction process, for no cause can compensate for its absence when extracted, for it is a substance that sublimes during the removal.
When the patient is forced to remove a tooth, you must be certain which tooth is painful, checking several times where the pain originates and ensuring it is not in a healthy tooth. Once you extract the diseased and painful tooth, the pain generally ceases, for we have seen this through the operations of barbers.
Therefore, you must be certain which tooth is painful, and knowing this well, when you incise along the circuit of the tooth in the socket where any virtue lies, ensuring that it is dissolved from the entire part of the tooth and gum, then insert those tweezers or fine scissors gradually at the beginning, ensuring that the tissue dissolves.
And then irrigate it well to strengthen the grip for good speech or strong fracture, and place the head of the patient between your hands so that you hold them securely without causing discomfort, and then extract the tooth in a straight manner so as not to break it, nor give the patient additional pain.
And if it is not forced out, then take one of those instruments, and place it under the tooth with great ease and effort, ensuring its removal is done similarly to how it was initially placed.
If the tooth is broken or corroded, then you should fill that hole with cloth and tie it at the end of a fine thread to prevent it from breaking during your operation on that area.
And you should operate exquisite[ly] with incision in the circuit of all parts of the gum and guard maintaining your strength so that you do not break that part of it, and return over the gout through its malice which is worse than the first pain of it.
And guard yourself that you do not do what some ignorant barbers do in their incisions and audacity regarding the eradication of gout; for they do not administer what we have advised. For spots and marks often bring great diseases upon men which are harder to break than broken bones, and the reasons for their failures all or some of them, or that you extract that part from certain bones of the mandible thus for spots and marks we have testified.
And for the eradication of gout, wash the mouth with wine or vinegar mixed with salt.
And if bleeding occurs for this reason, as when small blisters appear, then take a little quantity of vinegar and sprinkle it over the wound, and if that vinegar does not stop it, cauterize.
The shape of the forceps and delicate tweezers used to extract a tooth at the beginning should be long and straight, short and thick, so that they do not bend when those you need to use.
And they should be such that when you tighten them around those, they do not bend, and are long but thin.
And they should be made of Indian steel, straight and long. At the ends of these, there are teeth such that one enters the other and tighten by descending construction firmly. Sometimes the ends of these are in the shape of a heron's bill, which is called a ciconia, and they are strongly constructed.
Capitol.xxxxi.
On the removal of teeth and the extraction of the bones from broken jaws.
When you need to remove a tooth that is broken for any cause, then you must place your hand over the area firmly for one or two days until the area becomes softened; and then insert probes or compresses at the extremities of which are attached to the beak of a bird called ciconia or gaunt, the shape of forceps:
The extremities of the probes should be made like a rasp orawl.
And if the tooth does not obey to your attempt with these forceps or probes, then you must grasp the root and strip all the flesh away, and insert the instrument which is named atali, that is a small lever of which the shape is this:
And briefly, the extremity should be slightly thick and not broken so that it is not broken.
So if the root is broken, that is good; otherwise, help yourself with these other instruments of which these are the forms: the form of the first instrument is a triangular extremity in which there is some thickness.
The form of the second instrument should be triangular and of very fine extremity.
And now assist in this instrument having two ramps, of which this is the form and shape for the next: and there are other instruments which are used for scraping teeth; so this instrument is made like a large spoon, and this is its form:
from the triangular bent or short extremity, which is of certain thickness, and not too deep so as not to pierce.
And another spatula that the instruments for the teeth use is similar to other instruments.
But the skilled craftsmen find suitable instruments for themselves according to what the operation and various ailments signify; so they have instruments for the ailments to which ancient ones would not have assigned nor provided a specific instrument due to the diverse forms.
But if the bone of the mandible or other bones in the mouth are pierced, or if puncturing is necessary, then use a point over that area in its place, according to what is convenient from the instruments and forceps which we have mentioned in the extraction of roots of teeth, and this is the form of the gesture:
And let it be in him some small lump little by little, and be compressed or held at the mouth so that it does not escape or flee until all the bone is thoroughly treated; then place the area with suitable medicines for it.
If there is a small abscess in the bone, then drain that of the abscess and its blackness, and cure that until it is healed.
Capitol.xxxii.
Of the cure of the prominent teeth over others.
When the teeth are prominent not according to their natural form, especially when they protrude in women, and particularly in venerable old women; therefore consider this: if a tooth is close to another tooth and it is impossible to extract or treat it with a needle, then remove that tooth; but if it is not attached to another tooth, then cut out that tooth using this instrument, which resembles the head of a pig, and made of Indian steel with an extremely sharp point.
And let your incision be where you cut that in too many days due to the hardness of the tooth, and may it not be another of the teeth.
And if the tooth is prominently protruding and needs to be filed, then file that with a file of Indian iron, which is of this form:
And let it be entirely of Indian iron; and let the margin be filed finely; and let it have small pointed teeth like a file, with which the tooth can be filed little by little over many days for ease, so that no other tooth may decay or fall out. Then lengthen it at the tip, and sharpen it with a few razors.
And if it is a tooth of which one part is fractured and you file the tongue, then cut that such that the sharpness of that fracture is obstructed and equalized, and may it be filled so that the tongue does not hurt nor the word become corrupted.
Book XXXIII.
For the restoration of decayed teeth using gold or silver filler.
When accidents occur to the front teeth due to concussion or removal by impact or during hunting, and the patient cannot strengthen what is left, and after treating it with astringent medicines your treatment has not been effective, then for those that are strong fill them with gold and not silver, because silver turns color and will likely leak in a few days, but gold does not change over time.
And the filling should be in such subtlety and thickness according to the quantity that can enter between the teeth; and the form of the cavity is that you take the gold and place twice its amount between two healthy teeth, and soon it will appear with two twists of the gold between two decayed teeth, or if one or several, until the tissue reaches the healthy tooth on the other side. And then insert the tissue into the part where you started, and strengthen your hand with ease and skill until it is not decayed.
And let your bandage be such that it holds the tooth roots firmly in place so that they do not slip out.
And then divide the excess roots of the tooth with forceps or sharp scissors, and add them to any location with your hand, and place both in between the healthy tooth and the decayed one, so as not to injure the tongue. And let it be thus tied like a Roman.
If it is slipped or broken, hold it with another thread in such a manner throughout its length.
And this is the form of the teeth and the figure of the extraction of two healthy teeth and two decayed ones, as you see these tied:
And when one returns a tooth or two to their proper place in their sockets, and they are grown back as we have described, and remain embedded.
And this is done by skilled artisans.
And sometimes it is suitable for certain causes of the bones of cattle, and it is made from them like a form of tooth, and is placed in the location where the tooth failed, and is strengthened as we have said, and remains and serves you long.
Chapter XXXIV.
Of the incision of the ligament which we call and prohibit speech.
This ligament, which we call and sometimes leaves the tongue in some cases naturally as one is born, or accidentally due to a wound which has already healed.
And the operation is that one opens the patient's mouth, which contains the tongue; then raises the tongue, and then incises that ligament nerve according to the width between which the tongue can be freed from its attachment.
But if there is any hardness or induration in that area, and this is due to the healing of a wound, then you cut one time and incise that ligament nerve according to the width at which you have already incised the ligament and dissolved the induration.
And make sure that no crack is made in the subcutaneous layer, and carefully split here to avoid a flow of blood.
And then wash the incision edges with warm water or apply a wet cloth; and place the tongue depressor over them; if needed, let it stay during each night to prevent the wound from becoming consolidated again.
But if there is a flow of blood, place a glass vessel over the area; but if the bleeding continues, then cauterize the location with a pointed cautery suitable for this purpose. And then apply other treatments as necessary until it is healed.
Capitol.xxxv.
For the extraction of a ranula, use the tongue depressor.
Sometimes, an abscess appears, causing the tongue to swell like a small lump, prohibiting its natural operation; and as it fills the mouth, the swelling becomes more significant.
And the operation for this is to make an incision in the groin sixty centimeters in front of the pubis and consider the abscess.
And if you see one of reddish-brown or black, hard, to which the patient feels no sensation, then do not touch that area.
And if it has turned white, which indicates humidity, then you place the probe in it, and incise that area with a thin blade, and incise all parts; and if you notice blood during your operation, then pause above zegi trissat, which is vitriol, within which you restrain the blood.
And then return to your work after having completed it, after it has been washed with wine and salt; and care for that with the other treatment until it is healed.
Capitol.xxxvi.
On the extraction of abscesses from both ears and those that occur in the throat, as well as other abscesses.
When in the throat gout, so are their glands those which are gathered cotton-like, which occur externally and are named two ears, which when you cure them as we said in the division and it is not healed, then consider if the abscess is hard, of dusky color, of little sensation, then do not touch that with iron.
And if it is of red color and the root is large, then do not touch that with iron for the flow of blood; first let that mature, and then either you will incise it, or it will rupture by itself.
And if it is of white color, radish-like, and the root of it is fine, then that is to be incised.
And the operation on it is that you consider, before your operation, if the abscess has fully matured and rested after cautery, or if it has diminished with some reduction; then make an incision in the morning before the sun, place its head in your lap, and open its mouth. The servant taking between his hands the patient's tongue, holds it with the most noble instrument of which this is the form:
And it should be made of silver or copper, and very fine like a刀刃。显然，这里的“如刀刃”并不是正确的翻译，正确的翻译应该是：“And it should be made of silver or copper, and very thin like a blade.”
And when you press on that area with your finger and the abscess is shown to you, and you see it clearly over that spot, then take a needle and prick that area, and poke it outward as far as you can. Another thing you do with some cause of the tunics, and then apply that to the area using an instrument of which this is the form:
Another thing you do with some cause of the tunics, and then apply that to the area using an instrument of which this is the form: and it is similar to forceps, but the ends of these are curved, so that the orifice of each of those is in the straight part of the other, sharp points, which should be made of iron and well tempered.
And if this instrument is not at hand, then incise that area using an instrument of which this is the form: It should be sharp on one side, but not on the other.
And after you have incised one wound, incise the other according to this method of incision, and then by incising, the patient will be cured with water.
If there is a flow of blood, guard with water from decoction of herb of myrrh or leaf of holly and similar to that of the causes styptical until the flow of the blood is restrained, and then cure that among which it is healed.
Sometimes this occurs in the throat, other abscesses elsewhere on the two ears, and incise those according to my judgment and as described in the incision of two mallets equally.
And I had already treated a woman with an abscess which was located in her throat, which abscess had a dark color, little sensation, and had already closed her throat. The woman breathed very thinly, and had already been forbidden to eat and drink water, and she was nearing death if more water remained for one or two days.
And the abscess had already been pressing so long that it had been two weeks before it would heal through two incisions.
Then I incised it forcefully and clamped one of her ounces, drew out that portion, and then incised the other, and closed its opening, held her tongue, and placed the ounce in the abscess.
And then you cut away a large part of it, and there was but little blood flowing from it. Therefore, the swelling was that woman's gout, and she began to drink water soon, and then consumed some food. Then I could not cease incising that abscess many times for a long time, and an abscess would occur in its place, which continued to swell as long as that lasted.
Therefore, I treated the gout on her and applied cautery; then I walked about and did not know what God had done to that one near me.
Capitol.xxxvii.
On incising the swelling when it is abscessed.
When catarrh affects the uvula, and it is abscessed and long, then it is named perpendicular; if it is in the part with a large and round swelling, then it is called a bubo.
When it is cured as we have said in the division, and you do not see your cure, then often you find that the abscess has already come to an end and become subtle. Then you should incise the one that is aggregated and round; if it is of a length, and is bloody, with a dusky or black color, and is not more than a centimeter, then you must fear the incision of it, for there is fear of gout in that.
And when you see that according to the manner that I have said of its whiteness and length, you make an incision in the patient and probe the wound with an instrument of which it will take the shape and then place the onion inside the new opening, and pull that down and cut that with one of the two instruments which are called in the cutting of two bellies.
And make sure that you do not cut there but where it is attached to the natural term of addition, for if you cut beyond it, you will damage its function.
And near the incision, use what we have recommended in the cutting of two bellies, and cure that until it is healed.
And if the patient was frightened by the incision, make sure you use something to calm him during the cautery. The way of applying the cautery is simply with hot water. You place the head of the patient in your hand, and then probe the wound with the instrument we have mentioned. Then take from the water which we have described in the chapter on cautery, and apply it moderately but not too thin to the area, filling the cavity of the instrument whose shape this is:
Let the lower part of the cavity in which the medicine is placed be as wide as the width of a ray fish, and place the instrument on top of the medicine near the vulva, with the patient's buttocks below to catch any saliva or mucus from the mouth of the patient that might enter through the internal medicine, so that it does not get contaminated by this cause and spoils.
Place your hand on the medicine, and express it over the uvula for half an hour, until you see that it is darkened and saturated by the action of the medicine.
And if you wish, take some cloth and wrap it around the end of the ray, submerge the cloth in the medicine, and insert the ray through the cloth into a tube so that the cloth adheres within the tube. Do this several times until you achieve what you want from cauterizing the uvula, then let it dry and fall off in about three or four days.
And if you need to apply more medicine, apply it, and after cauterizing, clean the circuit of the uvula with a cloth soaked in vinegar, modify what is in the circuit of the uvula due to the medicine, and wash it with fresh water, treat externally with ointment, and internally with decoctions until it is healed.
And this method of treatment is safer than incision and shorter in duration of fear.
Some cases of uvula pain are cured with what is finer than cautery and incision, which is treated by fumigation in this manner: take calamus, hyssop, origanum, rue, scikos arabicus, camomile, grind them into a paste similar to that of herbs, and adjust all these causes or some of them into one vessel, immerse them in water well boiled; let the vessel be covered properly, with an opening in the middle on which place an iron container according to this manner; make it of silver or iron.
And place the extremity in the mouth of the patient where the vapor rises to the uvula above the gullet, so that the uvula is well saturated.
And then repeatedly apply it to those affected areas where it is dry, and guard that you do not perform this treatment at the beginning of the onset of carbuncles, as it would too tightly constrict the carbuncle. You should not do this, but instead declare the presence of a carbuncle with a cautery.
But if you do not have this instrument at hand, then take a cane and place a cork at the end of it, so that the mouth of the patient is opened, because the cork prevents the vapor from burning the mouth.
And this cure is good for health.
Capitol. XXXVIII.
Of the extraction of thorns and what adheres in the wound and other causes.
Spots or thorns that adhere in the wound or from a foreign object.
Then carefully extract what is obvious and visible. Press the tongue with an instrument in front of the light so that you may clearly see what is in the wound.
And what is not apparent and hidden in the wound, make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach, because if a strong cause attached to the wound causes vomiting, it will be expelled; or have the patient swallow a piece of napkin or rue cloth or a chunk of dry bread; or take a piece of sponge well soaked in wine, tie it tightly with thread, and make the patient swallow this, for it will reach the place where the thorns are located and be expelled. And take an eel and bind it with honey, place it inside and secretly extract it; or take a probe and secretly insert it and then remove it.
And if none of these causes we have mentioned apply, then use a lead instrument in this form:
And let it be as thick as a small finger, and at the end of it, have a cavity that you can insert into his throat with ease.
And make his head lift up, and keep watch that the touch of his bone in the throat reaches his body, or that the doctor places his hand there.
And instead, when the patient himself inserts honey, by his knowledge of the place of the cause and pushes it down, and pulls his hand towards the instrument, do all this according to the quantity prepared inside before it is completely inserted.
Capitol.xxxix.
From the extraction of gouty fluid associated with the gauloar.
When gouty fluid is treated with the medicines as we have said in the division of the cure with medicines and you do not agree, consider at the gauloar of the malate under the sun, for you have understood the language of the patient with the instrument which we have recommended.
So if you see the gouty fluid, extract it either through a small needle or with fine, delicate instruments.
And if it is not possible to extract it there, then take a concave cannula and insert it into the gauloar of the malate, and place a heated iron in the concavity of the cannula, performing this as many times as necessary (until the gouty fluid is dead and comes out of the gauloar), and let the patient abstain from all water for the entire day.
And then take a sponge full of water, open its mouth over the area, and wash the area with it; and do not swallow any part of it, but let the water remain on the area for about an hour with your hand, as soon as the gouty fluid perceives the water it will start to come out.
If not fogged properly as we have advised, then subfog the thigh with cyme or assafoetida through the instrument we have advised in the uvula fogyation.
Do this, so that it may fall into place.
And another way of performing the fogyation is that you take a brazier in which are burning coals and cover the brazier with a cloth in the middle of which there is a perforated tube, and place the end of the instrument at the other end of the tube; then proceed with the subfog; and place the thigh over the end of the canula, and seal its mouth so that the subfog does not escape until you see that the subfog has reached the uvula, for the uvula will soon fall.
And if not cured, then repeat the subfog several times, and make the patient abstain from drinking, eating salty foods and such, and not to drink water. Thus it is necessary that this regimen be followed.
And this is the form of the instrument used to treat gout when it is seen; and it resembles tongs as you see them, except that there is some curvature in it. And it is placed on the gout, and the extremity of it is similar to the beak of a stork, which is curved, and is filed with a file, so that when any cause is compressed, it does not leak.
Capitol.xl.
In which the main discourse on boils and their treatment is presented.
Boils are special kinds of lumps, occurring in various ways, as remembered, for each one in this treatise.
And they vary in penetration and treatment by two methods. Of these, one is specific to the nature of boils themselves; and it concerns the compression of the humors.
And the second method is specific to the places where bodily accidents occur. A boil that occurs on the head is different from one that occurs in the genitals; and a boil in fleshly tissue is different from one at a joint. For each of them, there is a distinct procedure for operation.
And more of abscesses some of which cover that they not be perforated but near maturation of the health in those or complement of their.
And other abscesses some of which cover that they be drawn out when they are ripe, and not matured according to their complement, thus as abscesses that are close to joints, for an abscess that is near a joint, the nature of it is prolonged into where you will be here that is in the circuit of it, and greatly corrupts the ligaments or the nerves of that joint, so that it becomes a cause of contraction of that limb; or it is an abscess close to the main member, and if you delay the perforation of it until its maturity affects the main member; or it is near the anus, therefore pierce that which is not ripe; and it must not be pierced raw, due to poor digestion, but one that is near the anus, so that you do not cause a prolapse and be extended into the internal parts of the anus, and a fistula be formed, or something done in its term that does not heal. And you must know the time for perforating the abscess, and this is when it is ripe.
And know that it is ripe when there is the cessation of pain and the end of fever, and nearly the decrease of redness and pulse, and the sharpness of the head of the abscess, and other signs.
And know that when you can perceive the penetration of pus in the location below the abscess and coming from the healing of the prominence, then proceed.
And the penetration of pus should be made along the length of the flesh or the body, if the abscesses are in the thigh or the feet, and at the location of the lacertae, the cords of the nerves, the arches; and, finally, in all locations where there is no reflection; for in those that do reflect, use the penetration according to that member.
When the abscess is in a fleshy location, it is better to delay the penetration until the digestion of the pus is confirmed according to our previous saying; for if you penetrate it prematurely, it will prolong the course of the disease and make the edges and depth more pronounced.
Sometimes abscesses are pierced according to the width of the flesh or body as necessity demands, or according to that from which the member suffers.
And ensure that for small abscesses, you perform a small puncture; in large abscesses, make a large and wide puncture or multiple sections according to the size of the abscesses.
And in other cases of abscesses, ensure that the cavity is closed and sealed. When this is done, do it while the pus has stopped flowing, just as you would when dealing with large boils and buboes.
And of those that are incised with a section having three angles; and in which an incision is made as the shape of a mulberry leaf, just as with abscesses of ganglions.
And of those in which a circular section and a crescent section are administered, resembling those.
Otherwise, for those abscesses that do not require it as with superficial abscesses, ensure that you perform a superficial puncture or a flat one only.
And when the abscess is large and has already collected pure matter, that you perforate it and do not hesitate to extract all the pus at that time; having extracted one part, then on another day inject the abscess with a larger part, and continue to do so in stages until it is thoroughly treated.
And especially if the patient is of a choleric temperament, or a woman in labor, or a small child, or an old person in decrepitude, for the animal spirit is resolved with the emergence of the pure matter, and greatly alleviates the pain, so you should openly relieve it.
Take great care with this chapter, and when you make your perforation in which you perforate these abscesses, ensure that you cleanse the wounds and consider whether the wound of the abscess is small, or a flat section, then administer either hot or cold remedies accordingly; if the abscess is large, and the cracks of the perforation are painful, then you should place your hand in each tract until they heal together.
And if in the abscess a part of the cord is divided or you have concaved it in the circuit, then you should close it with cold flax or a thread made of linen cloth, as when you have removed bandages or roots, their humidity; strengthen it on the third day; and proceed with it and cure it according to what is appropriate from ointments until it is healed.
If blood flows during the time of your operation, then administer water mixed with wine in which you soak a cloth, and place that over the area of the bleeding several times.
If the bleeding persists, then you should administer treatment and cure with powders which I have recommended in many places of this our book and division.
If it is in the time of winter, and the location of the abscess is near major nerves, then you should infuse powders in wine and oil, and place those over the areas.
And if it is in the summer, and the areas are fleshy, then you should place powders soaked in water and oil or in wine and oil, and all this should be infused within the first three days, as we have said, and then you should incise the abscess, clean it, and administer to it what is appropriate for its cure until it heals.
And this is what is necessary concerning the knowledge of the cure of abscesses universally, but according to the division I have already said about all abscesses in what manner the cure thereof should be treated individually.
Chapter XL.
Of abscesses where the vein is in the chain of the head.
In the chain of the head, small abscesses, and their species of knots which contain tunics that are formed; and the species of these are spots.
And of these they are lumps, and of those that contain humidity resembling lime. And of those that contain humidity resembling dust, and similar to them; and of those that are hard, like stones.
And in the section of all, and in the extraction of those, there is no fear, just as you should not cause resistance in the extraction of those.
And the operation in the section of these is that you express them with an instrument of the form which is nearby, which is called a probe until you know it contains.
If what it contains is humidity, then section that along its length by superficial section according to this form:
And begin at the section of B line between the line of G. Once the humidity is evacuated, then scrape that skin which contains that humidity, and leave no cause of all, for too many times returns if there remains any cause of all.
And then immerse it in Egyptian ointment if present, otherwise in water and salt; then apply it to the wound and leave it there for another day, for in this way you will dissolve all that is beneath the skin.
And then repeatedly apply the ointment to that part with Egyptian ointment, gently if you feel it necessary, until you are confident that there is no underlying cause of that skin issue; then treat the wound with ointment once it is healed.
And if there is an abscess containing fatty nodes, then incise it according to this form: In the section having a cruciform shape, make an incision between two sides of the section and carefully draw out the entire part, exerting your virtue in the extraction of the layer which contains it.
But if your artery resists, then do as I recounted to you first.
And similarly, treat the abscess by incision and cure according to what we have said; the incision on an abscessed area should be lighter, as it involves little bleeding and little moisture.
And sometimes the abscesses in the head of some people contain little moisture; the cause of which is that I could not incise an abscess on a woman's head, as it was hard, rough, and white, and could not be divided. If any part were struck, it would be harmed.
But in other head abscesses, this is not covered in this chapter; as with the abscesses that come to the heads of children, you should treat the sites of the ears, but the incision of all these should be a superficial one.
And place the incision of those lower parts below such that it alleviates the body from the disease in the lower parts.
And then attend to what needs to be done for the sake of the cure.
Chapter XLII.
Of the section on scrofulas which occur in the neck.
Signs of suppuration occur in these abscesses in the neck, in the axillae, and in the inguinal regions; and sometimes they occur in other parts of the body.
And those that occur in the neck, and the signs that are generated within them, and all scrofula of these is infected with its own tunica, just as in the nodes and abscesses of the head, as we have recounted.
And the species of these scrofulas are signs. Some of them are hard lumps, and some contain humidity, and some are malignant, which do not respond to treatment.
Therefore, in that one which you feel to be of good disposition in the Tocament, where the color that is manifest is similar to the color of the flesh, and is palpable throughout the body, and is not attached to the nerves of the neck, nor to the veins, nor to the arteries, and is not fluctuant, cut it away with a superficial incision from the part above to the part below along the line of G. to the line of B., and scrape out all of that part, and extend the lips of the flesh around it with one or several thin cuts if you need those, as we have said in the abscesses of the head, and extract it little by little.
And it is more careful that the vein or nerve not be cut.
Let the incision not be too deep, so that you do not damage the vein or nerve with your hand during the cut, or relieve the patient, and do not cut what is not necessary to cut; for if you were to cut a vein or artery and stop your operation, then apply a piece of vitriol trioxide or other powders which are fluxes of salt, strengthen the wound, and leave that in which allows the acute inflammation of the abscess to rest and soften the wound and begin to suppurate. When the blood is cut.
Then return to your operation until it is completed.
And then inquire as to whether there are any other small scrofulous swellings, and if so, cut those out and cleanse them.
And if it is near the vein of the large scrofulous swelling, cover it so that you do not cut that scrofulous swelling from its source. Before you place a strong fold of cloth there, let that remain where it falls by itself.
And then fill the wound with old cloth which you have already soaked in Egyptian ointment, and then dress it.
And if you incise the scrofula completely, then you must adjust the two edges of the wound and sew it up tightly so that no superfluous fluid escapes.
But if you see that there is an excessive exudation due to the size of the scrofula, then you must incise its edge, remove it, and administer stitches as described.
And for those scrofulas containing moisture, make a superficial puncture at the place where it appears, and then make a draining hole below the pus base of the lesion, as we have said.
And then administer the puncture, apply ointment and similar substances to it, so that it corrodes what is exuding from the wound. And when you see that the wound is already clean, then you apply the cream of flesh generative once it is healed.
Chapter 43.
Of the section of the boil in the region of the groin.
The ancients called this section the hypochondrium, and no one in our land has ever seen it performed.
And this is the inscription of the speech of those.
In men with foreskin, there is a cavity to be avoided during the extraction of the hypochondrium. Since this is not done for that reason, all the veins and major vessels in the groin are here.
In those who have boils cauterized in the groin or ears, when the illness is not in the genital area, it is advisable to use the section of the hypochondrium to avoid the loss which is caused by perforation.
When we want to do this, make three or four small sections of the epilhom around the area between two circles according to quantity, so that the section is in cartilage, not in the flesh, and this place is suitable for a section, which is devoid of muscle and its blood vessels are lacking.
And if the doctor fears this, do so when he extends the thread of the scalpel, and then cut the thread before it reaches the channel, but more avoid the blood vessels if you see any cause.
And then incise the skin as we have instructed; and it is significant on the section of the channel by the flame which indicates that of that injury by this that is disjointed and by the absence of voice.
And leave the wound open for some time.
And when the time is ripe for the perforation that is feared, add two loops of the thread of the wound, and stitch that alone to the cartilage.
And then administer medicines that cause flesh to grow where it is lacking.
And Alcubasis says that the main point of the discourse we have recounted is merely that you see some of those abscesses already have pierced the windpipe of the patient, and the patient has come into death, and its throat is severed, and some go to incise the epiglottis so that the patient may breathe over the place of the wound through some respiration, and thus be saved from death.
And for this, I order to leave the wound open until the malignity of the illness is consumed; and the malignity of the illness lasts for three days; and then, at that time, I order to close the wound and treat it until it is healed.
And what I have seen with my own eyes is that a servant took a knife and pressed it against the windpipe and incised one part of the rib cage, and I was called to treat this case, and examined the woman as I would examine a dead person, and uncovered the wound and examined the bleeding which was coming from the small wound in the wound.
Then I confess that she had not injured any vein or artery, and the wind from the wound, and healed her with that which was sound.
And she did not suffer any injury, not even hoarseness in her voice, and soon recovered from her condition.
And now I say that in the section of the paronychia there is no fear.
Capitol. xliv.
On the section about an abscess that occurs on the shoulder outwardly, and is called a shoulder hernia.
This unnamed shoulder abscess is a large abscess according to the color of the body, and it often occurs in women.
And it can occur in two ways: either naturally or accidentally.
And in the natural case, it is not easy to cure.
And the accidental can occur in two ways: one resembling fatty nodes, and the other resembling an abscess formed by the obstruction of an artery, and in this case, there is fear. And do not make presumptions about him as if he were small, but in that which is little. And you probe that area and investigate the one he points to, and if you find a swelling resembling a hard node, and it is not suspended by any of the veins, then you incise that area as you would for nodes, and extract it from the skin and bursectomize; otherwise, you thoroughly examine his entire body, and place the affected area in such a way that it利于伤口愈合。
Capitol. xlv.
Of the section on types of nodes.
Of the various types of nodes, and I have already described all the types of nodes in the division.
And note that I recount so as to make the difference between a node and an abscess clear, without any doubt.
Therefore, I say that in an abscess there is warmth, fever, and severe pain until the boiling of the excess subsides; and once complete putrefaction occurs, then the fever, pain, and heat cease.
More often than not there is no heat nor fever nor pain, and concerning that lion's head which is at the back of the neck.
And it is according to the color of the body, and its beginning is like a bruise and is made thus, either greater or smaller, and they are according to two species, namely fat ones containing humidity, and the colors of the humidity are spots, as I said in the division.
Therefore, when you come to the treatment of nodes, express that and inquire about that at the beginning from the flesh which is called intromes, according to its form which will be in the chapter which is nearby.
And this is the method of inquiry for abscesses and all nodes, and it is that you take this flesh and insert it where the moisture is greatest which you find in the abscess, and you will mix the tissues little by little with it until you know that the flesh has penetrated the core.
Then place your hand according to the measure of the size of the abscess, and extract the intromed tissue and consider what is left in the cavity of the abscess.
And if the running moisture of any color is overlooked, then you incise according to a superficial section as I have said in other abscesses.
And if there is no moisture from the intrusion, then you know it is greasy.
And if it is dry on the surface and has the form of a cross according to this form: As I have shown you, suspend it with a cord, and completely remove the skin from all parts with ease, and keep the hide or sack over it, if possible, and extract the clean part at the node.
But if it breaks during the operation, it is not possible to extract that clean part. Mark it well and then extract it piece by piece so that it does not break for any reason.
But if it breaks for any reason, whether a little or too much, the node should return as best as possible.
And if you see that it breaks any small part, then fill the wound with some sharp and strong corrosive powders, strengthen the wound, place your hand over the area where the abscess is located, and cure the rest of the body until it is healed.
And if it is not great, then you close the two lips of it and cure that which is within.
And if the vein is pulsatile on the opposite side, or non-pulsatile, then you incise and fill the area with three parts of vitriol and let it stay for two days or three until the swelling subsides and the boiling of the blood calms; and then return to divide what is ruptured from the node.
Capitol. xlvi.
Of the forms of instruments necessary for section and puncture.
Of those are the forms of the introduced instruments, and they are of three species: some are large, and of them are medium, and of them are small.
The form of the large introduced instrument is this:
The form of the small introduced instrument is this:
Make them of iron, of brass, of fallen extremities properly, so that the instrument enters into the abscesses.
These are the forms of the experienced ones, and they are named albed, and one of them is called bere.
These are of three spices, of which one is great, the second half, and the third a little.
The form of the experienced one is great, the form of it:
The form of the experienced one half, the form of it:
The form of the experienced one a little, the form of it:
It is advisable that they be for those abscesses, discharges, fistulas, and buboes, so that they are in those of the bones and from other causes.
And make them round, large, like lions, as well as large needles to which the threads are attached. They are made of iron, or steel, or silver, and the best are when they are made of steel.
And they make experiments with black plum seeds, which are said to be effective when the fistulas in their cavities are opened and reflected, being reflected by their lightness to those reflections.
And so, in three species, some are long, and others medium, and others short, according to the width of the fistula and its stricture.
Form of the experiment with great lead:
Form of the medium-sized lead experiment:
Form of the small lead experiment:
The forms of the lancets are of three species. Some are simple, having only a single curvature, and are of three kinds: large, few, and medium.
And they have bodies of lancets, which are of three species.
And those having two curvatures, are of three species.
And from them there are three curves, and of three species.
And all these are necessary in their place.
Shape of a single small curve, like this:
Shape of a large curve having two curves: Shape of a medium-sized curve having two curves: Shape of a small curve having two curves:
Shape of a large curve having three curves:
Forma of a woman having three curves:
And these are the forms of the scalpels which are sharpened and filed to remove nodes and abscesses, and they are of three species, one of which is large, woman-sized, and small.
Forma of the large scalpel:
Forma of the woman-sized scalpel:
Forma of the small scalpel:
The extremities of those which are to be cut are sharp, while the other extremities are not sharp, and they are not held in such a manner as to fear incision of a vein or nerve. This is done for the benefit of the patient, and some slight discomfort due to the heating effect is acceptable for the excoriation of the abscess.
And these are the forms of the forceps, and they are of three species: large, woman-sized, and small, as you will see.
If they are formed from heat and have the appearance of a red spot where the alcohol was applied.
And if it is in the outer side of the lower limb with a point marked by hidden puncture and there flows to the inner parts both inside and outside, when you want, do so as you see fit.
The forms of pustules, which are hidden between the fingers and do not affect the thighs, and they are of three species: great, female, and small. And these are the forms of those:
The forms of venous ones, in which the flow of blood is cut off, and they are of three species: great, female, and small; the forms of which:
If they are formed from yellow heat, round of some length, and are fine in texture.
And these suction cups you should make some large, medium, and few, so that through those cuttings the flow of blood is rapid when needed, and when first it is not necessary treatment.
But do not use those for cutting the blood in all parts of the body, and use them only on fleshly parts, thus in the groins and thighs, and in the armpits, and in the breasts, and in the belly, and in the armholes, and similar fleshly parts.
And some are made of those instruments smaller, resembling hooks according to this form; through which the blood is cut when it is done by phlebotomy, or by incision of a vein or artery.
And some are made round according to this form:
Capitol. xlviij.
Of the treatment of the breasts of men which are similar to women's.
Sometimes the breasts of some men swell when they begin to become flabby, and at times the breasts swell and are gathered together in women, and Roman women with large breasts, let them rest.
And to those for whom you have this, incise those areas along the lunar section according to this form, from line B to line G. Then excise the tumor entirely, and fill the wound with red medication. Finally, suture the two edges of the wound together and treat it until it is healed.
Moreover, if the breast droops towards the sides and is softened by its size as in women, then cut it into two lobes, with each lobe contained within another of similar lunar sections. Each should be ended such that the larger line contains the smaller one according to this form from line B to line G. Then excise the tumor which lies between the two edges of the wound, and remove the fatty tissue. Proceed with suturing and administer the powders as previously described until it is healed.
And if you do not complete the incision that should be made due to the discomfort of the patient and the flow of blood, then you must fill the wound with a small piece submerged in corrosive ointment and leave it there until it dissolves the roots of the fatty tissue, and then cure what remains healthy.
Capitol. xlviii.
Of the perforation of abscesses where pus is allowed to titillate.
These abscesses where pus is allowed to titillate are of the species of scrofula, tumors which contain a lump that is extracted.
And of those that contain moisture, they should be incised at the lunar quarter according to this figure: from the line of G to the line of B. And when all that is in the abscess of pus is evacuated, then complete it with a new incision and leave it for another day.
And then let the wound be dressed with an ointment suitable for it, until it heals.
And if the abscess of the glands or scrofula is, then you incise thereupon in this way as we have said in the section on scrofula equally.
And if the wound is extended to the point of becoming gangrenous, then apply a cautery to it according to what we have said above.
Chapter XLIX.
Of the section on abscesses that occur due to an arrow or a vein.
When an arrow is broken and the string that was over it becomes consolidated, then dark spots develop into abscesses. And the signs by which one can recognize that inflammation or abscess is due to the artery or vein: for when you press on the abscess with hot objects, you feel a stridor in it.
And that which is due to the vein is round in appearance on the surface of the body.
Of the section on this abscess: it is dangerous, especially in those that affect the axillae, the inguinal regions, and the neck; and when it is large, it must be ensured that its cure is not delayed. Those in the extremities or near the head should also be carefully avoided.
For that which is due to inflammation of the opening of the artery, cut in the longitudinal section at the cord; then enlarge the section with clips and near the artery, and liberate the tunics so that they are exposed.
Then place a needle there and make it penetrate into the other side, and strengthen the artery with double stitching in two places, — which causes you to suture in the extraction of two arteries that are in the temples.
Then cauterize the area between two threads with hot iron until the bleeding stops and the abscess is dissolved.
Then administer treatment in which poultice is applied while the threads are being removed; and cure that with suitable ointments until it is healed.
And if it is an abscess due to venous congestion, then take what you can of the abscess with your hand while holding the abscess taut. Then insert the needle at the spot where you held the abscess with your hand, and make it penetrate; and extract it in a double stitch between the two parts of the thread on both ends of the needle, and ligate the abscess with a good suture as I have said before about the grapevine thread in two parts at both ends of the filament.
But if you fear that the thread will come loose, then insert the needle at that same place and leave all the abscess from the first puncture, and strengthen your threads in four places.
Then dry the abscess in its middle location so that when the patient sits in it, you incise the excess of the cord, and leave what is soaked from it.
Then place the powder you have soaked in wine and oil over it, and administer the cure which is made with cloths and ointments until it heals.
Cut out the abscess which occurs due to nerve damage.
Similarly, when an abscess occurs in an artery or a vein, and similarly, an abscess occurs in the nerves when there is percussion injury or trauma from excess work, and for similar reasons.
And it is most common in the areas of the assistants or the thigh, or in any area where the joints are weak.
And it is a heavy abscess, and it resembles the color of the rest of the body, and it is in the larger parts of his body. When stretched by intensity, one feels the patient's illness resembling stupor.
And it is not an abscess growing in the front of the body, and therefore the chain is left off, and he is allowed to move freely without going forward or backward.
So those in the joints do not have to be enchained, for strong ligaments will resist contraction.
But those in the head or on the forehead should be chained with a strap. But if the abscess is small, then treat those forces and cut away that part with forceps.
And if it is large, then suspend it with forceps, and scrape away that part, and stitch it up; and cure the wound until it is healed.
Capitol. li.
Of the section of abscess that occurs in the cheek that affects the abdomen.
Some people have tumors in their abdomens and in other parts of their bodies. These tumors are called funguals due to their similarity to fungi; the substance within is fine, but the head of the tumor is large; and the skin around them is wrinkled, both for those that are small and for those that are greatly enlarged.
And I have seen one myself, and in its abdomen were two tumors which resembled fungi, and there was no difference between those whites, of fine substance.
And the skin around those tumors was wrinkled and split, and moisture flowed from them constantly.
So I incised those and cauterized one on the foot that was eighteen inches long, and the other that was six inches long.
And the operation in incising them is that you consider whether the tumor is moist, and the color of the tumor is white, moist, with fine substance; then you incise it with a deep cut, and have it cauterized in your presence with fire, for moist tumors must have their section thoroughly drained; and if you fail to drain it, cauterize it.
And if the patient is afraid and fearful, guard yourself from injury by iron; rather when you take lead powder recently made, strengthen that part, the manner of which we have said; leave it for two days.
And then adjust in the constriction of the lead wire; therefore, do not cease to strengthen the lead greatly throughout that part, until it is severed and falls by itself.
And if the part is of great thickness, then in cutting it there is some cause for fear and dread, especially in that which is in the abdomen.
And it is more possible that you cut the majority of it, and then cauterize it so that it does not return.
And then cure the area until the wound is healed.
And guard that you do not presume to cut flesh which is of dusky color, with little sensation, and appears flaccid, for such is cancer.
And I will recall the sickness nearby this.
Capitol. lii.
For the treatment of hernia around the navel.
Hernia around the navel is caused by various reasons; or by fissures in the diaphragm which is above the abdomen, and protrudes through it according to where the other ruptures are; or by a wound which flows from a vein or artery as stated before, or by constricted congestion within it.
If it is due to a diaphragm fissure and the hernia sac's color, the color of the swelling resembles that of the body; and the pain is severe, often appearing in various locations. And if it is due to the protrusion of the intestine, then its location differs from what we have described, with more varied severity. When you press on that area, the protrusion disappears and soon returns. It is firm in that place and requires a strong method for introduction, such as a bath or vigorous work.
If by humidity, when you press with your hand it is evident and not hidden, nor constrained, nor credible.
And if by scald, when these signs appear the abscess in black decreasing.
If by no meat, when the abscess is severe, large, and hard, and is situated according to a quantity.
If by humidity, when you touch it, it is soft.
And the operation in it is that you consider whether the prominence of the umbilicus is by scald from an artery, or a vein, or by humidity; and then seek to be avoided in the treatment of it, for there is fear and dread as you have been taught in the Capitol where I said about abscesses from arteries and veins.
And if the prominence of the umbilicus is by the intestine or the hernia, then you seek to command the patient to have his bowel movements, and stand extended; then place your hand around the circuit of the entire umbilicus, and command him to stand with his hands behind his back; then encircle with a broad band around the circuit of the umbilicus over the area you have marked with the tenta; then extend the size of the abscess towards the upper parts greatly; then place a strong ligature or a catgut suture in the circuit in a proper manner.
And then push the pus of the abscess out onto the membrane and insert your finger in that space to find the intestine; if you have already touched it without guarding it with the membrane, then you withdraw quickly and push the intestine into the inner parts of the abdomen.
And if you have touched the membrane, then take it carefully; incise the superfluous parts of it.
But if it is contrary to your artery or vein, then circumvent that spot, and then return to your operation; take two needles and place them in those two strong threads and insert two needles into the circuit you have made around the abscess in the form of a cross, making sure they penetrate; then strengthen the abscess in four parts over the needles.
And if you wish, hold the needles and let the area extend and fall by itself; or incise that which has become thin and can drain, and then treat that with ointments until it heals.
And if the prominence of the navel is due to flesh or moisture, then drain the abscess as we have said and remove the pus or moisture, which you find there, and then treat that with ointments until it heals and consolidates the area.
Capitol liiii.
For the cure of pain.
We have already said, in the division, about kinds of pain and in what manner they are treated with medicines, and that a cure is valid only if it does not become ulcerated; and we have said that pain is generated and how it is treated.
And the ancients said that some kinds of pain are in places where it is possible to completely remove them, such as in the head, which is in the mammary glands or similar parts of the body, and especially when they are just beginning and small.
But when it is old and hard, I cannot determine its properties, for I have neither healed anyone of this kind nor have I seen another case, nor can it be treated in this way.
And the operation for it is as follows: when it is located, as we have said, you should first expose the disease and purge of black bile for several days, then draw that out, if an obvious full and distended condition is found.
And then prepare the patient for operation by placing him in a position suitable for the procedure, and then stretch his limbs so that they reach the required area; and then curve all parts with the knife according to thorough incision so as not to damage any vital part of the patient. Let the blood flow, and do not stop it lightly, and squeeze the areas, and wipe away the thick blood with your hand or with an instrument at your disposal.
But if you find thick blood in the incision of a vein or artery, then cauterize that area once the flow of blood has stopped, and treat it with the other remedy until it is healed.
Capitulum I.
On the treatment of dropsy.
We have already discussed in the division the species of dropsy caused by water, and the signs of each species, as well as the treatment using medicines.
And that which is cured by iron is nothing but the specialty of arthritides alone, and it is not approximated by iron to the specialty of tympanites nor to the specialty of hypochondria, for this is fatal.
And when you have treated this specialty of tympanites with medicines and find that your treatment is ineffective, consider that if the patient has already achieved debility or another illness such as edema, as in their cough or abdominal condition similar to those, then do not treat them with iron, for there is fear regarding this.
But if you see the patient with an excess of virtue, and in them there is no other illness than edema solely, neither child nor old man, then the manner of the operation for them is that you lift the patient between your hands, and minister to them by pressing their abdomen with your hand, expel the water from their side near the femur, and then take a spine spatium according to this form:
it should be of two sharp parts long, with sharp ends like a spine; yet it should have some slight thickness, so that in the operation you do not pass into the intestine, and that you do not damage it.
And then consider if the generation of dropsy is from the intestines, for when you examine the section you are about three inches away from the navel on either side, along the right side above the iliac bone.
And if the generation of dropsy is due to illness of the kidney, then your section is on the left side of the navel by three inches.
And if the generation of it is due to the liver, then your section is on the right side.
And ensure that your section is not on the side where the illness is located to prevent excess fluids from flowing to that area.
And then perforate the entire length of the canal with the instrument, and insert it into that section. Elevate your hand above the spasm between the canal and the siphon, and expel it; if the quantity is about an egg or more.
And then perforate the siphon so that the spasm reaches the desired location, which is where the water is. And then extract it and insert an instrument of this form: and it is similar to a thin silver cannula; it is made of silver or gold or copper, on the lower part of which there is a small hole, and on its sides are three holes: two in one part and one in another part; and the end is incised like a feather's tip, as you can see:
And at the end of the instrument above is a ring; when the instrument reaches the water, it quickly rises to the surface, so that it expels a small quantity of water in half an hour. If you expel more than what fits in the container, the patient may die suddenly due to resolution of his animal spirit, or it might lead to a condition five days away from death.
More water should be expelled according to the quantity of the virtue of the fluid and according to your assessment of the patient's condition from the pulse and the quality of the fluid.
And then extract the instrument, and stop the water which causes it, as soon as it is stopped by the cord which blocks the hole through which it flows. You have already perforated it according to this manner.
And then repeatedly apply the instrument if the patient tolerates it, and extract a small quantity of water, and do this for several days out of fear, and beware not to let him drink too much water but only a little.
But if you fear for the patient, and let him drink a large quantity of water, then cure that with burial in sand, and washing with wet earth, and in the sun wait for a long time; and cure that with drying medicines until he is healed.
And cauterize on the stomach, and the spleen near the extraction of the water, as I have recounted in what was previously mentioned.
Capitolium.
For the treatment of children whose urethras are not perforated.
In some instances, one of the infants is born with the abdomen of its mother closed, and the opening of the mixture does not perforate (or it is stretched or does not remain in its proper place).
Then cover the wound after perforation of the leg as soon as it is born with a subtle moist spatum according to this form:
Then place a thin lead nail over it and bind it tightly, and let it be for three days or for four.
And when he wants to urinate he is relieved and urinates; then return it.
And if you do not bind the lead, it is possible that the urine which falls on the area will prevent this from healing.
But the one from which you have pierced should be treated with a lead nail, as we have said, for many days before it is enlarged.
But those in which you have pierced are not in their place, they say, the cause is due to those, that which is native and the wound should be at the end of the shaft of the penis so that it cannot urinate from the internal parts, while raising the shaft with his hand above the parts upwards; and it is not a generation, for so that the sperm cannot reach the ovary according to its straight path, and it is a malady of long duration.
And the manner of the operation is that the patient lies on his back, and then extend the head of the penis with your left hand in strong extraction, and incise the head of the head of the penis at the place of circumcision with a sharp knife, as if it were incised like a feather, or any part you wish to remove, so that the meatus resembles the head of the penis and leads downward into the middle location according to what is convenient.
And watch that in your operation for the flow of urine, if you notice any spots accidently; pause at it and carefully cut away the bladder, and treat the wound until it is healed.
Capitol LXVI.
For the abscess which occurs in the prepuce, on the head of the penis, and is accompanied by corruption, blackening, and adhesion of the prepuce to the head of the penis.
Spots appear in this abscess on the penis and form a raised flesh wound.
And one of them is malignant and the other is non-malignant.
And the non-malignant one, take and suspend it on a fine thread and cut through it where that tumor is entirely; then place your hand over it to submerge it in Egyptian ointment; afterwards, treat it with diafinic ointment until it is healed.
And if the abscess is malignant, of white color, then you should apply a cautery near its incision and around it.
And if the abscess is in the foreskin of the head of the penis in an uncircumcised person, and one part of the abscess is inside the foreskin and another part is outside, then you should remove the part that is inside at the beginning until it is consolidated; afterwards, treat the part outside, for when you treat both together, it is not assured that the foreskin will not become infected.
And we have examined accidents in the genitals and in the foreskin, such as blackening and corruption. Then you should reduce everything that is already darkened and that is about to腐化或已经腐烂；然后在其上画线，使用蜂蜜，它由新鲜大黄粉、碎三色堇和筛过的粉末混合而成。
And then attend to that one among the other treatments when it is healed.
And if there is a flow of blood, then administer a lunar cautery according to this form:
A lunar cautery is used in two positions together, either for a flow of blood or for the plague when it is corrupted.
And if the head of the abscess is corroded and destroyed entirely in an hour, then you must introduce a lead cannula into the flesh of the prepuce so that the sore discharges through it.
In the adhesion of the prepuce with the head of the abscess (and this adhesion occurs only in that part from which the prepuce is drawn, and over which circumcision is not required; when adhesion occurs due to the plague or an apostema), you must excoriate with a blunt blade while the glue dissolves and the head of the abscess is completely released.
And if it is difficult to excoriate them thoroughly, then you must excoriate with a blunt blade some part of the head of the abscess and the prepuce, and this is because when the prepuce is thin and light, it is perforated slightly by its thinness.
And then separate between the prepuce and the head of the penis a piece of the thin skin, which is already moistened in the cold fluid to prevent another fold from adhering.
And then apply a styptic inside as soon as it is consolidated.
Capitol. lvii.
On the purification of children and the treatment of what occurs to those who have been circumcised.
Circumcision is not a solution for continuity as other wounds are: yet, since it is of our operation and our will, and the issue properly lies in children, it is necessary that we assign to it the best operation and the lightest way, losing nothing for their health.
Therefore, it is said that the ancients did not use circumcision for any of the free parts, for they do not use it in their laws, and it is only because we have acquired this practice through experience. The reason is that I have examined the majority of surgeons and barbers who use circumcision and purification with a knife and by cauterization; and they use lint soaked in wine and incision with ungual scissors.
And I have already tried all these methods and cannot find a better modification using scissors, or honey or vinegar in the modification like ointment, for you will see that the thread escapes above, for the thread of the foreskin is caught by two tunics, and weaken the tunic below, and it is necessary to make another incision and cause certain pain. And in the circumcision which is done by clamping, and is digital, of which shoemakers use, it is not secure the incision at the end of the male member, for it often enters into the wound.
In the operation with anointing, you must use iron and corrupt your operation. And the thread of the child is short by nature, and often does not need to be cut in such a manner that no circumcision is necessary, and I have seen this.
More of the circumcision that is done with scissors and ointments and vinegar, its quality, I have observed from experience, for the scissors are for proportional incision, whereby the sharpness above is thus as the sharpness below; and therefore when you press your hand proportionally on two sharp points, and incise according to a comparison in one time; and it is made compression of the vinegar in a figure containing the thread of the foreskin from all sides, by which no error occurs at all.
And the manner of the first operation is that you make the child stay mostly if it is among those who understand a little, that you lie the faeces in the anus only, and let it out the next day.
And then cleanse in all that manner which is possible of what receives its intelligence. And then place it among your legs properly prepared, and do not be more than a hundred; and hide the scissors in your hand or let your thigh cover them, so that the child does not see those or any other of the instruments.
And then insert your hand into the child's anus and blow into the cavity, and push that in until you straighten the head of the anus, and then modify it from what is added to it by deafness.
The shape of the forceps after modification, this is the form:
If the one jaw is uncut and the other is cut, let the tip of the key form the handle, and let the length of the two jaws be as long as the length of two equal-sized handles.
More importantly, the error in modification is that if you inadvertently remove the internal or part of the internal knee, you must perform an incision.
Therefore, ensure that you extend the one from your hour mark along your finger in front of the incision site and make the incision according to equality.
And if you cannot hold it with your finger, then stretch it with a pin and make the incision there.
If they have passed three days and remain what is swollen due to the inguinal abscess, then you let it be until the abscess is lanced with a cautery, and excoriates that for facilitation, and inscises that according to how you are prepared.
And guard the head of the swelling, for it will not be to you what is there.
And therefore treat that part where the wound is consolidated with the powders we have recommended in the treatise on powders.
And if it is incised from the wound beyond measure, and you obey to the rules above, this will not harm it.
And therefore treat that part where we have said should be treated until it is healed.
Capitol. lviii.
On the treatment of retained urine in the bladder.
Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by an obstruction due to a stone or a strangulated sore, or pus or flesh, and resembles those we have said about the methods of treatment in the division.
And if what we have said is not dissolved, then strongly make the cause in the patient's loins. Then know that you should perform extraction of it with an instrument which is called a siringue, of which this is the form: It should be made of silver and should be very fine, like a long ray canula similar to half a palm's length, with a thin cane at the head of it.
And the way to extract the urine through it is that you take a flax thread doubled and tie it at the end of the siringue with good knots; then insert the ends of the flax into the part left by the siringue, and cut with scissors if any excess from the flax is needed. More firmly insert it into the canula, and quickly bring the siringue to the edge and against the wall of the bladder.
And make a cut in the patient's side, and pour urine from his bladder and penis with olive oil and vinegar.
And then insert the probe easily until it reaches the meatus of the penis; and then fold the penis upwards at the point where the urethra divides; and then push the probe inside until it reaches the bladder, and that should be done in the meat which has become tortuous.
And then slowly insert the probe into the wool, for urine will soak the wool.
And then remove it and use urine for treatment, and insert the probe again without stopping until the bladder and patient are thoroughly relieved.
Capitol.lix.
Of the quality of the clyster for the bladder, we shall use and describe instruments which are appropriate for this.
When ulcers or abscesses occur in the bladder, or there is a burning sore, and you wish to distill waters and medicines into it, then a device called a clampcedra is made. This is its form:
so that at the end of it is closed, so it is sealed. And in it there are three holes: two on one side, thus positioned.
At the beginning it is concave, in which the substance to be inserted is placed, and according to its quantity that fills it, more is added. When any cause sends humidities towards it, they are drawn in, and when expelled, they are expelled through it, and when expelled for a long time, naptha is placed in the grooves to seal it.
So, when you want to introduce humidities into the bladder, insert the end of the clampcedra into the humidity, and draw out what is pushed into the upper parts, so that the humidity is drawn into the cavity of the clampcedra.
And then insert the tip of the pessary into the vagina as we advised in the ciringua; and push the moisture out with what you are pushing, for that moisture will quickly reach the bladder, and the malady center there.
The form of the subtle pessary through which the bladder is chartered, and that is the form:
And it should be made of silver or copper, with its head resembling a small feather, and leave the thread inside linen.
And then take a bladder of mutton, place in it the moisture you want to chartered in the bladder, and tie it between two with strong ligatures of doubled thread, and heat that moisture over the fire.
And then insert the tip of the pessary into the vagina.
And then strengthen your hand over the bladder with the moisture in a descending structure so that the malady centers where that moisture has reached the bladder.
If you do not have a bladder present, then take a piece of parchment and make from that circle; perforate it completely round; then insert strong thread through all those threads, as they are twisted; then add the circle so that it is added alsofatur, for you must place in that which you want from the humors, odor, and waters.
Then you tie that with the instrument and do so with it as you did with the bladder, and keep your hand in place so that the humidity reaches the bladder.
Capitol.lx.
Of the extraction of gravel.
We have already mentioned in the division the species of gravel and its cure with medicines, and the difference between gravel generated in the kidneys and gravel generated in the bladder, and the signs of the former.
And we have mentioned the gravel for which the major operation and sectioning is performed.
And the stone generated in the bladder is that which is inserted in the bladder.
And I am now narrating that amendment and abbreviation manifestly and briefly.
Therefore, I say that the stone generated in the bladder mostly affects children; and the signs of it are that the urine discharged from the bladder is similar in subtlety to water, and appears with that sand; and gout irritates its vein, causes reddened areas on the skin, and soon becomes exacerbated; and the anus is often affected as well.
And the recovery of children occurs within about four years; and it is a difficult cure in old age. More in the young, it occurs about half way through those four years.
And of that in which the stone is larger and the cure is easier; And if it is small, it is contrary to that.
Therefore, when we reach the cure of that, begin with the modification of gout by a cristol stone which extracts all the fluids which are in his intestines; for that fluid sometimes prohibits the passage of the stone and you must question its presence.
And then place the patient on their side with their feet together and lift and massage gently so that the stone descends to the neck of the bladder, or passes from that spot a few times.
And then place those cushions you have prepared under the patient, while the others keep their position, so that the bladder is entirely made to slope towards the parts left.
And then apply that and all that remedy.
And if you feel the stone in the space, then immediately apply pressure to it with your hand.
And if the stone does not pass with your touch, then rub your index finger of your left hand with oil, if the patient is a child, or your thumb if the patient is an adult, and insert it into the patient's anus. And apply pressure to the stone with your finger while it is in place. And gradually move that finger towards the neck of the bladder.
And then press upon that area as you have said, and expel that to the external parts; see where the location of the lesion is.
And command the minister to press the bladder with his hand; and command another minister to extend the genitals upwards with his right hand, and with his other hand pull back the codex which holds the genitals, at the location where the section is made.
And then insert a spatula; this is the form of it: And cut through it what is between the anus and the genitals, not in the middle location, ahead of the left thigh; and let the section be on that stone which you said is at the anus, and let the section be transverse, so that the section outside is wide and inside narrow according to the quantity that flowed from the stone is possible, and no larger, for we carefully preserve the section which is in the anus the stone should have the section, and it becomes a hole-slit due to its natural function.
And know that there is sometimes one in the foot where the toes and margins, for which the insertion of it becomes difficult by this.
And of that which seems like a lion's claw, and is round, and from it is made a easy insertion.
And if there is one with the toes and margins, adjust it in the crack.
And if it is not thus torn open, then you must probe it with a finger or strengthen it with your hand, doing so decently, the tip of which should be like a file on which you strengthen the foot, and do not脱离开它；或者你必须将一根细而弯曲的器械插入其中。
And if you cannot do so with that, then you enlarge the tear a little, and if you want a flow of blood, cut strongly on it with vitriol trisseret.
And if the foot has more than one, then at the beginning you push your hand to the mouth of the bladder, and nearby cut into it; and nearby push a little nearby there; and similarly do if its spots are more than two.
And if the stone is very large, it is ignorance on your part to incise such a large section, for when this happens to the patient, one of two causes occurs: either death or the induction of continuous urine discharge, due to which the area does not fully heal.
Administer the expulsion of the stone when it is within so that it comes out, or use forceps in the fracture of the limb to extract it from the wound.
Then, after you have completed your operation, fill the wound with slices of aloe and dragon's blood, and strengthen it. And place it over that soaked cloth in oil and wine, or in sweet oil and infused water, so that the abscess may yield.
Then lift the patient's leg on a stool, and do not remove the bandage on the third day.
And when you have removed it, sprinkle the area with water and some oil, and then dress the wound with a ointment of diafinicon and an ointment of diabazic acid until it heals.
But if in the wound there happens an abscess with suppuration and corruption, and it appears as if the blood is in the bladder congealed, and from it urine is prohibited (and this is known by the egress of blood through the urine), then you insert your said instrument into the wound and extract that blood, for if Roman corrosion is provoked it causes corruption of the bladder and its putrefaction.
Then clean the wound with vinegar, water, and salt, and oppose all species, using what is suitable for its cure while it remains unhealed.
And observe the hours for the entire cure that you have prepared, placing your hands on both thighs and applying the medicines which are laid over the area.
And if the stone is small and located in the meat of the penis, and urine flow is prohibited, then cure it by doing what I have recommended before reaching the section; for too many applications of this treatment are accused of causing dryness. And here you insert it, meaning that you should take a metal punch, which is the shape of this:
from a triangular sharp instrument, inserted in the fist.
And then take spica, and tie it around the scrotum, placing the penis inside to prevent it from returning to the bladder.
And then insert the needle into the scrotum, piercing easily so that the puncturer reaches that stone. And rotate the puncturer with your hand in that stone little by little, and you pierce the puncture so that the one on the other side also penetrates; for urine is quickly released.
And then press your hand on what is broken from the stone of the other side of the scrotum, for that is fractured, and the hole is filled with urine, and the patient is cured.
But if this cure is not possible due to some cause that prevents it, then tie a spica around the stone, and another spica above the stone. And then fix something over the stone on that scrotum between two ties. And then extract that. And then untie the bandage and modify the dressing, which is done on the wound.
And it is not necessary to tie the bandage with flax, leave the stone, but so that it does not return to the bladder. Instead, tie another bandage above, for when the flax is untied near the edge of the stone, the stone returns to its place and heals the wound.
And for this reason, when you untie the flax above, you should lift the stone to the parts above, or return it to its proper place, and then the wound will heal as we have said.
Capitol. lxix.
On the extraction of stones from women.
Stone in women is not commonly generated.
Yet if a stone does appear in any of them, the cure is difficult, and it is forbidden by too many methods.
One of them is that a woman who is strong and virginal.
And the second is that you cannot find a good woman who confesses to the doctor whether she is chaste, or being married.
The third is that you cannot find a good woman who knows this art, especially the operation on the eye.
And the fourth is that the location of the section for kidney stones in women is far from the location of the kidney, so you need a general sectioning, and there is fear in that area.
Yet if necessity prompts you to do this, then seek out a midwife who is well versed, and one is seldom found.
Yet if you are lacking in that, then seek out a midwife who is clever and subtle, or present a well-versed woman who specializes in the care of women, or a woman who has part of this art.
Then have her present and command her to do everything you tell her, from the examination of the kidney stone to the beginning; the reason is that she should check if the woman is a virgin, and then insert her finger into the woman's anus to feel for the kidney stone.
Then if you find it, cut it out and leave his/her as he/she was before, then command him/her to lie down on it.
May it be that it is not a stone, then command the midwife to insert her finger into the wound of the patient and inquire about the stone, while placing her left hand on the bladder, and grasp it with good grip.
Then if you find it, gradually moisten that from the opening of the bladder to the parts, and leave abundant of its virtue so that it reaches the root of the thigh.
And then insert the application of the finger gradually down to the root of the thigh wherever it is stopped and center the stone in that part, so that the patient does not feel pain by cutting him/her.
And the section be small at the beginning; then insert the probe into that section, and if you feel the stone, then adjust the section according to the quantity he knows the stone will be removed from there.
And know that the seeds of the pear are spots: some are small and large, lion and sharp, long and round, and having crests.
And know how many seeds the pear has so that you may signify about what you want.
And if you want a flow of blood, adjust the location with vitriol trioxide and apply it for one hour until the blood is drawn out, then return to your operation after the pear has been removed.
And make sure to prepare for yourself the instruments you mentioned in the extraction of pears from men, so that you may be aided by them during your operation.
And if you want a flow of blood, and know that the expulsion of blood is from the artery that is incised, then apply powder to the area, strengthen it with powders, and cause a descent; do not repeat this; leave the pear and do not remove it, for strongly applied it will kill the patient. And then cure the wound.
When the heat of the fever has subsided after several days, and the place heals, then you return to your operation while the swelling is forgotten.
Chapter LXII.
On the section about inguinal hernia.
Aguoza hernia is nothing but the addition of moisture in the white fibrous tissue which holds the testicles containing the humor, and it is named fibrous tissue.
Sometimes it occurs in the own scrotal tissue which nature prepares for the part of the humor before it is cooked and becomes another humor; and it is the cord of the testicle between the white fibrous tissue, which we have said, and it is not this but a fold.
The generation of this hernia occurs due to weakness, which happens to the testicles, causing this material to infiltrate them. Sometimes it occurs due to a blow struck on the testicles.
And this moisture having colored streaks, may be yellowish or reddish or brown, or black and grainy, or white watery, and it is this that is most significant.
And the signs by which one knows where this accumulation of water is: if it is in the white cell which we have said, then the abscess is round, slightly declining in length as a figure of an owl, and the genet appears, for the humidity contained from all parts.
And if the humidity is in the own panniculus, then the abscess is round departing from the owl and for this reason one estimates that it is another owl.
And if the humidity is between the geniculum and the white cell, then cut away the centiment.
And to know the color of the humidity, you expel the color of the humidity in the abscess through a small incision from which the form is preceded; and according to what happens in the trace of the incision, judge what is inside it.
Then when we come to the cure of it, you must command the patient to bleed if this is within your capability, and often raise his body.
And then he is supine on his back on some slight support, and place him down with the other cloths.
And then set yourself on the left part of him, and command the minister to stand on the right side of him, who extends his curtain from one side to the other, covering the groin and the flank of the abdomen.
And then take a spatula and split the groin longitudinally near the pubis.
And the section should be made according to the correct method, at equal distance from the line where you shall divide the skin of the groin, until it reaches the white fatty tissue.
And excise that, and observe it carefully, making sure not to go deeper; and your incision should be such that it can be suspended from the upper and finer forceps, and you should examine the incision thoroughly according to its quantity as much as possible.
And then puncture the fatty tissue filled with water through a large hole, and extract all the water.
And then separate between the two lips of the section with forceps, and extend the incision upwards; and do not touch the cord at the base of the genitals, and incise the incision in that manner as is possible for you. And incise that completely or in parts, especially its thin layer, for if you do not thoroughly examine the incision, there is no guarantee that the water will not return.
Mais if you proceed with the procedure from outside the base of the cord during your operation, when you have completed the incision of the forceps, return inside that, and carefully adjust the two lips of the base of the genitals with sutures, and then treat that as you would other wounds until it heals.
And if you find the vein corrupted by another illness, then ligate the vessels which are over the spermatic cord, extract the vein, and then treat that as we have said.
But if the water is present in two parts, then you know that there are two hernias; therefore incise that part as you have done with the other equally; and if it is evident to you that it is a larger operation, then you perform it.
And then you clean the blood, and insert strips of submerged wool in oil or rubbed oil into the sections; place another strip of wool which you have soaked in wine and oil over them, and spread that over two genetii and the miracle of the belly; place others over cloths folded and powders, and lay those over flour which is according to this form:
And then press two cloths and fill them with dyed wool according to this likeness; and make the ends which are pressed with cloth or wet wool, and attach them to the structure in the belt of the pants, and one end grasp from behind into the two, and the second grasp at the crotch part, and two ends leave on two thighs, and two other ends on two garters, and all the structure be adjusted in the belt of the pants.
And sometimes this hernia is treated artificially with a cautery in place of sections with iron; you grasp a thin surgical cautery and incise there at the cord of the genitius, and ignite it as we have recommended until the white sheath containing the water is discovered, and then you take the cautery in this form: and it resembles Greek letters.
And then puncture that abscess, and ignite within it to expel all the moisture.
And then incise the abscess with lancets, and excoriate it with lancets, and cauterize it with a thin ignited cautery; and incise that part according as it is possible so as to eradicate all of it; and guard well from the smoke that the fire not touch.
And know that this operation is safer and more distant from the risk of infection, better than an incision.
But if you find it contrary to perform an abscess on the hour of incision or the hour of cautery, or risk of infection, then cure as the contrary does for you in this, applying the treatment that is appropriate according to what is said.
But if the patient is afraid and does not expect the second operation due to its horribleness, then administer puncture according to what I recommend; and it is when you are certified by what we have said about the meanings that that hernia is dangerous.
When you must set the patient on a raised cushion, then perforate the abscess at the lower part of it with a lancet, and place the puncture according to the length of the body.
And let the incision be wide enough to drain all the water.
And place your hand firmly over the area, pressing and releasing it, to allow the water to drain smoothly. And apply something to speed the healing of the wound.
But if contrary to the drainage of the water at that time you perforate there: and this is not done so that the white gauze in the orifices of the wound causes a contrary effect and prevents the efflux of water, then you should put into the wound a pen or instrument with which the water from the dropsy is extracted, the form of which is described beforehand; or adjust over the area of the wound a small.
And know that the water returns, and is aggravated for about six months or until it disappears; and when it is aggravated, then perforate according to that method, so that the patient passes its days thus.
Capitol LXIII.
On the section about flesh hernia and its treatment.
Know that in the section about this hernia, there is fear of harm to the major organs; for I have seen its removal and been saved by that which is better.
And I am recalling the operation in that case and the types of abscesses.
Therefore, I say that abscesses arise in the tissues where the glands are composed, and this occurs for several causes: either due to acute toxic discharge, which is infused into the glands, or due to percussion.
And the color of the abscess depends on the color of the tissue, and is not accompanied by severe pain, indicating a serious abscess.
And the abscess is firm and lumpy, of which the color is dark, and there is no tenderness in it.
And sometimes it is due to the concretion of arteries, and due to inflammation of those vessels, as the memory of which is already perceived, or due to inflammation of veins.
More than this, when caused by the inflammation of arteries, it is known as the dispersal of the abscess when you grasp that mass with your fingers; and do not squeeze it.
More than this, when caused by the inflammation of veins, it is not dispersed for any cause; you should avoid compressing it with your fingers.
And it is possible that a section may be made on this species and on the other tissues; for you will incise the channel of the glands, and then extend the hook above, and extract that from the white cyst, and deliver the suspensory ligament of the vessels, and ligate them. Then incise the suspensory ligament after you have delivered that from all parts of the hook.
Therefore, if the hook has already grasped those tissues firmly, then you should extract the hook and incise that area.
And if there is an adherence due to any cause of the cyst, or between what is below the vessels, then you should deliver all that adherence and incise it through a round incision.
If the flesh is native to the place of adhesion which is behind, then scrape thoroughly everything that belongs to it, and extract the humor as we have said.
Then since your operation is completed, fill the wound with wool soaked in rubbed oil and wine; and then cover it with another dressing until it heals.
Chapter LXIV.
On the cure of hernias that are external.
It is an external hernia enveloped by some envelope resembling a clot, and it makes physical exercise, movement, and walking difficult.
And in the cure of this illness, there is a fear due to what precedes it and causes remembrance.
However, proceed with the operation as soon as you perform the first steps.
And I say that you should cut out the hernia on an elevated cloth; and then attach the scrotal suspender to the parts left; and fasten the inguinal codetta to the stipes that are tried by the virga; and have another minister hold those, and extend them forcefully.
And then incise through the skin with a sharp blade along the middle between the vessels where the vessels are exposed.
And then excise from all parts as we have said in the extraction of arteries which are in the temples.
And then place a needle in which there is a double thread, and tie that at the beginning of the places where you cut, and tie the other half at the end of them. And then incise those in the middle location with a straight cut according to the length of the body, and extract what is added by the flowing moist humors that are corrupted.
And then cure the wound by the healing of other wounds in which you want health to be generated so that the vessels which do not convey either of two spirits are unaffected, for this is not harmful.
But if you cut all the vessels, then ensure that the testicles are extracted or that the testicles cease due to the cutting of the vessels, so that it is deprived of all nutrition due to the incision of the vessels, and that they be established, or that this happens because it lacks vitality.
Capitol lxv.
Of the cure for intestinal hernia.
The occurrence of this hernia is due to a secession that ends in the cipha (abdominal wall) extending over the abdomen from the inguinal region. Because of this, some of the intestines from that rupture end up protruding.
And this rupture is either of the cipha (abdominal wall) or of its excision. These two species occur due to various causes: by a blow, by a fall, by shouting, by lifting some heavy cause, or by similar actions.
And the sign of this, when it is due to extension of the cipha (abdominal wall), is that it occurs gradually over a long period of time and does not happen suddenly. It is an abscess that gradually forms within the preon (inguinal region) because the cipha compresses the intestine.
And the sign of this is when it is due to a section of the cipha (abdominal wall), as at the beginning it causes sudden and intense pain; it is an abscess that appears different from the nearby apparent one, which is due to the compression of the intestine, and the body's reactions in the parts outside the cipha.
And sometimes the intestine protrudes through the skin, and this hernia is called intestinal bubal.
And sometimes it is caused by distension, and sometimes a hole forms in the intestine, where it gets stuck, and this greatly inconveniences the patient, and sometimes it causes severe pain, especially when pressed.
And in the treatment of the symptoms of this illness there is fear, because it is believed that hunting should be avoided there.
And the manner of the operation is that you command the patient to push the intestine back into its cavity with his hand at the internal parts of his abdomen if it obeys on its return, and then he should be suspended over his chest between your arms, and lift the patient's legs.
And then stretch the cord which supports the cord of the testicles upwards, and incise the cord of the testicles entirely along its length; then place it in two folds of the incised section according to what you need to split the section with those.
And if the section according to the quantity that it is possible for you to have been perforated.
And then excise that scab which they leave at the root of the testicles, after which the white hard scab from each part is revealed.
And when you insert your finger into what is being excised from the testicle, in what is between the white scab, which they leave at the root of the wound, and between the second scab, you release all the adhesion that is behind the part.
And then place the hand at the root of the testicles on the parts behind, and by this extend the white scab with your left hand, and lift the wound above the scab to the part of the section; and command the minister to extend the wound upwards while you dissolve the adhesion that is behind with a solution.
And near your fingers, say that there is no cause for the intestine being enveloped in the white hard scab. But if you find any cause, then you remove that to the abdomen and leave it there.
And then incise in the part left of the cord of the testicles along the section where blood and health flow as we have recommended in what we have said.
And then apply wool submerged in oil, and place it on the wound; apply the plaster which we have recommended (and after several applications, the white cloth is cauterized, which we have mentioned near the incision of this where there is a flow of blood, for several days occur). Leave the plaster until it falls by itself.
But if the dressing is delayed, then pour boiled water over it, and place it on the area until it falls as we have said.
And then treat the wound with another method for treating wounds until it is healed.
Capitol. lxvi.
On Hernia Ventosa.
In this hernia, nothing has been seen that has been burned during the treatment of it.
And the first will say that it is done this way as we have recounted in the hernia case; which is that you tie the vessels near the section at that facilitation of it; and dry out in the middle location around the apostema with what I operate there, before the vessels fall.
And cure the plague as we have said until it is healed.
Capitol LXVII.
Of the disorder that occurs in the ankles.
In some cases, when there is a rupture in the ankles as we have said, apply a poultice to the area.
And the geniuses do not attribute any cause of the intestines to the geniuses; and if they do, it is rare; and return them to their place at all times.
But if the time at which this occurs is prolonged, there is an adjusted fissure in the cavity into which one places the intestine; and this happens due to the extension of the cavity, which is in the ankles as we have said. The cause is that the cavity is stretched, and then softened, and the area becomes an apostema and poultices are applied.
And the treatment of it is with a cautery as it is preceded by the narration of it.
Sometimes it is cured with iron according to this manner: and the patient lies on his side between your hands, and then the place of the rupture of the abscesses dries up by exsanguination according to the breadth as much as three fingers.
And then strengthen the white cloth that is under the cuff when it is uncovered.
And then take the wick and place it over the prominent part of the cuff, and press it against the root of the belly.
And then sew the two prominent parts over the end of the wick of the cuff, and adjust one to the other with the stitching.
And then extract the end of the wick, and do not go outside the cuff entirely, nor extend the cloth, nor any other cause as I have faith in the treatment of intestinal hernia.
And then cure that in the treatment of ulcers, and as you incise the flaps, clean it and restore the ulcer before it is consolidated; for the cuff contracts and does not adjust the prominence of the rupture.
And cautery is better in this place, for it is more closely related to health.
Capitol. lxviii.
Of the mollification of the skin of the testicles.
When the skin of the testicles is spotted in some men, it becomes softened because the flesh that lies between them is softened, and attention is paid to this.
Then it is necessary for the one who is responsible for the treatment to ensure that the patient remains in a position conducive to healing according to their condition, and entirely over the area that has become softened, placing it above the natural skin; and then he should adjust two flaps at the suturing site.
And if you wish, begin the closure of the softened excess skin with three or four stitches and a firm suture.
And then incise between the sutures; and afterwards, treat for the recovery of other wounds until they are healed and the stitches fall out.
Chapter LXIX.
Of castration.
Know that castration in our law is excommunicated, but for cause I am told to remember it in this free treatise; and the recollection of it is necessary for two ways, of which one is so that when asked about it by a physician, he knows the cure for him upon whom it happens; and the other way is that we may have need of castration for our young animals for those like mules, and bulls, and pigs, and similar to animals.
And thus it is said that castration can be performed in two ways: either by atrissio or by fissure by section.
But in that which is performed by atrissio, the way of the operation is that we make the beast stand in cold water until the genitals of it become softened and relaxed. And then take those with your hand until they become relaxed and no marks appear upon the touch.
In castration caused by rupture and drying, make sure you have the animal and press the cord of the testicles with your left hand.
Then lift the suspensory ligament, and incise over each groove between two processes.
Then incise those pus that have exuded in each case. And do not incise any of the veins in the ciphac, but incise only the thin vein which is over the vessels.
And this method of castration is better which is done by traction, for traction firmly leaves no cause of the testicles so that the animal desires copulation.
Then cure the wound while it is healing.
Capitol. lxx.
Of the cure for hermaphroditism.
Hermaphroditism in males occurs according to two methods: one where there is a gap in the cord of the testicles, in which it appears between the two testicles and partly female in nature, with its skin.
And sometimes a flow of urine comes from there which is in the channel of the testicles.
In women, it is special: and the woman's mons pubis has two folds like testicles, a little softer to the touch like a swelling in the groin similar to those of a man with his testicles.
And the cure is of three kinds: two for men and one for women. And you should probe where the flesh is tight so as to relieve the pain there, and then apply the cure for other wounds.
And in the second kind for men from which urine comes from the channel of the testicles, neither cure nor operation is needed.
Capitol.xxI.
On the labia and flesh protruding due to causes in women.
Labia firmly attached is close to natural causes where it is strained and appears legible upon examination; sometimes in some women it is magnified so much that it stretches like in men, and may protrude during intercourse.
Then you should have the superfluous mucus of the throat in your hand or spoon and ingest it.
And do not finish with ingestion, especially in the region of the rectum, so that no flux of sperm occurs.
And then care for those wounds until they are healed.
More concealed flesh is flesh that arises in the horror of the uterus until it fills that space, and a hard lump is situated outside according to the likeness of a clot (and for this some first called it "caudate illness"); therefore, you should cut it thus as we cut mucus, and care for it until it is healed.
Capitol.lix.
On the care of alratica.
Alratica is when the hymen of the woman is not perforated, or is slightly torn. And it can be natural or accidental.
Accidental pain arises from an illness that has preceded, and this is caused either by unclothed skin or by a thin or thick cloak.
It is felt in the groin of the thigh, or in the sides of it, or in the upper part of it, or in the lower part of it, and you prohibit intercourse and pregnancy, and strongly you prohibit menstruation.
The knowledge of this is made by looking at the midwife, if the obstruction is obvious, probe gently; but if it is not obvious, then you search for that among the thighs or on the abdomen.
But if the obstruction is due to a thin object, and is close to the two lips, then you open and separate that.
And you place powders on the two lips, and then place your fingers indicating both sides near them.
And the woman is on her back, her thighs extended, and then spread the two lips with force until that thin object is broken and the obstruction is opened.
And then take wool and soak it in oil, place it over the area, and keep someone there to prevent the incised area from healing too quickly.
If the swelling is large and thick, then incise that area with a lancet or a leaf of mint.
If the swelling is due to flesh, then suspend that area with a pin, and incise that area.
And use those medicines that stop the flow of venom from a bite, such as garlic, dragon's blood, and haws, mixed with honey.
And then administer a broad lead tube to prevent the ulcer from healing too lightly.
And keep it for a few days and administer boiled water.
And then use the other healing method for consolidation once it is healed.
And sometimes accidents occur in the natural abundance of other tissues, then you must incise according to this method. If this is due to an abscessed boil, in the major abscess do not create any counter-irritation by applying a iron in any manner.
Chapter LXXIII.
For the treatment of hemorrhoids and prolapse and of red boil that occurs in the vagina of women.
Hemorrhoids are appreciated as the result of small veins situated between which constantly flow dark blood; and as for old hemorrhoids, they form knots.
And I have already said in the division the species of those and the signs of those, and to say likewise which receive treatment and which do not receive treatment.
Therefore, say that hemorrhoids and knots when in the prolapse of the rectum and do not appear in the sensation, then in those do not make any treatment with a iron.
But those that are in the rectal orifice and on which there is sensation, these are the ones that are treated.
And ensure that you insert the female part in warm water and then extend the thighs with the scissors or a rough cloth, and incise those areas with razors.
And then sprinkle over those areas the flux of the blood from one of the incisive powders seven times with bite marks, thus causing a similar effect to those.
And then wrap his feet for an hour, and then immerse that in cold water.
And if the bleeding persists, then apply that salve in a decoction of sumac and of slices of garlic and of walnuts and of similar substances.
And then take flour of oats and mix it with honey and wine, and make an ointment with this over his back.
And if the bleeding is stopped, that is good; otherwise, apply it to two flaxseeds, and make seven incisions on the breasts.
And then take wool and immerse it in the juice of caraway or in the juice of angelica or in the juice of garlic in fermented wine, and apply it to the area; and cure the area with ointments until it is healed.
And cure that which is within and let it be healthy.
Chapter 74.
On the perforation of the eye socket during surgery.
Various special cases of apostematons occurring in the eye socket, such as cataracts, apostematons, ulcers, adenitis, ophthalmitis, fistulas, and thyloides, and other apostematons. And I have already described these ailments and their special cases, as well as the signs of them, and their cures in the division.
And note that I will discuss in this treatise a boil that appears in the eye socket, which is one of the types of apostematons that cause illness. If you want to know how the operation for it is performed, I will tell you in what manner.
Then consider if the pain of the abscess at its beginning is acute upon percussion and effusion and fever, and sometimes that reddening and if it changes over that place the sensation, noting coughs from within it, and cure that with what helps in promoting maturity until the acuity of the accidents ceases.
Then you must place the woman on a bench that has two seats; recline her back and adjust her feet to the part behind her abdomen, and spread her thighs apart, and place her arms below her hips, and lay cushions of lint where appropriate.
Then the midwife should follow straight down and administer the instrument through the orifices of the vagina, the form of which will come in the cases that will be discussed later.
When you want to administer this instrument, place it along the length of the cervix of the woman, and what part of the instrument enters the vagina should not exceed the cervix and relieve the pain. If the instrument is larger than the opening of the mother, then cover it with powder on the surface of the mother's opening so that no instrument can enter the opening of the mother.
And cover the vergitge that runs in the instrument of the latex above and have the minister hold the instrument and rotate the vergitge until the orifices of the mother are opened.
And when the excitement appears, and it is touched with the hand and is like a lion and moist, then cover that part by sprinkling the head of the patient with spatum lat.
And when the saenia is evacuated, then cover it with a sponge submerged in sweet oil or olive oil in which there is some astringency; and place the cake in the section at the opening of the mother.
And puncture the mother and over the wad place a clean woolen cloth submerged in water in which mallows have been boiled.
And then it is cured in about two days by applying ointment which you apply to it while it heals.
And sometimes the liver and wound are washed and are tried with chrismated water and honey, then with water in which is stirred up rue or of aristology longue, and then returned to salve.
And if the wound is inside the liver softened, then cover that part with what we have said in the division.
Chapter 75.
To teach midwives how to properly treat breech births when they occur according to an unnatural position.
Necessary cause is that the midwife recognize at the beginning the natural figure of childbirth by signs. When you see the female expel from the passages and desire to smell the air, and is moistened by what is over her during labor, then you know that this birth is according to a natural figure, and the expulsion is over her head, and the second one is either suspended or hanging from the navel.
When you see those signs, then compress his belly so that the fetus descends lightly; when it presses on its own head, let it bring the second one, and it is cleansed of those superfluities by good purification.
That which is another to this part is unnatural and unacceptable, for when the fetus rests on its feet and the body of the mother is resting in front of the head of the fetus and its feet, or one of its hands, or at its side, or the head of the fetus and one of its hands, or over its belly, and firmly leans on its own back, resembling figures that are unacceptable.
For necessary cause the midwife must be wise and subtle in all those causes, and she must guard against error and deception.
And I will show all the figures of these, and what organ is in them so that it may be indicated by this and placed there.
When the fetus is resting on its head naturally, and it is vehement against the woman and is made difficult for her, sometimes weakening the virtue of the womb, then apply that, or what women have for this, and evaporate the conh of the woman with fenugreek and olive oil.
And then insert the probe between his so-called spine a little and open the second one, or dry out that one with its claw through which flows what is in it of moisture. And press the woman's abdomen until the fetus descends.
But if it does not descend, then cause the woman to be rubbed with a paste of flax and fenugreek.
And then command her, by smelling the mixture, that she coughs while in this condition; and keep her nose and mouth closed for about an hour until the fetus is discharged.
And if both parts of the fetus are already discharged at the beginning, then cause her to relax gradually to facilitate this. But if she does not obey the instrument, then place the woman on a bench and lift her feet off it, and then hold the bench firmly to the ground; and make sure the woman does not fall due to the concussion.
And if the hands are not turned inside and the wound is deep, then incise there and extract the fragment of the wound or hold the body with a cloth and extract it equally, for that will be thoroughly cleaned.
When the wound yies over its feet, then push those parts inwards, and gradually make the wound smaller, and carefully take hold of one part and gradually expand those parts little by little.
More when it yies between the thighs, then command him to express it, and do that externally in the proper condition, for that will be thoroughly cleaned if God wills.
And if it is not thoroughly cleaned as we have commanded, then return the wound little by little so that you pause it according to the natural figure, for that will be thoroughly cleaned with slight incision.
And if it is prohibited by all that we have commanded, then take of alum and dissolved gum, and pound them together in the mortar for good pounding, and then apply to that the conch of the woman, below her lower abdomen. And then make that cut in clear water, once you reach the hypochondria.
And when you see that the parts around it become softened, then perform a fumigation with mint on it and place your hand over it. And when you have performed the fumigation for an hour, then make that incision over a cushion, and then perform that lancing and extend the wound to the mouth of the vein, and lift it, and apply a light compression to the lower part of the abdomen, which will cause it to soon become firm.
Suture the wound longitudinally with one of their hands. Perform the reduction on the patient's hand, but if you cannot reduce it, then lift the woman and move it.
And if it cannot be moved, then apply pressure to the area, and shake the patient's thighs with vigorous shaking, and then administer liniments which you prepare from mucilages.
And if labor has come, then apply pressure with the hand, and then study the reduction of the hand, and close the wound according to its natural figure, and make the woman cough and command her to hold herself until it is fully closed.
Lift the foot over the shoulder and extend its hand while the foot's sole is against the mother's side. Hold the foot in your hand and then gently rotate it slowly, so that it becomes more comfortable.
And when it is equalized and the swelling has subsided, then place there what we have recommended of oil and ointments.
And then command that it be gently massaged, and when you have done that, then pour the decoction over a cloth and command that it be inclined over the right side, and then command that it be compressed; and make the cloth starched. The prepared fetus flows to the side.
When the mother experiences horrors according to this method, consider it, and then incise the second one with your scalpel so that it is evacuated of moisture.
And if the foot is suspended over the face and neck, then incise the one with the splint, so that it is not retained and causes death.
And then push the fetus into the parts inside while you place that [fetal part] according to what fits, and send the woman to excrete some times lightly, if God wills.
The exit of twins or many fetuses. Know that twins or spots of many births are normal, and sometimes even three or four arise at once, but this is strange and worth investigating; mostly these are causes from nature, not disease.
And count those, whether they are multiple, one second, and are separated by cipha, distinguishing them between the ligaments at the umbilicus of each. Sometimes they are expelled as a fetus by light natural expulsion, and some times they are expelled by an involuntary expulsion as we have recounted.
And if they are difficult to expel, you should assist in the delivery and proceed to what we have said about non-natural figures, then care for them as we have recounted.
And if the midwife is subtle and does what she does with ease and subtlety, and with delay, and be ingenious according to all form as prepared by her bringing about health.
Recollection of that which is formed in the matrix from embryos and are aborted.
Sometimes pregnancies are formed in the uterus one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and more than ten, and you should verify that one female aborts with a vi, and another with all of them formed, the cause of which is made by the measurement of the glorious sages.
And all of this covers what is in the science of the midwife, and she must understand it well as to that which is proper.
Capitol.lix.
On the extraction of the fetus when it is dead.
When you treat the dead fetus where we have spoken in the division of therapy and it is not yet outside, you are forced to use surgery more. Then consider whether the woman is of good constitution and is not among those accidents for which her danger is feared.
When the woman is laid on her back on the bed, and her head is inclined sideways, and her thighs are elevated.
The minister should hold that [area] with two hands or bind it on the bed so that the body does not extend during the extraction of the fetus.
And then moisten the mouth of the mother with olive oil and honey and juice of aloes and fennel and lemon.
And then the midwife should apply her hand with those oils and honey, and place her hand for facilitation in the mother, and seek with her hand the location where the fingers will enter the fetus.
Place the fingers appropriately: then consider if the fetus is ready to be delivered through the head, and then place the fingers in the folds of the head, or the neck, or the mouth, or the palate, or leave the beard, or at the sternum, or at the proper locations of the ribs, or leave the hypochondria.
If the discharge is from his feet, then at the ankle, or in the middle of the back.
And make sure that the thumb is with your right hand, and curve it at that place which is between the fingers of your left hand, and insert your hand easily and place the thumb in one of those places which we have mentioned, until you reach the cause below.
And place and keep the other thumb, or the third if necessary, in a similar position, so that it is an equal opposition, and not extension according to its straightness alone.
And make sure it is movable in all parts, so that the movement of it is alleviated as much as is done in extracting a tooth.
And make sure that the extension is softened; and if any part of it is retained, then ensure that the midwife applies some of her fingers with oil and inserts them expertly and rotates them around the part that is retained.
So if the part of the fetus is forgotten, then the fingers may be stuck in that place; and do this until all of the fetus is forgotten.
But if the hand is pressed against the other, and it is not possible to reduce it due to the constriction of the hand, then cover that part with a cloth; and then extract it until all of it is forgotten, and incise it at the joint of the hand or in its crook.
And do the same with the other hand and with both feet.
But if the head of the fetus is large, or you encounter constriction during incision, or there is fluid in its head, then insert a needle between the fingers and cut open the head to drain the fluid, or use an instrument called "alundat" to remove it, the shape of which will be described in the forms of other instruments in the chapter that follows this.
And if the fetus has a naturally large head, then cut it with forceps, or use an instrument called alundat as we have said, and then extract the bones with forceps.
And if the head is swollen and compressed, you should open the foramen, when the humidity which is in the feet has infiltrated.
But if it is not complicated, and does not require elevation, then you should incise the head as soon as possible according to what is convenient for you.
And if the swellings of the abdomen are suppurated or in it, then make a puncture where the humidity is located.
But if the fistula is on his feet, then the draw of it is light and the direction to the mouth of the vein is light.
But if it is compressed, you should incise the abdomen and feet, when you withdraw that which you have wrapped around your hand, and incise the abdomen and feet where what is within flows out.
But if the other members are swollen and the head returns, then the surgeon should insert his left hand; but if the mouth of the vein is opened, then he should insert his hand in the region of the throat, and seek out the head, and push that with his fingers into the mouth of the vein, and quickly insert one or two needles, and push them there.
And if the mouth of the ileum is constricted by an apsis, cauterize which happens to the one; ensure that it is not treated too vigorously; rather, first ensure that you administer effusion of fatty humid causes. And administer plasters; and follow the patient with waters that soften and moisten.
And if the wound is on the side of the body, whenever possible it should be lanced: and what we have said about the living wound should be administered.
And if this is not possible, then incise in pieces, and extract.
And ensure that you do not leave any cause inside the cavity.
And when you have completed your operation, then administer what we have said about the treatment of apsis that occur in the ileum after cauterization.
And if there is a flux of blood, then apply cold waters and administer the other treatment.
And I have already seen a woman in her womb where one child was dead, and nearby another pregnancy began, and the dead fetus is now the other. It happens that after a long time an abscess in his arm becomes inflamed; and when opened, it begins to discharge pus.
And I was called to treat it, and medicated it for a long time, and the wound did not heal.
Then I applied plaasters of strong attraction over it for several causes, and extracted one bone, and after some days, extracted another bone; and I was too amazed, as there is no bone in the womb.
And then I realized that they were the bones of the dead fetus.
Then I cleansed the wound, and extracted bones from it. The woman existed in her womb's many dispositions, and I had already seen such a manner for a long time, correcting it by removing a small piece of arm.
And I do not administer treatment merely because it is strange, but rather because in this there is science and aid that the physician provides through his art for healing.
Of the forms of the instruments that are necessary to extract the stone.
Form of vertigo at which the liver is opened:
This is the form of strengthener in which you equalize the ligaments, at which equalization there are two vertebrae at the two ends of two tendons. However, let this vertebra be curved and more delicate in structure, made either of sinew or of tendon.
And let the width of each tendon be as wide as two fingers, and the margin on both sides be as wide as one finger. The length of each is a palm and a half; in the middle location of two tendons, there are two joints of that same kind of tendon, which are already firm. The length of each is about a palm and a little more, and the width of each is as wide as two fingers, or a little more.
And these two additional elements be inserted into the mouth of the womb so that they be open when you revolve the two prescribed virtues.
Form another one similar to that, both subtle and light:
Be made of silk thread or fine linen according to the likeness of forceps. Moreover, at the extremity of each, there are two additional elements as you see, and the length of those elements is about one palm, and the width of each is two fingers.
And when you want to open the womb, then place the woman on her side with her feet hanging down, and open what is between her thighs. Then, open your hand with the instrument as you would with scissors equally according to the quantity you want of the size of the mouth of the womb while the midwife applies herself as you desire.
The form of the vortex which the ancients describe:
Form of pressing which is applied to the wound:
Form of dressing in which the large cap is contained:
And it is assembled to forceps which have teeth at the extremity, as you see. Sometimes it is made long like forceps according to this form, as you see, with teeth like crochet teeth on which it is inserted and contained. Form of dressing for minor cases:
Form of applying a dressing with a spine:
Form of applying a dressing with two spines:
Form of spoon having two extremities, in which the head is incised:
Form of two large spoons:
All these instruments are exercised, and when more species of that kind occur, the craftsman should prepare them, making their operation lighter and providing more people according to their quantity.
And do not delay in preparing those instruments, for the need is urgent.
From the extraction of the second child.
When the second child is retained, you should induce labor. Then make the patient hold her breath, and at once apply this remedy, strengthening your hand over her mouth and nostrils. If by this she delivers, that is good.
And if not, then take a rod and perforate in the cover a tube, and place it over those herbs burning at the mouth of the uterus, as with calamus, rue, anise, camomile, scirpus arabicus, and cinnamon. All these herbs or some of them may be submerged in water in the rod, and place that over the fire.
And place a cane tube in the mouth of the uterus, and keep that there so that the vapor rises to the cavity of the uterus.
And then perform that sneezing procedure as we have said before, and the second one shall be done with greater speed.
If this remedy does not work close to this cure and it is ineffective, then command the midwife to submerge her left hand in sesame oil or in chamomile cotton, and then insert that into the nose and search for the second one with that, as you have found. If it is stuck in the passage of the mother, then insert your hand according to what we have recommended, and when you have found the second one, extract it little by little in order that the mother does not fall due to the strong expulsion. Before it is moved to the right and left sides with ease.
And if the mouth of the mother is constricted, we have already recommended the cure through sneezing and the treatment of the womb with herbs.
If all the causes we have recounted are not forgotten, then guard that you do not fatigue her repeatedly in abstraction, but instead anoint the area where it comes out at the opening of the large intestine to the woman's thigh, and apply a plaster; for this will cause it to heal within a few days and be dissipated and forgotten.
When it heals, raise the bad humor to the head, and this leads to the disease; then ensure that sub-fumigations and appropriate remedies are administered for this.
But some of the Ancients prescribed sub-fumigations with nutmeg and dry figs.
Form of the instrument with which the woman is sub-fumigated, you should retain her menstruation and the second one:
It should be made of copper or iron.
And place the narrow end in the chimney and the wide end over the fire, and position the sub-fumigation above the coals of the fire.
And hold that there while that the subfumigation be consumed and iterate another.
For the treatment of an unperforated anal condition.
The child defecates poorly and the anus is not perforated, which has already been treated with a fine incision. Then have the midwife make an incision in the said incision; and if not, make an incision with a sharp blade, and take care that it does not touch the nerve.
Then place something warm in the anus, filled with oil; and apply an ointment to it while it is warm.
If you fear it is incised, then place a catheter for several days, and wait until the child wants to defecate.
And if an incision in the anus occurs due to the consolidation of a boil or abscess; then have that consolidation incised, and treat it as we have said for the treatment and draining.
For the treatment of fistulas that discharge pus.
The fistulas that discharge pus below are often due to swelling and enlargement of those located near the buttocks or in the space of one side.
And it is either a fistula or abscess.
And when that swelling is old and caused by watery white moisture or subtle rot, sometimes these fistulas penetrate.
And those that penetrate are known by what is caused by them through the discharge and windy condition; sometimes the patient uses the opening, and a strong exhalation occurs from those worms.
And of these fistulas, sometimes those that penetrate enter into the bladder and into the flesh of the vagina; and of those that penetrate into the joint of the thigh and into the notch of the buttock.
And to know whether a penetrating fistula enters the buttock or does not, you should insert your finger into the buttock and gently probe with a thin wire or needle in the fistula when there is no pus.
But if there is turbidity, then insert a thin tube of lead or horsehair between which you feel the tube or hair in your hand.
And if you do not feel that at all nor proceed from it any cause of evacuation or worm or flatulence, as we have said, then know that it is non-penetrant, and then apply something to the cure.
And when the fistula is penetrant into the bladder or into the flesh of the penis, then its significance is dysuria from that and prohibition thereof until the area with medicine is consolidated.
But if it is penetrant into the junction of the thigh or into the bone and causes pain in the circuit, then its sign is that the tube passes through here if there is no turbidity in the bone, and pain in the circuit of the location; and that pus constantly flows from it; and that it does not respond to that treatment, nor is it consolidated with ointment.
And in all those penetrating fistulas, complete cure is not achieved, and the cure of those is work and waste of the surgeons' leaves upon which they firm themselves.
In that which is not penetrating and not ancient, heal with iron as I will recount to you later, and what I have already said stands.
And it is that the patient lies on his back with his legs elevated between his thighs, the hips inclined towards the belly of the patient, and then insert a lead or iron tube, if it is in the tortuous fistula, into the place where you can feel the pulse.
And if the patient feels pain around the throat, then you must insert your thumb along the throat.
And if you feel the pulse already clearly and spontaneously passing through your thumb, or if you feel something between your thumb and the gout or flesh, then you can certainly determine that it is penetrating; and then do not work on that, for healing does not occur there, as we have said.
But some say that it is cured in some men after a while.
And concerning the treatment in which healing is hoped for, you must ignite a fine cautery according to the size of the fistula, as is previously described, and insert that burning instrument into the fistula until it reaches the throat; and then repeatedly do this two or three times until you can feel that all those grafted tissues around the fistula are firmly attached, resembling the quill of a bird.
And then cure that which is with joints wrapped in bandages between where all those muscles are contracted, and then cure that which is with medicines the flesh generating and consolidating, and if it is healed, well; and if not, then it is not healed in some time by another cure.
And if the probe enters but does not penetrate further, you have said which is in the anus, and between that and the probe which is a veil of flesh or of cloth, and touch the fistula in what dries the surface of the wound, then dry the wound from the beginning of the fistula, and you dry the probe, and it is in the fistula where the drying penetrates to the place where the end of the probe reaches, and through the probe it is released and healed.
And then cleanse those fistulous tissues which are gathered around the penile urethra and do not drain from any of these causes.
But if a flux of blood comes between you and your operation when insides those tissues, then let it be as much as possible and of the lightest pus use a pointed cautery with fire or with acute medicine, for cauterization with fire makes good double heat: so it adjusts those tissues, and stopping the blood by excision of the humid substances.
And then cure that which is with cold veins wrapped in bandages or cut three times around the area getting hot, and then cure the wound with an ointment of hard flesh forming and consolidating.
And in medicines where there is stiffness and excoriation; when the restoration occurs, it is cured, and you fear no recurrence.
And if the fistula has already pierced through to the depth of the buttock and is long from the surface of the body, then insert your finger into the buttock and inquire there.
And if you probe and between you and her is a veil of cicatriz or of flesh, and is close to the penetration, then it is not an operation in that place but rather according to the way of trust and hope.
That cause is to administer in that place one of three ways: either by cauterizing it as we have said; or by excising it until you achieve the cavity of that place so that it becomes possible for you to insert and cure it properly; and do not proceed with cutting for fear of injuring the muscle containing the coccyx, and acting against the will of the patient; then cure that as we have said which will surely be healed; or by elongating that veil and cleaning that until it dries close to the buttock, as we have said, or by probing or another sharp instrument, and then modify those fistulated tissues which are in the area where you can avoid necrosis; then strive to perform the restoration of the entire wound by cauterizing, and if the opening above is not consolidated, and rupture the open fistula at the part of the buttock, it will be easier for the patient. And sometimes the fistula is closed according to this manner: when you insert the probe into the fistula, and place it in the perianal area around the surface of the body close to the margin of the anus, then take hold of the perforated extremity, as if piercing with a needle prepared according to this form:
And insert it there, wrapped in several threads or around them; and then insert the probe with thread into the fistula until you achieve its cavity.
But if it penetrates close to the margin of the anus internally, then extract the thread from that, and do so as you insert your hand into the anus; then withdraw the end of the thread and adjust both ends equally, strengthen each one, and let this be for a day or two. When more flesh is excised, thoroughly strengthen it where those flesh areas are excised between the two ends of the thread, ensuring they fit well.
And then cure the wound as it consolidates and heals.
If the fistula openings are not penetrable, then make them penetrable in any manner you prepare, but ensure it is moist on the outside, for you should not do this to avoid burning. Then place something inside that will heal.
The shape of the pointed spatule used when the fistula is split: the curvature of which is sharp and the other part is not, so as not to burn what is unnecessary, as you see.
For the suturing of hemorrhoids where there is pain in the insertion area of those hemorrhoids.
Hemorrhoids can be classified into two ways: some are like charcoal inside the anus, or they may be like the fat of a raisin. And of these, some are small and large, and the pain from them comes at times and is one, and they affect the anus, and its extremities.
However, those that affect the anus are according to the degree of less humidity, from which yellowish water or a little of bloody discharge continues, and they are according to the color of the body.
And the cure for that which is within the belly is to command the patient to lie down and squeeze between when the belly swells and the veins appear before you. Then you lie down and place your hands under the patient's knees, and subsequently apply pressure to their veins.
But if the hands cannot be placed there due to their moisture and softening, then take rough cloths or thin woolen ones, and place them under the ties mentioned. Subsequently, apply pressure to these and sprinkle some powdered cauda over them near the application; or cauterize them as described in the chapter on cauterization. And subsequently cure them with the other treatment until they are healed.
And if the buttocks do not yield to evacuation, then cauterize the patient with a small bite of the cautery, and wash it with the fluid from the belly that causes gentle evacuation when the patient is squeezed.
If the hemorrhoids are outside the buttocks and the cause is slight, then you take those with your nail or pinch them with one finger, incise them, and afterwards cure them as we have said when they are healed.
And if you have an incision, make sure to suture it according to this manner: take thread wrapped around a needle and after extracting the hemorrhoids from the upper parts, make the thread penetrate through the edge of the other part, wrap the two ends of the thread around the part beyond the needle, and do so longitudinally; strengthen the hemorrhoid with strong tension, and afterwards secure the thread and remove the needle.
And do this to all of them, leaving one unsewn, so that the excess blood can flow from it.
And place a warm cloth in olive oil or ointment over the buttocks; place it there and command the patient to rest. And then let that which is inside remain; when it is healed, treat those with ointment or other remedy until it is cured.
And since they are old and not useful in medicine, you should cauterize them with the point of a needle or with your finger when they are moist and ensure that the wound is packed with clean linen beneath, which prevents their healing; then treat those that have healed.
And when you cauterize them with a strong fire after the first bleeding and when they are irritated; then treat those that have healed.
Know that an abscess, this is crucial, and it is a round swelling resembling the head of a nail, appearing throughout the body but particularly in the feet and hands. Therefore, you should treat these with pain relief.
And then ensure that what is within the circle of the key is cut out, and hold it with forceps or tongs, and remove it from the wound; then cure that.
And if you wish, cauterize what follows as previously described in the same chapter.
More commonly, a small sharp, fistulated prominence appears on the surface of the body, and reddish spots from veins are visible in most children.
And the treatment is to extend and cut out that part, or to tighten it with a needle or thread that holds it. And if you wish, cauterize this as we have said, with fire or with sharp medicine.
More commonly, a large, fibrous or fistulated prominence appears on the surface of the body, and when you touch it, it resembles the bite of an ant, and is found around the body.
And the treatment is that you take a probe of iron from a furnace or from a hammer, and it should be strong, and place it over the ulcer between where the circumference of the ulcer meets the end parts of the probe; then rotate your hand around the probe as you insert what is within the circuit of the ulcer, and leave it in the depths of the flesh, and eradicate the ulcer from its root.
And if you wish, do this with a probe of reed or iron according to this form:
Let the upper part of the probe be thin, dull (i.e., non-piercing), wrapped so that over the ulcer its appearance is covered and the rotation of it is concealed.
And if you wish, cauterize the ulcer as previously described in the cautery treatment for athletes on the head of the cautery.
In the manner of the instruments that you use to give crotti.
Sometimes the probes are made of silver or tin or reed that is melted or hammered; sometimes they are made of those instruments small and large according to those you use, for the probe used in the treatment of small children should be small; and for those with sore or painful buttocks, the probes for them should be small.
The form of striking hard and little:
The head of the cannula above which the bag is tied should be broad according to this manner; and there should be a place where the bag is tied as you see.
And the lower end of it, which is inserted in the anus, should be closed (if not open) with a small aperture; and on one side of the tube there should be two openings, and on the other side one opening, and the width of the opening should be according to the size of the rays, with the larger one slightly smaller.
And the bag in which the medicines for the beast's bladder or sheepskin are placed should be about a palm in length.
And it should be perforated with large openings as it is wound; and the space between the openings should be about the size of a finger.
Then insert strong raw honey into those openings, using ten pieces of honeycomb or around that amount. Adjust the bag to that. When the bag is placed there, stretch it at the head of the strike hard and little between two distinguishers with strong constriction, and then strike each opening: More specifically, the quality of striking each one is that you fill the bag with medicine, which should be heated according to the quantity of tolerance of the patient; and ensure that it is not too thick nor too cold.
And the patient is laid supine on their back, elevates their hips, and places them on a cushion; then applies oil or honey or fenugreek paste or something similar at the tip of the cautery; inserts that into the anus gently, then the minister takes the bag and squeezes it twice with vigor so that everything in the rectum is evacuated into the intestine; then removes the rectum and the patient lifts their hips to the wall.
And if the medicine forces it to evacuation, have as much as it will take; and if it sleeps all through the night, it is more beneficial in recovery.
More so if you evacuate the patient for stomach distension and bowel evacuation, then repeatedly apply the cautery until it is healed.
And if there are hemorrhoids or abscesses in the anus, then use a thin and sharp probe from among the probes that children are familiar with.
Of the treatment of the wounds.
And I have already said in the division of the treatment of wounds what is appropriate for the free and for medicines according to need.
Therefore, it is said that wounds are diverse according to what they are caused by and according to the place where the plaques occur.
And the causes why wounds are made are thus: by a stone impact, or a sword or knife incision, or a lance or rod blow, or an arrow, or something similar to those causes of wounds.
Moreover, the wounds that are in parts of the body are thus: like a wound that falls on the head, or the neck, or the foot, or the abdomen, or the thigh, or something similar to those of the limbs.
And I am recounting the treatment of some wounds so that you may apply that reasoning and rule to other wounds.
And I will begin with simple head wounds, for the memory of composite injuries will come at the beginning of the third capita.
So say that when an accident occurs on the head with a simple wound and it is not a fracture, consider: if it is due to a stone or similar object, and it has shattered the bone so much only and is a large wound and you fear the sudden onset of an abscess in that area, then you should incise and bloodlet from the cephalic vein as soon as possible, and do not delay this; and extract from there the blood according to the quantity of its virtue if no other reason prevents bloodletting, especially if the blood that results from the wound is little.
And the bloodletting is from the opposite side of the wounded part; and one must prevent the illness from spreading, and from wind and heavy foods.
But if some cause prohibits the incision, then reduce the food and do not approach meat or wine.
And place yourself over the wound, if an abscess is suspected, apply cold compresses with oil-soaked cloths or with wine in which astringents are mixed.
But if it is certain that an abscess has formed, then place yourself over the wound, if it is fresh with its own serum and the air has not changed there, spread the powder which I will describe shortly.
But if the air has already changed there, then place yourself over some ointments until it is healed.
But if the wound is large or due to a deep cut and the edges cannot be approximated with pins, then adjust those using stitches according to the stitching method I will describe.
But if the wound is already exposed to bone and flesh, and it is not retention but only a small suspensory ligament, then incise there and properly cure the wound with medicines, restore the flesh in its proper place, and command the patient to eat foods in which they take pleasure: meat and vegetables that resemble them, until they recover.
And if you find putrefaction in the flesh and it does not adhere to the bone, then incise all of that and scrape it away, and properly cure it.
If in these swellings the artery or vein through which blood flows to cause it cannot be avoided and is not cut by medicines, then you inquire about the artery, and if you find that uncut one, you incise it with a blade or ligate it; and if necessity prompts you that what we have said does not apply, then you cauterize where the blood has been abscised.
And if these swellings are simple and small, the cause of them is light; sprinkle this powder over them until the swelling diminishes before the air changes.
And the manner of the powder is this: take one part olive oil, two parts dragon's blood, and three parts burned and sieved ashes; fill the swelling with it, confine it well within a good container, and let it adhere and coagulate with the blood.
Then strengthen it above with powder and leave it, and do not remove it while it is not absorbed, for the medicine will not be effective until it is healed.
And sometimes one does this alone with a cautery, when it is not in your presence the smell of dragon's blood.
And this operation is performed on large wounds when you deem it necessary to have them closed and straightened, and on recent wounds whose blood still flows.
And if the air has altered them, especially when it is in the summer season, then I do not take their position for this powder, but then cure those as we have said, try placing your hand on those small, digestible ointments, or place your hand on those mixtures of wheat flour and water and honey that produce suppuration; and then cure those with another treatment until they are healed.
And if a fracture occurs in the bone of the wound, and it is small, then you extract this with your fingers.
And I will speak of the treatment of fractures of the head in what is venomous.
Of the wounds of the neck.
If the pain occurs in the neck, there is no difference in treatment, and between head pains when they are simple.
But if the nerve of the neck is incised or an artery, when it is a nerve, there is no engineering to be done but rather avoid any cure that causes strong constriction, as zinc and zyg are like glass and resemble them in hardness against the nerves and contract those. And do not place any cause of cold on the pain, for the substance of the nerves is cold and their continuity is in the brain, which is the core of all body parts.
And if what is to be cured with light medicines, such as after a double wash with water, sometimes infused in olive oil roasted or unroasted, and thyme when washed with double water and the other pears mixed according to this manner, apply moist ointment.
But if the pain is great, then administer缝合，或收缩其边缘，并且在愈合后用粉末治疗。
If there is depth to the wound or accidents in the lower part near the buttocks, then puncture there at the most swollen place.
If the wound already incises an artery and a flow of blood is obtained, then separate or dry that area, or tie it with a bandage, or cauterize it if necessity demands it.
If the vertebrae of the neck are incised or completely cut, and if the veins of the neck are saved, then you adjust the flaps of the skin and suture over the spine, but do not touch that area; proceed in the same manner for all and return it to its natural shape, and strongly strengthen it with proper structure, leaving it alone for a few days; and treat it with ointments that have stiffness and stimulation until it is healed.
If the wound has already reached the bone, then percuss that area, and if there are fragments of bone in it, extract all those you can from it; what is not accessible to you, leave it until the wound suppures, heals, and the inflammation around it subsides.
And if the wound is recent then powder it with the powder which you have been advised. But if in the wound a fistula is made, then cure that as well, of which the remedy will be described shortly in its own chapter.
If it is a lance or sword percussion, and the depth of the wound varies, then consider more if from the wound there is edema when the patient faints; then you know that the wound is fatal.
And if there is no depth to the wound and it is recent with its own blood, then you apply powder for the first hour, and do not press on it so that the blood does not remain deep in the wound and return to the heart, which might cause further fainting; instead, apply an attractive ointment and remove it after two days.
And if the ointment is not at hand, then you place a wick in the wound to drain what has come from the humors; and make the patient lie on the wound so that what is in the wound can flow out.
If already three days or more have passed since the onset of the illness and no spasms, tremors, or constriction occur in the patient's chest, and other good dispositions are present, then you may conclude that the illness has passed; then proceed to treat with calx (a type of plaster) and another form of treatment until it is healed.
If the healing of the patient is impossible, and the area has been open for too long, you may conclude that a fistula has formed; then treat it according to its own principles.
And if the illness is due to a stab wound or cut, and it is simple on the surface of the foot or toe, then treat it according to what is preceded by suturing, if it is large, or with powder, if it is small.
If it has already pierced the bone, and you are now incising the wound, then twist the wound and pull to extract those pieces, if they are separate. If they are not separate, then leave them alone until the wound suppurates, as their extraction is alleviated.
And for other accidents of pain in other members, the cure is the treatment that we have said.
Of the pains in the abdomen.
The discomfort that occurs in the abdomen is either great, little, or moderate.
And a small disruption is made difficult by another method. I believe that the reduction of them becomes more difficult if you do not carefully avoid the intervention in them at their place; for when they open and become enlarged, the instrument for them becomes difficult to use.
And therefore the best disruption is moderate, for in that case the reduction of the intestine is not difficult, as it is difficult in the two species mentioned earlier.
And know that the suturing of the abdomen is according to four methods, but two sutures are common and apply to the sutures of other body pains.
And two other proper sutures communicate to the other wounds, more properly so in the suture of the abdomen.
And I advise you concerning each exposition and declaration.
So say that when the wound is small and some cause of the intestine seeps through it, making it difficult to reduce that part, then this is in one of two ways: either due to the smallness of the disruption, as we have said, or when inflammation comes to the intestine from the coldness of the air.
And when this is so, then you should soak that attempt by submerging a sponge or a wet cloth in pure water, or by using squill, cyperus, and spikenard, and inserting the intestine into it until the inflammation is resolved.
And sometimes in those where there is stiffness, it is better to use water mixed with other substances for the resolution of inflammation.
And when you see the inflammation resolved, then moisten the intestine in water in which almond and marjoram are steeped, for by this it is alleviated from the instrument due to little cause.
If it is necessary to use an instrument near this cure, then cut the disruption a little with a small instrument in which the veins are incised.
The first cure is better when it is proper that it not be section and not be occupation to dry up unnecessarily and deplete.
Of the instrument, describe its form:
One part of the blade is sharp, and the other part not acute, with the tip subtle, but not too fine like a spout; it should be slightly blunt.
And so, when the wound is enlarged and the intestine protrudes, ensure that its reduction follows its natural form, in its proper place. If possible, do it over what belongs there, for this is better.
If the disruption is large and located in the lower part of the abdomen, then place the patient's back on a surface, and position their legs higher than their head. If it is in the upper part of the abdomen, then hold the patient's head and feet higher than the rest of their body.
And if the disruption is in one of the two parts of the abdomen, then pause your understanding and consideration for some time so that the part where the injury is may be higher than the other.
And thus you should apply this in major wounds and in wounds of medium severity.
And in small wounds, pause what you have prepared, and then make sure that the minister uses your most skilled assistants. He should hold the disruption entirely with his hand and adjust the edges of the wound, and then uncover that to this one who needs suturing due to some cause nearby.
And this is the common method of suturing: take the needle, or a counterneedle according to the quantity of the wound's width; then leave a bit of the end of the disruption from the ring finger, and thread the needle once, or another that you do not put a single thread in both ends of the codena (a type of needle), but in two ends of the ciphac (another type of needle) that are left from the inner parts, before you make it penetrate from one part; and you have already added two ends of the codena and two ends of the ciphac, and so four orders are made.
And then strongly insert a double thread in the circuit of the needle, and several times from both sides together, and then join the two lips and the wound by decent joining; and let the thickness of the digit remain, and put another needle there, and join that one with thread as you did with the first needle; do not cease to do this if necessary among the needles until all the contraction of the wound is completed.
And the needles should be of medium thickness between coarseness and subtlety, for the fine ones penetrate the flesh lightly; and the coarse ones are difficult to handle in suturing, therefore it is advisable that they be of medium thickness in terms of fineness and coarseness.
And it should not be that the needle is placed at both ends of the suture closely together, for then the flesh would be penetrated lightly and the wound would open up before its healing.
And do not make the sutures too long so that the wound does not hinder its healing.
And then incise the ends of the needles so that they do not lead the wound away from its proper healing; place your hand over the suture with powder expanded from all parts, which cover the ends of the needles; and leave them until you can see that the wound is already healed.
These kinds of sutures with needles are more convenient in small wounds, for only one or two needles suffice for their suture.
The second suture is as follows: and you perform the suture of the four extremities, from the cord and two extremities of the tendon, in one go, with a needle that is wrapped equally in subtlety and thickness.
And then, when you have the needle penetrate these four extremities, withdraw the needle from that side where the suture begins, so that the thread retracts and comes up from the other side of the wound, thus making the suture like a stitch in cloth where the threads are tightly drawn.
And pause between each suture the width of a little finger.
And this suture I know for men.
And with this suture, I closed the wound which was inflicted upon a man in his belly, where he had been stabbed by a刀具，伤口主要部分约一掌宽，并位于肚脐两侧约两掌处；这是肢体中部的伤口中断。当时，那个伤口在腹部开放了大约24小时后我才缝合它。
The wound is consolidated in the space of fifteen days or so, and cure that and it is healed; then those viscera are moved back to their positions.
And other doctors had judged that it was not healed; by miracle fire, for I did not cure that without ointment, for it was in a place where ointment could not reach nor any medicine, but placed my hand over the wound like an old woman two days a day and applied frequent washing with honey water until the fire healed.
And I will speak of two species of suturing properly according to the narrative of Paracelsus.
And you should start with the chain stitch, and insert the needle from one side outside to the inside.
And thus, as the needle penetrates through the chain and follows a straight path along the entire length of the body, you leave the end of the thread on which you have inserted the needle; then pass the needle from inside to outside through the other end of the stitch.
And when you have made the penetration, then make another penetration in that same limb from the outer part to the inner part; leave the end of the probe on this side, and insert the needle into the other inner part from the outer part.
And make the penetration with your previous penetration, which you make penetrate into the probe at the end of the limb which is in the middle so that all of it penetrates.
And then begin from this side, piercing the probe at the end that is on the probe in the other side, and extract the needle from the sheath which you have penetrated. Then return it to the sheath using the end of the probe that is on this other side of the limb; and extract it from the sheath which belongs to it.
And do this one time and again, and do it another time or two more as you sew the entire outer part according to that example.
And the sum of this method of suturing is that you sew with thread, upon which you sew the skin. Ensure that you sew the probe once from the part of the end of the sheath, and leave the other stitch until after you complete the join.
The second species of suturing which Guilia often teaches is by speaking about it and recommending it, that you suture that according to semilitut, as those physicians suture that, in attempting to add all parts to their proper part according to nature; and apply the extremity of one to another and the beginning of the other to the extremity of the other, and this is done as I have recommended to you.
Place the needle at the extremity of the thread on your proper side of the part from within, and make it penetrate from inside to that part, leaving two extremities of the thread; then turn the needle and make it penetrate from outside to inside in two extremities of the thread.
Then turn those threads, and make each part penetrate from inside to the outside in two extremities of the thread on the other side.
This method of suturing is better than the common loose suture, and it is the suturing method of which I have previously reminded you.
This is the saying of Gualia
And some would say that the incision of the belly is corrected with two needles, so that you insert into these a thread, and begin with the needle insertion of what you should, and make that one penetrate through the other layer according to the stitches which equalize the hearts.
And know that when the disruption is in the middle part of the belly, then the stitch of that place is more difficult than of other parts of the belly.
More the judgment of medication for plague is the judgment of other plagues.
That cause is when you manage to obtain the recent plague from its own blood before the air alters it, and you reduce the intestine and suture it properly, then place it over that flesh-colored powder.
And if the air has already altered the plague, then place it over that, some ointments which harden and break the threads, and be consolidated chapstick and rubbed; and then cure it as is the treatment of other plagues until it is healed.
If you do not have the medicines at hand, then pause over that for a while, until he begins to sweat much, and frequently change the dressing every two days, as I have shown you, until he is healed, for you will not need any other medical treatments when the sores are simple.
If you fear that the sore might communicate infection to the principal members, then soak a lion's wool in well-refined oil or in sweet oil, and place it over the area between the joints, leaving the axillae uncovered.
And if there is pain or putrefaction in their intestines, then for several days apply this: crush that amanita stiptica black terebinth, and especially if the inflammation has reached the intestine and caused an exitura penetrating into the cavity of it.
And know that the one from the large intestine is less likely to be serious than that from the fine intestines.
And it is difficult to heal, for the intestine which is called "gungun" does not receive healing from any sore that falls into it; this is due to the great number of veins in it and its large size, as well as the fine nature of that part, and its proximity to the nature of nerves.
If what you are treating is the skin, and you manage to obtain that recently inflamed area, treat it according to your skill by reducing the intestines equally.
If it has passed into the space and is already red or black, when you strengthen that with astringent over the area that is deteriorating, so that it brings forth bloody flux, for in the skin there are veins and arteries.
Then incise what is another of that ligament, and place two ends of the astringent hanging from the cut part of the wound, so that over you the attraction to it is alleviated; close the opening of the skin and the emission of the flux of the wound.
Remembrance of the wounds when they occur in the intestine.
When there is a disruption in the intestine and it is small, then it is sometimes possible to restore it in some people, therefore I saw one who had been wounded in his belly with the thrust of a lance, and the wound was on the right side of the stomach; the wound was old and had become a fistula, and he healed from the operation and enlargement.
Then I pursue the cure of him whether he was not closed in the healing of him, but cease to subtlety bring that which is healthy into the place and let it be consolidated.
And when I see the place already consolidated, I treat the patient who has suffered an accident of evil in his own belly; and do not suffer any through this evil accident and break his natural dispositions eating and drinking, and then enter into baths and exercise his words.
And some experienced ones have said that when there is a plague in the intestine and it is small, then you should tie it according to this manner: and that you take fireflies from large caps; and place one of those fireflies with its mouth open over the two lips of the plague; therefore when it takes on those and tightens its mouth, cut off the head of it, for it adheres and does not dissolve.
And place another firefly nearby, and do not cease to put fireflies one after another according to the quantity of the entire plague.
And then return the hernia and the wound; and drain those adjacent caps within the intestine until the intestine is healed; and do not damage the patient in any way.
And it is possible that the intestine has been irritated by fine bile produced from the adjacent intestinal tissue. This is done by taking the extremity of these threads of intestine, making it somewhat raw, then placing the extremity in bile wrapped up, and inserting this bile into needles and cloth to heal the intestine, and return it to its disruption.
And this method of suturing with threads is merely done out of trust and hope.
But if the wound is large and extensive, especially in one of the fine intestines, where there is no real injury but merely irritation, and it does not heal completely.
For the treatment of abscesses and fistulas.
Know that any wound or abscess when it is wrapped and left to mature, and becomes a ulcer, and does not heal completely and continues to discharge pus constantly without being incised, wherever it occurs in the body, it is universally named a fistula and we call it an abscess.
And according to truth, a fistula is a hardened, white node, upon which there is no pain and which is contained as is the cavity of an abscess; hence it is named that root, that is, pain.
And in some people it is moist, which gets inflamed; and the moisture is removed in some hours. And in some cases this moisture is thick, small, and subtle.
All those causes have been shown, and the signs of them and the cure for them by medicine in this division.
And thus I will show you how to know the treatment for a fistula which is caused by surgical operation with the hand.
And know that fistulas can occur in all parts of the body; some fistulas lead to major veins and arteries, or to nerves, or to the brain, or to the intestine, or to the bladder, or to some of the ribs, or to one of the spinal bones, or to some joint formed thus from the arm and the leg; these are those that are near the main part of the body and similar.
And so of these fistulas that occur in this manner, they are among the illnesses difficult to cure, and do not receive treatment or occupation; for such is labor and ignorance.
And if any of these fistulas is so deep that it does not reach the locations mentioned, and you hope for its cure and wish to know about it, then try with a rod or a needle. If the fistula follows the straight path, you will find it by probing.
If the fistula is tortuous, then investigate that with a fine lead probe, for lead being light in its body is alleviated and curved to relieve the tortuosity.
And if the fistula has horrific movements, it is not possible for you to signify about it with a probe.
Then christerize the orifices by their orifices, for the humidity with which you christerize that one should relieve the other orifices and flow from them.
And then inquire precisely, according to whatever manner it is possible for you to know if here are the vessels or the nerves, and whether the cavity of the fistula is distant or close, or whether it is a fistula with only orifices that this encompasses in all its strength, by your inquiry, by which you inquire the patient, and the invention of the pain with your compression on the area, and the appearance of the significations and the causes of accidents at the abscess.
And when you have stood over all those causes in true position, then go to the cure according to confidence: and it is that you consider then if it is a apparent fistula nearby or in a location solid, distant from joint, or from nerve, or from artery, or from vein, or from one of the locations which we tell you.
When you dry the fistula as previously described in its narration, and stop what is within that filtration and of corrupted flesh, and what is born in the orifice of the flesh, or tissue and resemblance, and cure it so that it may be healed.
But if the fistula is of great depth and straight, then delve into it until you can go as far as possible, and thoroughly remove all corrupted flesh; and administer sharp medicines wrapped in cloths, and insert those into the cavity of the fistula, which you have grasped with forceps.
And do this several times so that the sharp medicine corrupts everything that is rotten in the cavity of the fistula.
And then restore it by applying ointments that generate healthy flesh until it is healed.
But if it is not healed by this, then cauterize it as we have recommended.
If the cause of fistula is bone and you must certify this, then inquire about that dry and that moist according to what we have recommended, if you do not prohibit any cause of vein or nerve or of principal member as we said.
But if the bone is exposed and there is some corruption and blackness in it, then probe that area where the corruption is completely stopped; and place a dressing over it as the flesh within heals.
And if it is not yet healed and you graft on as before, then know that you have not completely eradicated the corruption; then uncover again thoroughly and explain its nature and treat it to your last strength, and restore it.
And if it is healed, that is good; but if not, then know that the corruption is deep within the body, which you have not reached, and then in that case, do nothing but leave it alone.
And if the corrupted bone is small, or if it is possible to extract it with forceps, then use fine forceps suitable for this.
And if the bones are affected, then you must carefully extract all of them, and from them, you do not leave any cause for your strength.
And if there is any cause of humidity affecting you, and in their incision there is neither fear nor error, then incise those ligaments or tissues if they are here, and deliver the bones.
And if there is no preparation to remove the bones at your disposal, then pause over the area that you can make less painful, and leave it in a place near those bones of flesh and ligaments, and guard the area that is not yet consolidated, and keep the section that you have incised during your operation constrained.
Having done this, if you fear, pause over the part submerged in warm oil, or a part submerged in Egyptian unguent, or in some of the green ointments; for when they can be applied, and the bones are separated from it, the pain is alleviated.
And if it is a large bone such as the hip bone or the pelvis or similar, and what is corrupt in it affects only its surface, then rush that away only behind where that darkness and corruption should be removed, and then restore the area.
But if what is from it has腐烂了，而且腐败已经到达骨头的髓质部分，那么就需要封闭那个部位，并彻底切割进入腐败发生的地点，然后在它愈合巩固后再治疗。
And I advise you when treating a man in the thigh to place it as an example and helper for your operation.
Let there be a young man around xxx years of age, to whom comes pain in his thigh, and the affected parts inside are about the matter inside the body that has reached the thigh, and is matter of abscess, being a large abscess, and it is not due to an external cause.
And then the abscess is allowed to expand over time due to the error of the doctors, as the pus from the abscess drains out and the matter moves. The treatment of the patient is almost paused when the leg becomes fistulated, and you make openings in the wound through which pus and the body's fluids flow out.
And then the treatment lasted for about two years, and it was not due to their knowledge in the art, but when I was called.
And see the leg, and the materials that were flowing from it through those openings into a great part of the body; and already the condition of that man was entirely stiffened and the color of his skin was yellowish.
And then I insert the probe into one of those openings and guide the probe to the mouth.
And then examine closely all the openings and find those that are connected to them from all parts of the leg.
And then I extract and incise near one of the openings through which I will describe part of the bone, and find the corrupted tissue, which was already rotten, decaying, and discolored; and part of the leg had already rotted where it had penetrated into the marrow.
And then I sew what was revealed and prepared from the discovered bone.
And I ensure that it is not in the bone but in that corrupted tissue which I will remove and sew. And I have already reduced it.
And then continue the restoration of the wound with consolidative medicines for a long time, and do not stop until it is consolidated.
And then you examine and discover over the second bone after the first discovery, and find continuous corruption in the bone.
And observe what appears to me of that corruption, and then proceed to perform the cure and restoration, and it is not restored.
And then you discover over the other side and do not cease to incise the bone little by little particularly and perform the restoration of it, and it is not restored until you incise around a palm's width of it, and he extracts its marrow, and then restore that with medicines, and it is slightly consolidated and healed.
And there is no need for further iteration in the operation of the section of it, but rather due to the position of the femur and the lack of tolerance and fear of death in it, for it experiences fainting due to excessive evacuation at all times.
And therefore health is through complete healing, and nothing is in lieu of firm flesh; and it is well made the disposition of him in his body and return the virtue of him; and it is converted in his dispositions and not forced upon him contrary movements nor injury in any cause.
If the bone is prominent in the affected area of the body, then you must reduce it according to this manner: take hold firmly and strongly of that bone at its extremity, command someone to extend that bone; place a larger woolen pad over the flesh where the bone was left, extending the extremity of that pad so that it draws the flesh to the parts left behind, and uncover the flesh over the area you wish to cut for which the saw does not cut the flesh.
And place a stick or table properly over the bone, for when you do this, the saw is not forbidden to cut through the damaged flesh.
And ensure that the cut is small at first over the damaged area, for if the corruption is inside the bone and does not appear in its manifestation through sensation, you may have to make another cut.
And if the bone is corrupted and non-protruding, there is one continuous part joined to the other, and the corruption is in the middle of it or in a part of it, then you uncover the flesh from all parts; then place fusts, and then saw through the first part where the corruption is inside so that the closure of the other part remains continuous.
And the closure should be made according to the location of the corruption, making it small as we have said.
And if the corruption is at the joint, incise that corrupted joint, and saw the bone where it continues from the other part.
And if the corruption is at the continuation of two joints, then it is not in its proper place but is displaced.
And if the corruption is in the armpit of the arm or the side of the foot, it is very difficult; however, you must inquire how the corruption appears to you, and incise and clean that area according to any possible disposition which is at your disposal. In every case, it should be corrected as you see fit, provided it does not interfere with veins or nerves.
And consider which are incisors and the saws to cut these bones are made of according to the position of the bones, and the preparation of those, and their size, and their subtlety and greatness and smallness, and their hardness and rarity; so that you may prepare for each operation an instrument suitable for that operation.
And consider that that operation means to you concerning the type of instrument on which you will depend; when you have great study and long knowledge of the ways of this art, and experience of the ways of diseases, then when you have them already before your eyes, you will choose what is convenient for it from the instruments for all diseases.
And you shall know for yourself at the end of this chapter the number of the instruments which you will use as simple ones to which you will proceed according to your prohibition, which you will experience with the others. Form of the saw:
Form of another saw:
Forma of another shall be great:
Forma of ray: Let the head of this ray be according to the form of the head of a star key, and its points be according to the form of the star-shaped nails.
And do not insert anything but let those that are to be used for friction at the heads of the joints when they are broken, or for a large open mouth.
Forma of razori minor:
Forma of razori lateral:
Forma of saw another properly made: let it be an arc from its back and the sharpness of it of iron, and the member of it of deeply cut points. Forma of it:
Forma of razor in which it has a cavity:
Form of a razor blade:
Form of another razor with curved extremity:
Form of a small razor resembling a needle:
Form of another smaller lancet:
Form of another lancet; this resembles a ray, and its extremity is like a point, and it is used in certain places in the proportion of the bones:
Form of a ray which is proportioned to the bone that is to be pierced:
And its extremity is triangular and sharp.
And it is made of iron from India, and similarly hollow, like all the causes we have said about razors, lancets, and saws.
For the incision of extremities and the cutting of bones.
The extremities may be affected either by an intrinsic cause or by an extrinsic one, or as you have medicated that corruption through the cure of those medicines and the cure did not succeed, or sometimes the corruption goes away from the member which you do not perceive by any cause, then you must enter that member into it where the corruption accedes, so that the evil may escape through death or malice which is greater misfortune of the member.
The sign of him upon whom this occurs is that the member becomes black before it is cooked as if by fire that has already burned, or you may notice the blackness in the area where the burn enters that part and affects all the body; therefore, examine him carefully for that.
And similarly, the corruption may be caused by a blow from some venomous sources such as a scorpion, a viper, or a rattlesnake, and similar to these.
And if the corruption or blow is in the extremity of the finger, then you must cut the finger and do not give space to the corruption so that it enters your hand.
And seeming so, if you touch the hand, then incise that of the armpit, and do not give space for corruption to enter within that of the arm.
And if you touch that part, then incise the arm between the shoulder at the joint.
And if corruption passes and surrounds the shoulder, then in that it is the death of the patient; and to give another cause other than this for cure is a measure of virtue.
And similarly do for the foot when corruption surrounds the part of the foot, then incise that between one of the toes.
And if it takes in the sole of the foot, then incise the entire foot. But if it enters the sole, then incise the leg between the joint of the sole.
And if corruption has already penetrated the sole, then there is nothing but dismissal, and let the patient die.
And the method of incising the member or sewing it is that you hold the thread at the part you wish to incise, and tie another thread over the place; extend one hand with a thread to those parts, and extend the other hand with another thread on top; you separate the flesh which is between two threads until all the flesh is uncovered; then it should be incised or sewn.
And ensure that a cloth of linen is placed over all parts so that it does not touch the affected area, and that when the injury comes to the patient, it is adjusted and the abscess cauterized.
And if you happen to bleed when working, then cauterize the place frequently, or apply some收敛性粉末止血；然后返回你的手术直到完成。
And then bind the injured member with a thread as is convenient, and treat it until it heals.
And I advise you that when someone has a dark spot on their foot, this accident which you and I have advised about is due to a burn that resembles the combustion of fire.
And that corruption accidently first occurs within the said tissue where it tends to the skin.
And then that person prepares himself to wait until the cure goes to the limb with the intensity of his pain from both the pain and the inflammation, and the disease enters the joint, and the limb is healed.
Long ago that corruption disease affected the thumb of the hand.
And then it comes to me, and so I force myself to reflect on how to relieve that excess by applying medicine to the hand, in the transformation of the body; but the excess is not relieved and begins to go into another part where it first began in the hand.
And they advise me to cut the hand of the patient, and I do not want to do this hoping for the relief of that excess, more because I fear the cutting of the hand leading to death, as the power of gout was strong.
And after he wakes from me, he returns to his land and informs me that that person prepared and cut off his entire hand, and was healed.
And I have added this narration only to serve as an aid on what is understood of this illness, and as a signification so that it may be understood and according to which it may be performed.
On the care of intestines and the quality of catharsis with medicines.
When an apostema occurs in some fleshly members and the space of the apostema is prolonged such that it collects pus, and then it breaks and perforates, and the pus is extracted from it, and the place left behind is emptied as if it were a vessel, and the cloth over it is so fine that no further corruption occurs, and it does not imprint on the bone or nerve nor on the membrane, it is called a sinus, and is not named a fistula.
However, if the space is prolonged such that the corruption imprints on some member, then it is called a fistula.
And the treatment for it is to extract that cloth completely as if it were rotated, especially when it is fine and made like a cloth, and ensure that it does not stick to the area due to its corruption.
If you hope that the cord will adhere and that the corruption has not reached the deeper consequences, and on the cord there has passed through from front, then you cure it with a cleansing enema.
And you consider the sinus, and if it is large and the part that exudes has a foul odor, then administer an enema with a medicinal Egyptian remedy which consists of oil and wine mixed in equal parts, and be sure to adjust them in a vessel, and keep the mixture near the fire until the medicine becomes hot and reaches the proper temperature.
And then take what is necessary and dissolve the medicine in water and honey; administer this enema to the sinus, and strengthen the openings of it, and leave the medicine in it for the quantity of two hours.
And then extract that medicine completely; do this until the sinus is cleansed and the sore is healed.
And sometimes an enema is administered with water from ashes, when this medicine is not available; you take the ash of vitex, put it in water; and then extract that and administer it as an enema until you are certain that the sinus has been cleansed.
And if the patient does not tolerate the Egyptian medicine nor the water of ashes, then prepare that mixture with honey and vinegar three times, and prepare that mixture with wine and honey mixed, for it is the property of honey to modify and wash, and the wine makes the sinew adhere, especially when there is excess of stringency and dryness in the wine.
And when you have done this several times and you are certain that the sinus is healed, then cleanse it with a mixture that causes flesh to grow in it.
And you take anointing myrrh, dissolve that mixture with diluted oil andstringent wine; or you cleanse it with a mixture of some medicines and apply other ointments that have the properties I have already written about in the treatise on ointments.
And if the sinus opening is wide enough that the catheter of the clyster cannot be inserted, then gradually enlarge it with a small iron instrument, pausing in doing so with a cloth wrapped in Egyptian or basilicon ointment until it is enlarged.
And if the opening is large, then you should suture the lips of it and leave in it the quantity which the enema will fill.
And if the opening from which the discharge comes is elevated above the lower parts, then dry that area below it so that the discharge can flow into it. When the discharge is blocked in the curvature of the sinus, flesh will grow in it.
And if you are not able to dry the sinus within the area below as desired, then prepare the member for a procedure by which the discharge can flow gently from it according to what is suitable and that no cause of retention of the discharge should be present.
May that which is over the opening of the sinus, which you burn at all times so that it does not come out what is stuck in it with the arm. And that you may know if what flows from it is much or little, or is digestible, or is undigestible.
And thus you consider the location of that sinus, if in it the patient feels pain or not, and if it has an abscess.
And as your medication is prolonged in this manner, and you see the matter that is discharged over the opening of the sinus has adhered, or there is an approaching adhesion, then while holding it, you separate it or on the third day, and when you remove the bandage, then change the cloth and renew the ointment.
May if from the sinus there has already spread pus subtil, then do not worry about its adhesion, for the healing of it takes over, for some people in whose wounds flesh generation is slow, and among those it happens the opposite.
And if after several days the bowel is situated improperly due to indigestion, you should perceive that the bowel does not adhere; and if the adherence of the bowel is delayed and the cause is prolonged, then you adjust it in drying with medicines, and if the medicines are moist in their substance and in their virtue, they are dried as with an ointment of yafinicon when there is excess addition of saffron.
And the best remedy for what is cured, is that you take an ointment of yafinicon and dissolve it in sweet oil, and apply it very gently on the affected area, and cover it well with it, and use this.
And pretend in that action, when there is no bowel, use an ointment of yafinicon, honey when mixed with it to make it thick, and use it; or what you take myrrh and aloes and incense, and mix all and powderize over the honey which is on the fire, and then lay this over cloth and strengthen that over the bowel; and lay this on the honey which you have mixed and made thick, and powderize over cloth and strengthen that.
And sometimes it is administered to her some doses of long wormwood and reasonings of celestial wormwood (and this is celestial wormwood) and flour of irises and centaury, and use those simples or adjusted ones, press them and sift over the honey which I have recommended; and use it.
And if the sinew is prolonged and does not heal by this treatment, then you should know that the corruption is in the vein of the limb, and you should investigate whether it affects the bones or other hard members or ligaments; then you treat it with a fistula cure, as was said above.
For the treatment of tumors, nail attrition, and incision of the digit with sectioning.
Panarici is an abscess that leaves the nail of the finger or toe, and is very painful in other fingers, and since its cure is less desirable, it may be a deep abscess, or corrupted, and you cut the vein of the nail, fortifying the corruption throughout, and allow its corruption to reach the bone inside, which gives off an unpleasant odor. Then the extremity of the finger is amputated, and the color of the wound turns pale.
And when you have done that which we have said in the division and do not apply your cure, then you must cut out all the pus that is discharged from the joint and place a cautery on it, for a cautery motion is beneficial in this.
But if the bone is sound and the joint is healthy, and the swelling of the joint has already compressed the flesh into its inner parts, and begins to pierce and draw it out, then you must pause a sharp blade at the angle of the joint that pierces the flesh, push that out and cut the flesh with ease, place your hand over what remains of the flesh until all is thoroughly burned by the medicaments; and apply an ointment there until it heals.
But if the corruption has already entered the bone, then you must cut into the bone and extract it, for nothing heals that is in the corrupt bone.
And if you see the corrosion and the corruption spreading to the bone, then you must cut there in one of the joints according to where the decay is most evident, and cure that until it heals.
If at the joint upon percussion or friction there is intense pain, then at the beginning bloodletting of the malady should be done, and soon dry the joint with an acute spathula in a transverse section above with juice, and guard that the section does not penetrate into the flesh left by the joint, for you will cause the malady intense pain, which will be due to the native condition of excessive adjusted flesh in the place; and soon cure that place with what alleviates pain.
But by "adjusted," which is native in many individuals, the flesh is very light and loose, or the joint is very light.
And some of them are native in the region of the joint, or the natural condition of their fingers is lacking in certain nodules. But that which is native in certain nodules of the finger is not bad, and this which is native in the joints is very loose.
And for those that are native fleshly, the section is light, and you should incise it with a broad spathula.
More difficult for those born near the joint, the cure is; therefore, beware of its removal.
More difficult in those born near the knee, ensure that you incise the beginning of the flesh around into the bone, and nearby it will be one of those suitable grooves for this, and cure that within so that it is healed.
More difficult the consolidation which occurs to the fingers between their phalanges, either by nature of the man who is born with it, or by consolidation of plague, or by burning, or by scarring, then you must cure that consolidation so that the fingers return to their natural form.
And place between the cloths where you have applied oil to prevent them from consolidating lightly, and separate between those, or place between them a thin layer of lead so that it consolidates as needed.
And similarly, if consolidation occurs in some fingers at the palm, then you must cure that consolidation as prepared and conform to the figure of the limb.
Of vein problems, such are varicose veins.
Vein problems are varicose veins, and such are swollen veins filled with melancholic superfluities that occur in the parts of the body, with the most frequent appearance in the legs, especially in those who travel, work, or stand.
Then you should administer purge of the body from black bile several times until strong expulsion, and then let the patient bleed from the internal jugular vein.
More often, the treatment of such is according to two methods: one is to incise and extract that black blood, and the other method is to elevate the vein and remove it entirely.
The sectioning is done in this manner: moisten the beginning of the leg with hot water until the thick blood is resolved, which is turbid from the leg. Then strengthen the part of the thigh above the knee by placing a bandage between the parts below the hip. Next, elevate the vein in one, two, or three places with wide separation, and using your hand lift the black blood from below the part of the leg to above it, until the quantity of blood that you desire and suffices has been drained, which will tolerate the virtue of the thigh.
And then tie her up, and command her to abstain from foods generating black bile.
And continue the cure through phlebotomy when the veins are full and this is noticed by the patient.
Raise the limb in this manner: you raise the leg of the patient, if there are hairs on it, and then immerse it in warm water and apply a cloth soaked in cold water between the time it turns red and the veins become prominent; or if strong exercise is available, if warm bath is not at hand, until the limb becomes heated.
And then dry the cord along the length of the vein by fomentation, either at its front or at its back, you should lance it, or lower down to the base of it.
And then cut the cord with scissors and incise the vein from all sides until you notice it appear by sensation, and you should appreciate the appearance of that rope draining to black.
And then, as you incise the cord, you will see that white thing which is the cord.
And then you place that cloth elevated and tilted from the groin, suspending it on some hook or ring.
And then dry another section near that section for three digits, and then incise the groin above the vein where it appears.
And then elevate that and incise the rear section of the thigh, and then extract it and elevate that where it enters through the second section, and then extract it from the section above that.
And do this where you extract it from the section that is higher or above all other sections, once everything is extracted; then incise that.
And if you do not obey in extracting and elevating, then insert a strong double-threaded needle and tie that, and extract it. Or insert that cloth and rotate your hand in all directions where it is tilted. And be careful that it is not incised; for if it is broken, it will be difficult to elevate that part and it will have come over the wound through that damage.
And when all that is done, then place over the wound wool soaked in wine and olive oil, whether pressed or unpressed, and care for it until it is healed.
And if the vein is contracted having torsion in which there is an envelopment at the parts, and it is not according to the straightness as we have said, then cut over that completely at all parts of the torsion of it and at the locations of the envelopment of it, and place it under support so that you lift it entirely.
And guard yourself in your section so that you do not cut the vein and do not damage that, for it will be difficult to lift it; and serve your prudence there.
Form of the incident where the vein is dried up:
It is not as hot as other clamps nor of acute extremity because it does not damage the vein; and it is of great flexibility. If it were subtle, it would cut the vein due to its subtlety; having it in its superfluous thickness as we have said.
From the extraction of the crus vein.
This vein is generated in the legs from the calves as Al-Ategi describes in the lands of Arabia and in the lands of India, from dry and infertile regions with little tenacity, in which neither grass nor trees grow.
And from other parts of the body, not just the calves, this vein is generated.
And its generation is from putrefaction that leaves the chain as if venom inside the body, serpents, vermin, and lice generating between the chain and the flesh.
And the sign of the susceptibility to the onset of this condition is when you encounter inflammation in the calf; then, nearby, the area becomes vesicated; and soon after, the vein starts to protrude from the site of that vesication, resembling a plant shoot.
And then, as the extremity appears, when you wrap a piece of lead around it, which weighs as much as a dragon's pound (approximately two pounds), feel that and let the lead hang from the calf.
And as many times as there is a cause to affect the parts outside, wrap this in lead and apply it. And if the wound is prolonged, then you incise a part of it and wrap the remainder; and do not incise that which is inside while that which is outside is already incised, for if you incise that, it will contract and enter the flesh and cause an abscess, inflammation, and a bad ulcer.
Because the abscess should be treated thoroughly and extracted little by little, without causing any further harm to the body.
And from this vein, they have incised in some men whose length is about five or six palms and I have already been informed that one was incised measuring twenty palms.
And if it is incised during the time of its medication, then introduce the probe into the wound and perforate that along the length of the vein, until all that is in the material is evacuated. Then administer putrefaction to the area for several days with medicines; and cure that through the treatment of abscesses.
And this vein sometimes has roots or buds, especially when it appears at the joint of the foot or in the foot, and brings with it many openings, and is derived from each opening.
And therefore cure it thus as we have said in the division and that which is mentioned above.
Of the section on worms generated under the skin and it is called the bovine illness.
This illness is named in some lands the bovine disease; for many times it appears on cows and is a worm that lives between the skin and the flesh, and goes up and down throughout the body, and is shown by its own movement from member to member as it breaks through the skin and comes out.
And its generation is through the putrefaction of some humors, just as worms and snakes and earthworms and ascarids are generated in the belly.
And it is feared because of its malice, for when it goes in the body and rises to the head, and reaches the brain, there it becomes very fierce and enters and destroys the brain, and this happens many times.
And when you want to cure it and extract it, then it must be done so that you consider its mobility and appearance according to the feeling, then cover what is on it and what is left of it with bandaging and strong constriction, and dry it thoroughly before extracting it.
And if it is swollen in the flesh and you do not find it, then place a cautery on fire over the area where it resides, and the main fear is corruption of the area, which corrupts the location as we have said.
If you see that it has reached the head near the ear, then tightly bandage above the eyebrow, and dry it thoroughly, and extract it; and treat the disease with modifications of its body using medicines that evacuate corrupt bad humors, and avoid foods causing putrefaction.
On the section of the disease nafir.
This disease is called nafir in our land, and it is a pain that occurs in some limbs, and often is shifted from one limb to another.
And now I can see that which I will describe to you. I was summoned to a sick woman in a village, and upon examining her arm, I found a small swelling in the vein near the elbow. After it had persisted for about an hour, I saw that this swelling moved up the arm like vermillion rising, though less urgently than porphry, appearing as if it were living silver moving from place to place.
And then the pain was in that area and fixed in the muscle, and there it remained for about an hour.
And then it corrected to the other side of the body, appearing in the other arm.
And then I was told that she moved about throughout her body as I could see; it was too marvelous to observe the change in her and the speed with which the member affected changed from one part of the body to another. And I had already seen this before in my own limbs in that manner, but I have also seen movements where the pain is perceived to be permuted from one limb to another. But not all have such heels as in the woman.
And I do not consider it to be so, but rather because the woman was of slender body, with dry organs and exposed veins, and in this appearance there is a sensation of that distension changed.
And it is necessary that this backward curvation not appear in those who are delicate and have moist organs with enlarged veins.
And since you want the curvation of the heel, and the patient feels pain, if it does not appear as apparent as we have said, then strengthen that area and let it slightly and gently rest over it while the distended part is inserted, and apply a cautery to the area.
But if you do not see it in the swollen heels, then cure that by releasing the body and by what you expel the distension, and purge those with stinky pills and with snake root pills and similars.
From the extraction of arrows.
Arrows are diverse according to the species and according to the places of the body in which they lodge, for their diversity is that some have large points, small, concave, and dull, being solid; and some have three angles, and of those to which belong tongues; and of those to which belong feathers.
And of the signs of the arrow is when it lodges in the brain, passes through the bone, and is situated above the ventricle which is over the brain, for it happens by strong saline discharge, scotoma, vertigo, redness in the eyes, inflammation and redness of the tongue, spasms and confusion of understanding, and vomiting of bile, and greatly the speech is cut off and the voice is destroyed, and situated at the place of the wound a white moisture resembling dust, and from it resembling the humidity of flesh.
And if you observe these signs, then abstain from the cure and extraction of the arrow, unless it is outside.
And the signs of the arrow when it has pierced the heart are that it is near the left nipple, and one feels at that place where it has been lodged in a hard manner, and the wound is not visible; and strong movement of the arrow seems like the pulse, and the flow of the black blood, and the area around it feels cold, and there is moisture from the effusion, and fainting; and therefore you would know that death descends upon him totally.
And the signs when the arrow has wounded the lung are frothy bloodiness from the wound, and the vessels near the neck are constricted, and the color of the patient changes, and he exhales a great spirit or sighs for air.
And if the arrow has pierced the periosteum which is in the foot, and the pain at that time is near the small bones, then it causes a great and violent pain and heavy breathing, and not all the members of the muscles are affected.
And if you see an arrow in the stomach, then remove some undigested food from the wound.
And if you see an arrow in the belly, and it is embedded in it, remove some opening of the wound, or the tissue, or the intestine which is ruptured, and there is no hope for its cure by removing the arrow.
And if the arrow strikes in the bladder, and it penetrates causing urine to leak, and there is any process from it to the parts outside, and much pain occurs in the wound, then know that it is fatal.
But for the other members such as the face, the neck, the shoulder, the auxiliary muscles, the vertebrae of the back, the furcula, the hip, and their corresponding parts of the body, they are saved according to the major disposals when the arrow does not find a vein or an artery and is not a venomous arrow.
And I will recount to you what I have seen about the nature of these arrows, so that you may understand this regarding their treatment.
The cause is that in a man an arrow struck the lacrimal gland of his eye in the root of his nose, and I extracted it from one side to the other, left his ear gray, and he recovered, and was not injured in his eye at all.
And I extracted another arrow from a Jew which struck him in the gray of his eye, leaving the eyelid but not the arrow, for it was hidden and could only be removed by a small extremity attached to its shaft, and it was a large arrow among the sharp arrows of the Turks, embedded in iron where there were no ears.
And the Jew recovered, and was not injured in his eye at all.
And I extracted another arrow from a Christian man who was struck in the groin, and it was an Arab arrow, and that which had ears; then I incised over it between two bones, and it was already submerged in his groin; then I dissected around it, and soon extracted it, and the Christian recovered.
And extracted another arrow from a man which was lodged in his abdomen, and observed that he died of that; therefore, after thirty days had passed and no change occurred due to his disposition, incised upon the arrow and extracted it, and he recovered, and no ill happened to him.
And there was a man in whom an arrow had pierced his side, and the wound had healed over. After approximately seven years, incise the arrow near the hip.
And there was a woman in whom an arrow had pierced her abdomen, and the wound had healed inside her, and no change occurred in her disposition over time, and the woman did not experience any inconvenience in any of her natural operations.
And there was another man in whom an arrow had pierced his face, and the wound had healed, breaking the arrow in the process. He did not experience much pain, and appeared similar to others.
And extracted the arrow from the king's prince, who had an arrow wound in the middle of his nose, and it had slightly declined to the right side, with the entire arrow hidden.
And I was called for the treatment near the wound within three days.
And then you should locate the wound from the arrow; and then you should inquire about the one that feels slightly tender, but does not feel it; however, he felt it when you pressed with your right ear, and then you should suspect that this press was at the tip of the arrow.
And apply a compress in the area that is attractive and digestive, confident that by placing it there, I will find the location of the arrow, which will dry up over that area.
And do not miss the significant location where the arrow hit that place; and continue applying the compress over it for several days without missing any spot; and the wound consolidates during this time, and you remove the bad part of the extraction over a period of several days until one day you feel the arrow inside its sheath and tell me so.
And then place a corrosive acute medicine over the wound for several days until it opens up. And by probing with your finger, you should locate the tip of the arrow, which adheres to the shaft.
And then you adjust in the opening of the wound with that sharp medicine where the tip of the arrow appears visibly to me, and pass it through the space of time between four months.
And then, when the wound is enlarged and I can possibly insert the forceps into it, I remark that, without further ado or delay, I continued to subtletize and ingenious about those methods of engineering until one day I managed to grasp that with descending forceps made, as will come at the end of this chapter, from which I then extracted it; and then restored that wound.
And some doctors judged that the cartilage of the nose is not restored, but I restored it and the wound was consolidated, and the patient recovered completely, with no trace left in any way.
And I recount to you the quality of extracting some arrows, so that you pay attention to this rule and meaning of what I have not said, for the parts of this art and the definitions of those are not understood in the narrative nor do they comprehend those freely.
And the wise craftsmen compare a little about motion; and what is present about what is absent; and find new operation and new instrument for the descent of foreign causes when they occur.
And therefore I say that arrows are not ejected from the members in which they are inserted but according to two manners: either by attraction of the place in which they enter; or by the contrary action of the other part.
And that which is ejected by the place where entry was made, or the arrow penetrates into a fleshly location and is then shot out.
And if it does not respond to the impression of the hour in which it was inflicted, then you should leave it for a few days until the flesh around it can heal, and reduce the attraction to it and its exit.
And similarly, if it is inserted into bone and does not respond to your impression, then leave it for a few days and repeatedly apply attraction and motion on any given day, and it will eventually be ejected.
And if you do not obey your intention for several days, then it is necessary that you puncture in the circuit of the arrow at that place of any part moving subtly where the area is enlarged by the arrow.
But if the arrow is already hidden in the place of the body and hidden from sensation, then you inquire about that area carefully, and if you feel it, then remove it with some instruments which are suitable for its extraction.
And if you cannot reach it due to the size of the wound and the depth of the arrow, and here there are neither nerves nor veins, then you cut into the wound so that it can be enlarged and the arrow can be extracted.
And if it is in the ears where it is held, then you release the flesh in which it is embedded from all sides with whatever means you can; and use your skill, if you cannot remove the flesh around the wound in the fracture of the ears and in the torsion of those areas that must yield.
And when you perform the extraction of the arrow in any place where it is, then you use your handkerchief and forceps from all sides so that they make it yield; and with great subtlety ensure that the arrow is not broken and that it can be easily extracted.
And if you cannot do this at your hour, then you let it be for some days until the parts that are in the circuit of him heal, and then again iterate that which is alleviated. And if it makes him the contrary condition of having blood, then you administer what we have said for cure in its chapter.
And preserve your virtue in the incision of vein or nerve, or cord, and administer engen in every manner for the avoidance of the arrow; and do this with facilitation, tranquility, tardiness, and firmness as you have been taught.
And so that you contract the arrow by itself that the patient be according to the figure according to which fire you should place the head of the arrow in him, for this is more advantageous. And if this is not possible for you, then administer what is possible according to the figures.
And if the arrows that are extravasated contrary to the other part, or that already have proceeded some part to the parts of outside, or cause distention at the extremity of the arrow by sensation from the part more above the groin; then you dry over that; and let the section be according to the quantity in which the forceps take hold; and then withdraw that, for it is made light and evisceration.
If it is retained in the joint, then twist the limb according to the opposite direction where the arrow presses into the joint, and amplify this movement, and then extract it.
If not, let it remain for a few days, and then repeat it where the pain is located.
If the root of the arrow is there, then push it toward it.
If the root is lost and you want to administer an impulse, then insert it there. If it is obstinate, stir it with a curved instrument so that its cavity enters the channel of the arrow, and then push it toward it.
If the arrow is concave, then push it with a strong stirrup entering into it, so that the arrow is straightened by it.
If the arrow is embedded deep, then make sure you concave all the flesh in which it is located, if possible, and then extract it using whatever method is appropriate.
And if the arrow hits the foot, or the abdomen, or the bladder, or the side, and is nearby such that you touch it with your hand, and it is possible to extract it there, then extract it there and carefully avoid cutting a vein or nerve, and after extracting it, properly dress the wound until it heals.
Form of forceps with which arrows are extracted:
If the ends are formed like the beak of a bird and are made such that they grasp the arrow when applied.
And from these, special hooks are made, large, few, and medium-sized, according to the size of the arrow and its smallness, and the width of the wound, and the shape of it.
Thus, in order that the instrument in the concave groove may be eased and pressed thereunto.
Of phlebotomy of the veins.
Of phlebotomy of the veins. The veins from which phlebotomy is customarily made are xxx, which are in chapter XVI. These are two pulsating veins near the ears, called by Avicenna; two herbs that are on the temple bones apparent; and two veins that are in the tear ducts of the eyes, called aspirant; the vein prepared in the middle part of the forehead, and the vein that is at the extremity of the nose; two jugular veins at the neck; two veins in the upper lip; and two veins in the lower lip; — these are the veins called algellic; — there are also two veins behind the tongue. But the veins that are phlebotomized in the arms are v. Of these, one is cephalic and comes from the wild laurel; the people call it "the vein of the head," and it is a median vein composed of a branch of the basilica and another branch of the cephalic. They name the latter "the vein of all the body," while the basilica is the vein that comes from the domestic laurel, called "citillar," and the vulgar people call it "the vein of the belly." From the funis branch, which is placed over the axillary, and it is this one on which phlebotomy is performed; it appears above the armpit due to its obvious appearance. Savallleta, which is the vein between the aforementioned auricular and the smaller one, and it has two branches.
In the foot and thigh there are three veins; one of them is that which gives the curvature to the horn of the wild goat; and the second is sophena, and its place is given to the thigh of the domestic animal; and the sciatic vein, and its place is given to the thigh of the wild animal; and in the thigh there are other veins similar to those.
The condition of the veins that are near the ears is catarrh and migraines and scrophula and old ulcers of the head.
And the quality of sowing those is according to what I will recount to you: it is that you lay the patient on their back, and rub the patient's head at the occipital region where both veins are located with a wide cloth in good friction; then firmly press the patient's neck with a band where the two locations near the ears are found on two pressed areas of the head; and when you feel those at your own finger, here is where you sow them.
Then you take the surgical lancet, and that is the one that will be inserted, and then you introduce it into the vein between which the phlebotomist will reach the artery. And then raise your hand to the vein and its parts above and incise the vein with an incident incision. And let the length of the incision be the width of two fingers adjusted or around that; and let the blood flow out as much as you want.
And then sprinkle some powder there and leave it until it is healed.
And already it was mentioned at the beginning of this book about the incision of these and their cautery treatment.
More of the two arteries, which supply the temples with the vitality of bloodletting, are aemigrena (hemicrania) antiqua and some evil amblyopia caused by frequent use and body of acute superfluous humors in the heels.
And the quality of bleeding those is according to what I recommend to you: compress the patient's thigh with your hand so that the two veins appear by palpation and it is evident, and demonstrate the pulse of their location by your finger; and then you can feel.
And then you elevate the knee above the vein at the parts above as you have already said, and insert the flebotomy incidiently, and elevate the vein in them; and cut that as you have done in the other two veins; and let the blood flow according to the quantity of your necessity.
And then release the constriction of the malaise, and place your hand over the vein for an hour, and then place a cloth and powder there with a strong constriction, and leave it until it is healed.
And already the recollection of them has preceded, and after those, the incision, and the cutting at the beginning of the wound.
And thus the treatment of bleeding from the vein in the forehead is close to the bleeding from the cephalic vein for ancient illnesses of the face and headaches, as well as swelling, ulcers, and foul-smelling sores.
And the quality of the bleeding from the forehead is as I will recount to you; it is that the malaise presses its side with a bandage where the vein appears; and then take the instrument which is called a fossor, of which this is the form:
Pause the puncture at the spot where it is at the top of the drain hole above that vein and hit it either from above or as suited by the method, and let the blood flow according to the quantity you desire; then remove the perforation in the thigh and strengthen it so that it may be healed.
Sometimes the space is opened with a large incision for bloodletting, but I do not know if the bloodletting incision should be of acute extremity as in other bloodlettings, or before it should be of lateral extremity, and make the bloodletting according to the transversal, because the bone is nearby and strong; a thin bloodletting would break through the bone.
More the juvenile state of the two veins that are at the lacrimal glands of the eyes through the groove of the eye by inflammation and abscess in the eye, and for facial ailments.
The quality of the bloodletting is that the thigh strengthens its own color with a bandage, and then make the bloodletting there, and you stand over the thigh.
And perform the femoral incision according to the transverse length a little, making a few femoral incisions, for in that place there is no flesh; and if the femoral incision is fine, strengthen the extremity of it by breaking it.
And let the bleeding continue as long as necessary, then place your hand over those wounds, and strengthen them with a new bandage.
More so, the femoral incision of the vein of the nose is appropriate for acute fever and intense swelling, as well as facial illnesses, migraines, and redness that occurs in the face, especially when it is chronic.
And the quality of the femoral incision for it is that the patient strains his neck and then places his nose in your left hand, and make the fine incision along the middle of the nose according to the proper direction, for the vein does not appear here, and the bleeding begins to flow soon.
Cover your hand with the incision little by little and let the bleeding occur as needed; then place it for a night, for that is quickly restored.
May the youth of the femoral incision lead to constipation and the beginning of leprosy and various ailments and corrosive bad ulcers as well as erysipelas.
And the quality of the femoral incision is that the patient feels each cut in his side with a stick; and the surgeon is over the head of the patient, and the patient lies on a bench.
And gradually open the vein along its length with a small and gradually larger incision; and extract blood according to the season in quantity, or according to what is needed as necessary for this; and make a similar incision on the other vein.
And remove the stick and strengthen both veins with a mid-stral ligature so that the patient is not overheated, and leave room in the flesh for the plague to heal.
And the benefit of the femoral venesection for ager-related conditions, it provides relief from small abscesses and pustules in the mouth, corruption of the gums, bad ulcers, and fissures, as well as bad ulcers that occur in the nose and around it.
And the quality of the femoral incision is that you make a cut in front of the malalus, strengthen its neck with a bandage, and then rotate the lips and look for two veins, one on the right side of the lip and the second on the left; the demonstration of each is by the darkness of each of both, and this more so in the circuit of those small dark veins; then incise each by an incisive incision.
And if doubt exists, you leave it, and if you do not know which is which of those, then you incise the largest of them, and the most obvious one.
And make the appearance of the two veins that are in the upper lips.
And the treatment for both veins that are left near the incision of the cephalic vein is close to the condition of the uvula, in the disease of the uvula, and diseases of the mouth.
And the quality of making an incision there is to follow the patient's thighs in front of their navel, elevate the tongue, and observe the tongue, from one side of its vein and the other side of its vein, and the color of each is declining to black.
And then make an incision there; and keep in mind that you should not complete your hand in making an incision there, for those are arteries.
And your veins that are incised in the groin are those in which blood flows customarily in all men, and the incision of them is made according to two methods: either they place a thorn or olive needle of subtile thickness; or with a surgical knife, and call it a lancet. This is the form of it:
Let the wound be like this you see, and it is necessary to open the concave veins full of apparent large branches, and those that contain thick turbid blood.
And this flebotomy is of lesser breadth and finer extremity, and it is suitable for flebotomizing thin veins that contain fine yellowish blood.
More appropriate for the flebotomy of the basilic vein, which is one of three veins: from this you extract the blood of the maladies that affect the knee and the groin, as well as what concerns the foot and the abdomen.
And it is fitting for the flebotomizer, when performing this flebotomy, to be well aware of it and to show great caution, for if he misses and adjusts improperly in the puncture of the flebotomy, he will cut that artery and cause flows of blood. Therefore, you must not perform a deep flebotomy before cutting as with a lancet.
And if the basilica does not appear by obvious appearance, then you should leave that one and change to the other, or seek some vein there; or perform a bleeding at the end of the arm where it is manifest, and dry out that one with bleeding as we have said.
And if you wish to perform the bleeding at the elbow, then before the constriction of the arm, touch the location where you know the pulse site, and place your hand over it; then lift the arm and dry the vein with a concave section for bleeding as we have said; and guard that the percussion does not occur in any space of the artery's location.
And when you press, as you strengthen the ligament, inflammation occurs in the location where you placed your hand; that inflammation is due to the artery, so avoid that area.
And if you see the blood flow in the bleeding as it appears from a child's wound, and the blood is thin and rosy, then you know it is arterial blood; then lift and place your hand over that area for a long space; and move close to that area, and if the blood stops flowing, where motas (small blood vessels) have stopped, then strengthen the arm and leave that.
And keep the patient warm, and avoid cold for several days until it is healed.
If the bleeding is not stopped, and sometimes you must not use the medicine for that, then when you incise the artery, if it appears to you; for the extremity will be contracted, and the bleeding will stop; or that which you take from a fistula, and perform that, and take one half and strengthen that over the place of the vein with stricture descending on linseed and powder between the other day.
And if the bleeding is stopped, that is good; but if not, then cure it with that of which it was preceded in the remembrance of the place of the powders stopping the flow of blood.
And the stopping of the bleeding from it is difficult in minor wounds and the possibility of the linseed.
And for the dark vein, phlebotomy is beneficial that extracts the blood from the part above the heart and from the part below the body; therefore, it is composed of a branch of the basilica vein and a branch of the cephalic vein, as we have said.
And carefully avoid the nerve that is over-sensitive during the phlebotomy of the patient; for if you leave it there, it will be a nerve; and then when you adjust in the puncture of the phlebotomy and find the nerve, it will result in stupor, and the recovery is difficult, and rarely is it completely cured. This nerve manifests sensations in waves; and if hidden to some people and subtle and not shown, then stop the phlebotomy at a section of alnessil and avoid the nerve with your strength.
And if the vein is between two nerves, then cut the vein along its length.
The purpose of phlebotomy of the cephalic vein is to draw blood from the head and relieve illnesses of the feet.
And carefully do this if you want to make a phlebotomy at an olive phlebotomy or a mirti phlebotomy; for it is the pure blood from all veins, and neither the artery nor the nerve is left.
Moreover, however, abscesses are more prevalent in some individuals, when not treated with veneflebotomy in the primary percussion, but do not ignore them again.
The first of these is that you should know that veneflebotomy should be administered only for the preservation of health and with hope and caution regarding the onset of illnesses, and that the veneflebotomy should be performed on one of the veins in the thigh: cephalic, basilic, and femoral; and that the veneflebotomy should be done at the beginning of spring, fasting in spring and autumn, and in winter before meals, when signs of repletion appear.
And perform a fistulotomy and let three hours pass after the first time of the day.
The more fistulotomy that is performed, the more when it provokes convenience and necessity at what time, day or night, at any hour and in all times.
And let a child not be fistulotomized until it has four years, and a woman who is pregnant should not be fistulotomized except in the fourth month between the seventh and eighth months of pregnancy, and old women should not be fistulotomized those which have passed their fifteenth year.
And when anyone wishes to be fistulotomized in any manner whatsoever, let their intestines be modified before the fistulotomy by using a lion's glycerin enema, if there is a mota (a small mass or clot) of retained feces, so that the veins do not carry superfluous matter during the fistulotomy of the intestines, which are cleansed, and do not harm the principal members.
And do not fistulotomize patients who are nauseated, intoxicated, or in a state of debility or drunkenness until this condition is remedied for them, nor in cases of dropsy, and more that fistulotomy be delayed near colic pain, near vomiting, near abdominal issues, near multiplication of coitus and work and exercise before or after fasting or vigils, and near any cause that dissolves virtue, whether physical or animal.
And then consider in subtlety of humors before this if the pain is great, with foods and drinks, and with medicines if this is possible for him.
And then enter the bath if any cause does not prohibit it, or exercise for some that the pain be subtlety alleviated.
And place the phlebotomy on the feet of the patient, so at the hour of the third, as we have said.
And I assure you that the feet of that patient should be guarded on that day from all bad animal accidents, as when there is anxiety, anger, fear, and from all bodily accidents, as when there is hard work or unnecessary pain, intercourse, and things like them.
And at her side, have prepared the causes in the use of which custom among men is based on aromaticity and odor, and with balsams according to their quantity and possibility.
And follow the phlebotomist on a cushion that is higher than the cushion of the one who is to be phlebotomized.
And then extract his arm, rub that area with your hand using the lancet two or three times; and tightly bind the wound with a bandage and wrap it twice.
And if the stricture is tempered, for when the stricture is not equal, or the stricture is due to excess, then prohibit the flow of blood; or due to softening, and then allow the body to expel it accordingly.
And when approaching the stricture, have those who are to perform the lancet massage their hands together between them as the veins become swollen and their presence made evident.
And when the lancet is about to be applied, apply a small amount of antiseptic oil properly; and then place your finger on the vein with your left hand, marking the spot where the incision will be made, allowing the vein to bulge slightly so that its presence is clear. The incision should be made at such a point as if you are drawing back a cord, indicating a full vessel. When you pause the lancet over this spot, it contracts, and the lancet reveals itself; if the lancet does not open the vein, and if it does, the vein is narrowed.
And thus, for this reason, it is known that the phlebotomist should be kept and be active in all these causes.
And then apply the phlebotomy, but if the vein is opened in one go, that is good; otherwise, you repeat this on another vein, leaving that area a little, or with greater haste if the area is not suppurating.
And if the area is suppurating, or the patient becomes febrile, then you leave it for a day or two, and do not tighten the bandage, for it would draw the suppuration out with the cautery, nor should you put it in a bath.
And then repeat the phlebotomy if necessary.
And if the perception is small and the wound remains subtle, and you fear that it will not drain enough, then you repeat the phlebotomy in that area according to correctness and adjust based on the perception a little, and do so with greater haste before the area suppurates, for when the area suppurates, you should have a smaller perception.
But if you find that it has already suppurated, then do not touch it, for no purpose is served by doing so; instead, place your hand over a part of the wound opening, for this alleviates the pain of the blood. And it is better in this place than oil and other oils.
And similarly, in all venous operations where the veins are opened to drain blood from the body, use oil as a substitute; they should apply this tyciaca alfadoc and sagzenea when placed over the area, for the blood becomes finer and is circulated when it is thick.
And if a large abscess forms in the area of the venous operation, where many vesicles occur, especially in those who have not been bled but only at that time, or during the appearance of the small vein, then you should apply and place a sponge infused in water and salt, slightly warmed, for about an hour, for it dissolves.
And ensure that this is done near the end of the bleeding from that vein, or after another vein.
And if any blackness or greenishness appears in the area for some days, do not note this; and if you wish, place over it some cause of aloes and myrrh dissolved, or some cause of mint juice or vinegar or similar to it.
And when observed spots occur, you should perform incision for abscesses and swellings.
And place your hand over it. If then you find softness, apply your compress there, as that swelling is bad and harmful; and then be careful to place over it some cause of what we have said, for much fluid will flow from the vein.
And apply a poultice of that which is styptic, so that the area may be hardened, and then cure it with the other treatment while it is healing.
And ensure that you extract from the vein according to the quantity of its virtue and according to the predominant color over the blood as it appears.
For if the blood is black, you let it remain until it becomes clear; similarly, if you see it thick, you let it remain until it becomes thin; similarly, if it is sharp, you wait until its acuity is reduced.
And when one is full and strong and has the need for a single-time extraction of blood from a vein, enlarge the incision in the phlebotomy of the vein and let the phlebotomy be lateral.
And when one is female, do the opposite, making the extraction in multiple sessions, and that it be straight.
And the best that is administered in phlebotomy of a vein is a transverse section, not a puncture.
And this method of phlebotomy avoids the flow of blood and injury to nerves, and is more commendable and safer than phlebotomy according to length and breadth.
And in which it is customary for syncope to occur after phlebotomy, make sure you cure that before the phlebotomy with a drop of wine infused with millet grains or simple oxymel; and extract from the side of the vein in three or four sessions.
And if there is a sensation of congestion, then apply before the phlebotomy a poultice made from myrrh powder or myrrh infused with aromatic spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and saffron, or an aromatic and fragrant poultice.
And if you encounter a syncope, perform a femoral puncture, for it is caused by the cessation of vital blood flow. Then take in his mouth water from meat and infuse a subtle fragrant essence under him; use aromatic aroma for alleviation, and place his foot thereupon.
And use the other causes that we have said in the division in the chapter on syncope by evacuation.
And if you wish to cool his arm and dissolve his blood for the second time, do this from which the femoral puncture is by nature an evacuation, and the virtue of it is cold, which evacuates the blood little by little, so it depends on the quantity of the virtue over consecutive days.
And if you wish to cool his arm and treat his blood for the second time, and his body is strong, then do this about seven or nine hours after the first femoral puncture.
And if you wish to draw the blood from his body in the opposite direction of the part where it declines, do this after it has cooled on the second or third day.
When that body in which there is already a wound is scalded and inflamed and causes fever, ensure that the blood is drained all at once and a large quantity is let out, and amplify the sensation so that syncope does not occur, but you must conserve all the conditions of phlebotomy; and when you place your hand on his pulse, you should drain the body of blood, so that it does not end in death instead of syncope, which should happen several times when the phlebotomist is ignorant and negligent.
And do not when you want to release the arm and evacuate the blood a second time, as already the orifices of the vein are closed and it is difficult for the blood to escape, that you press upon that area with great force and slightly extend it, for this is too much.
Let it remain until the phlebotomy is performed again; or keep this for the coagulation of the blood in the orifices of the vein; or place your hand over the tyriaca alfarach, or sagenea, and apply a light compression until the blood has subsided.
And if the vein is inflamed, then leave it alone and do not touch it until the inflammation subsides.
And if necessity prompts you to evacuate the scabbard then, and there is no excuse, then you let that flow at that location or in the other arm into another vein.
And the vein called "funis del bras" is lanced instead of the funica or basilica, when they are not found or are hidden, for it is composed of those.
And the quality of lancing it is that the patient inserts his hand in hot water before the vein becomes reddened and clearly appears.
And then it is strengthened over that with liniment to relieve the median constriction; and then lance it according to the transverse small vein, not laterally nor along its length.
And the aperture should be wide, and your lancing should be near the joint of the hand in a small way.
And if you prevent the flow of blood, then immerse your hand in the trailing water until you can achieve your necessity and let the blood run into the water.
And if you are in the days of summer, then you may be excused from immersing your hand in the trailing water, and instead preserve the flow of blood in cold water during winter.
And the phlebotomy of this vein is safer than that of all other veins, for it has no pulsating vein or nerve.
And the phlebotomy of the radial wrist vein is appropriate for ailments of the liver.
And the quality of phlebotomy from this vein is that you should press the hand with your fist or with your other hand, rather than keeping it in trailing water, until the vein is swollen and well demonstrated at once; then proceed to make the transverse incision; and if you cut through it entirely, no harm will ensue.
And conserve that you do not place your hand over the phlebotomy, but leave it with the nerves of the fingers naked of flesh.
And then immerse the hand in the running water and let the blood flow into it, for if you do not immerse it in the running water, the blood will coagulate in the orifice of the vein, and this is prohibited from flowing.
And when the blood is extracted in the quantity needed, then pause over the vein with oil and salt, so that it is not completely consolidated; similarly ensure that you do this for the entire length of the vein.
More importantly for the youth of the phlebotomy of that from the left hand, it is that you address the ailments of the liver.
And do similarly in the phlebotomy of the liver as you have done in the other.
And the youth of the cephalic vein from the phlebotomy is for the ailments that are in the lower part of the body, such as head ailments, and retention of menses, and for the ailments of rhinosinusitis and old ulcers of thighs and ancient chest complaints, and their similar ailments.
And the quality of the femoral incision is that the patient inserts his foot in cold water and makes friction on that area where the veins appear; he ties a cord around the ankle; and at the location of the vein, he cuts it apparent, and from there its branches spread out on the face of the foot.
And therefore perform the femoral incision more widely or place the leg and cut the tendon at the location of the injury, which is better and more effective.
And if you perform the femoral incision on the face of the foot, then you must guard the nerves that are left on the face of the foot, and place your incision over the location where you make it transverse, as if you were incising it.
And let the femoral incisions be made.
And if the letting of the blood is prohibited; then you immerse the foot in cold water and let the blood flow in that area until it is evacuated.
And if the femoral incisor errs in the first attempt, then repeat the incision a little more, for the location is sound. And do not fear its depth; but guard the nerves as we have said.
And similarly make a cut on the other foot in the same manner.
And for the sciatic vein, the place is as we have said, you should cut the thigh and leave the partil (a type of awl) at the start.
And the indication for the femoral phlebotomy is pain in the hip when it is due to blood excess.
And the quality of the femoral phlebotomy is that the patient enters a bath, relaxes, and prepares the thigh by placing a thin, long bandage just above the knee under four fingers. This is done so that it is not obvious.
And when it is obvious, then proceed to phlebotomize as each situation allows and according to the transverse vein, which is better. Or incise there with an incision or draw out the blood by pressure, for the place is salient.
And it is in most cases more easily found; and if you find it but do not notice it by touch, then proceed to phlebotomize a branch of it, which is the one that appears on the side of the foot between the auricular and the annular toes.
And guard the nerves, and let the blood flow in the quantity you desire.
And then release the constriction and place your hand over the location of the phlebotomy firmly, so that it heals slightly.
For ventilation and the qualities of using those.
Ventilation is of corns, or of ear, or of eye.
And ventilation is performed in two ways: one way involves incision and bloodletting, and the other way involves ventilation without incision.
And this ventilation without incision is performed in two ways, either with fire or without fire.
And for the ventilation treatments that involve incision and bloodletting, there are four locations in the body: one where ventilation is performed occasionally, which is the back of the head; another location halfway down the neck; ventilation under the jaw, leaving the mouth open; ventilation between the cheekbones; ventilation above the collarbone, which is near the shoulder blade; ventilation between two armpits, each about two handbreadths apart; and ventilation between the two hips.
And in suction, do not extract the blood but from the small veins spread in the flesh, and by this do not lose its virtue as in phlebotomy; nor should suction be made with fire or several fires in any illness caused by excess within which the body is completely evacuated.
But if necessity causes suction due to illness or continuously, we administer it at the beginning of the month and at its end, and in the middle of the month and at any time.
And when often in some cause of those, and properly if it is in the third or fourth day, then command ventilation to be made more than just passed after one or two hours.
And the benefit of ventilation of the neck is that when you apply it to gravity in the head and also what is embedded in the heels; more important is that this be closely followed by evacuation of the whole body.
And this ventilation is in the place of venesection of the cephalic vein.
And it is not recommended to use that which is inflamed or in which there is a cold, as this gives great discomfort.
And for this reason, it is not advisable to use those that are inflamed, especially in the heads where there are gouty ailments.
More so for those that remain inflamed over them, it causes oblivion; and for this reason, you should command the ventozer to place his hand slightly on the ventosa at the affected parts, to prevent the generation of oblivion.
More ventilation of alkali is in the place of femoral and basilic vein phlebotomy: and by this you contribute to asthma, and to the constriction of veins and to the rupture of the venous valve, and to coughing, and to fullness.
And ensure that the alkali vent is slightly covered, for if it is stopped up, it engenders weakness in the body and stomach.
And the ventilation of hagdahan contributes to headaches, ophthalmia, migraines, epistaxis, and toothaches; and it is in place of basilic phlebotomy.
And ensure that you command the ventilation operator not to press his hand on the scarification so as not to incise the artery and injure the flow of blood.
And if ventilation is stopped, it causes alcohol in the mouth, corruption of the gums, and appearance similar to those illnesses in the mouth that are located near the alveoli.
May the ventilation that is made over the two spoons be covered, which is done through the restoration of heat.
And the ventilation of the two internal partitions of the flasks contributes to the benefit of the bloodletting of three veins, namely the basilica, fusca, and cephalic, for those veins drain the blood from all those veins that are in the flesh, and those small veins from the other larger veins through which the attraction reaches the three veins.
And command the ventilator not to proceed with incision, for the area is stripped of flesh, and leave only its nerves and arteries.
And it is a ventilation on which the ventilation is performed over thighs and contributes to the hemorrhoids of the buttocks and the ulcers, but leave them.
And make sure to command the ventilator to use a large ventilation, and one made of earthenware, for the area requires strong drying; and let the small, light vents remain unblocked and do not incise them.
More wind in the legs decreases significantly, for they carry the mucus from all over the body, causing old pains in the groins and the liver, and of the bladder; they induce menstruation, and cause bothror and ademil; they are in place of double femoral ligation, and halorcoben, and of double ankles.
But they thicken the whole body and cause syncope in most men.
And of the winds, halorcoben is appropriate for the wind in the groins.
And the quality of the position of the winds is that you place the cautery at the beginning clearly and suck out the heat with a gentle suction, and do not prolong the position of the wind, but pause them lightly and remain them constantly, so that the humors come to the area by natural means. And do not cease to repeat this until the area is already reddening and swelling, and the sign of mucus appears.
And then you incise and gradually increase the suction little by little, while considering the disposition of the body.
If a person has tender flesh due to excess moisture, incise him once and do not continue, so that the area does not become ulcerated.
And command the ventillator to enlarge the incision slightly and place some suction to facilitate it.
And if the wound becomes large, then you must incise twice; in the first incision, open the way for exudation from the wound and its moisture. But in the second incision, for the thorough examination and removal of the large wound exudate.
And if the wound is mixed with foul matter, then make the third incision to ensure its complete removal.
And finally, when we want to extract the wound exudate little by little or a small amount sufficient for us, make one incision.
And if we want to perform a bloodletting for bloody flux, we make a cut with a scalpel; and if we know that the flux is thick, then we incise with a wider blade.
And in the term of scarification where the depth of the cut is just that.
And if the cut is thick, hard, dark, and its pores are straight, then the areas for the cups should be gently anointed with an opening and resolving preparation; in summer, use oil of aloes or oil of violet or balsam of copaiba or balm; and in winter, use oil of narcissus or oil of marigold or chamomile or oil of flux, and to those similar.
And if the excess is thick, apply, then the oil should be amber, or balsam, or oil of aloes, or anise oil, and to those similar.
But if the cupper has ample pores of tender flesh, then it should be prohibited from oil, and instead, the areas for cups near the cupping should be washed with warm water or cold water from a solatrum, or water from copaiba, or water from borax, and similar to those.
And for those whose blood is due to humid heat, wash their veins with vinegar, or with water of myrtle and sumach and similar.
And for those whose superfluities are large, wash their veins with old vinegar, or with water of sage, which is marigold, or from decoction of dill, or of chamomile, and similar to them.
And ensure that the veins are protected before bathing; have them administered shortly after bathing for one or two hours, and ensure that they rest near the veins.
What must be done to regulate the patient before phlebotomy and venesection.
Ensure that you consider the beginning: when the phlebotomist or the one who is to be phlebotomized is choleric and has sharp pain and inflammation in the blood, then ensure that they take causes of cooling, such as sweet milken, endive in vinegar, laytuguas, secanabin, and julep, and similar remedies.
And feed them thus like lentils, pigeon meat, and sauced meats, and things similar to these.
And for those whose complexion is fair, give them to drink essarop of mallow, or essarop of alsecanabin of seeds, sumac, and wine with a pleasant odor between must and new; and that they be advised to use moderation in drinking and eating, and avoid meats, beans, pheasants, young pigeons, and doves.
And ensure that on the day of ventilation and phlebotomy, his drink is greater than his food.
And ensure that some people are given to drink tiryaca alpharac or musk medicines, such as muscat or acelita, before ventilation or phlebotomy or shortly after, so that the principal members be comforted and the wound be subtle; and do not allow them to eat scalfatz.
More the ventations that are ses scarifications be ventations made over the liver, on the melsa (abdomen), and podagra, and over the umbilicus, in the places of the joints, and the side of the ancha (hip), for these principal members do not suffer scarification upon themselves.
And it is not desired by those for the sake of an abscess in a limb, as when we apply a cupping jar to a breast during illness of flux of blood from the blood of the nose; and we use that so that the external phlegm adhering to the limb may be dissolved, as when we apply it to the belly and the navel; for then it rarifies the limb and warms it and lessens the pain which resolves the phlegm.
And it is applied to the hiccups when they occur during their oppression or pressure, for by virtue of strong attraction it loosens the oppression and expels the hiccups from their place.
And it seems to work when applied to the liver and spleen to dissolve phlegm in those areas.
And these cupping jars are administered often with suction solely; sometimes they are administered with fire.
And sometimes they are administered full of clear water during illnesses of the spleen.
And this is so that the cupping jar may be filled and become larger, either with water alone or with water in which herbs suitable for the condition are boiled.
Form a ventouse with fire: let the diameter of the orifice be two fingers, as we have formed it; and the quantity of the suction be half a palm; and place it in its center, at the location that is in the circuit, making it small according to the quantity that an needle can enter.
Let it be made of elm wood or citrus, with thick edges, pine, equal and thin so that it does not cause the limb to deviate from its position.
And let it be placed at the midpoint of the elm wood or iron rod where the candle is paused over the fire.
And let this ventouse be much larger than the one we have suctioned; and the small amount be according to the illnesses and the condition of the one using it.
And the ventouses for children and those who are emaciated are different from those for young and robust individuals.
And the quality of placing this ventouse over the limb is to extend the flame of decent wood fire in front of a small wax candle, and place that near the midpoint of the transverse rod at the center of the ventouse, so that the fire is ignited around the space left, to prevent the patient's body from burning.
And then place your hand over the patient's thigh, and tell them about what we have said, within which when we have our hands and do not intend that they feel it and that the vapor does not scald that area, then the hand will soon be dissolved.
And then heat the iron according to its manner, and repeat that if you need to do so.
More in the case of the ventosa that is administered in the disease of pleurisy, it should be filled with water, in which there is no transverse or longitudinal cut, and it is not applied unless it is completely filled with water, and is placed over the limb only for so long.
And this is the form of the ventosa: And this ventosa, the larger it is, the better, so that it can receive a great quantity of water.
Capitol. xcvi.
Sanguissuguas are not administered in large members but in the members in which no position of ventosas is possible due to their small size, such as the fingers and similar parts; or on a member devoid of flesh, such as the nose and similar areas.
And the quality of using those that you have found leeches in the clean boiled waters.
And shortly let them lie in clean water for a day and a night until they become accustomed, and let no cause disturb their belly; and soon evacuate the body at the beginning with bloodletting and with fomentations; and soon rub the limb of the patient until it becomes reddened; and soon place them over it.
And when they are full and healed.
And if possible, suction of the area with fomentations is more effective in recovery.
And if not, then wash the area with water mixed with wine and soon apply hot water; and rub it and express it.
And if the bleeding of the body continues for a long time at the site of the leeches, and if this is so, then you insert a cloth in cold water, and place it there until the bleeding stops.
And if the bleeding is excessive, then powder vitriol trisulphate or pieces resembling the causes of haemostasis over it; or place hot bean slices on the area and let them remain until the beans adhere to the site, and then the bleeding will cease.
And cover, if necessary, the incision of the blood vessel, when possible to change those.
And if the blood vessels are prohibited from suspension, then wash the area with fresh blood or insert a needle into the areas until the bleeding stops; and place them there, so that when any blood begins to flow, it is quickly arrested.
And when you want them to constrict, powder a little aloes trisulphate, or salt, or ashes over them, and apply it quickly.
Thus begin the procedures of the second part: restoration. This chapter is a necessity in the art of medicine; it concerns the restoration of fractures and dislocations in bones.
Oh, son, know that both the false doctors and the common people, as well as those who for some time have not studied the works of the Ancients or read them even a letter, boast about this chapter.
And for this reason, this method of the scientists on our land is kept secret; and I have not forgotten it during that long time; and I have not adopted what follows, except through a long period of reading the works of the Ancients and study over their understanding, from which I extracted the science.
And I have directed this experiment and study over the length of my life.
And I have already described in this chapter all that pertains to my science and on which my experiment has passed; now I abbreviate this for you others and deliver this from long discussion; and abbreviate this at the end of abbreviation; and have shown this at the end of declaration; and gathered into this various forms of the instruments that are administered there, as is done by addition of declaration, just as I have done in two previous chapters.
First chapter.
Summarize and collect those fractures of bones that require a preliminary discussion before we begin the recollection of various parts of bone fractures. Therefore, let us begin this chapter with the summary of the discourse; and those capitols that must be understood at the beginning by the artisans and are based on the truth of those things; it is you and those who are prompt to know or learn this noble art from others.
And therefore say that when a fracture or dislocation or twist or setting occurs, you must turn to the beginning and perform a venesection or realign that part, or both, if no cause prohibits it, such as weakness of virtue, or in the case affected by it, or due to decrepitude, or during a time of intense heat or intense inflammation.
And furthermore, let him eat food consisting of fresh herbs and meat from young birds and crabs; and avoid fatty meats and any food that fills the veins with heat, until you are safe from abscess formation, and if you fear effusion of matter in the limb.
And then return the patient to his/her primary position according to the custom of doing so.
And so when the broken bone begins to be restored, then ensure that the patient consumes nutritious foods rich in both fine and heavy moisture, with viscosity, such as foods made from cooked wheat in water, rice, eggs, fish, cow stomachs, nuts, and fresh meat, and foods that are thick and similar to these, and with this regimen coagulation of the fracture is facilitated slightly and honey is applied.
And know that when bones crack in those who are in their prime and in the elderly, it is not possible for them to be continuously restored and consolidated according to their nature due to the drying out of their limbs.
But nature adjusts and moderates over the broken bone from any part due to a cause similar to glue in which it thickens and adheres strongly. In this process, conglutination and ligature are performed together, leading to the end of strength and firmness, such as fire at the beginning. In no case should any cause prevent this from its works.
And for this reason, it is necessary to lift the patient's thighs, viands in which there is gravity, viscosity, and largeness, as we have said.
And know that the types of fracture are diverse according to the diversity of the limbs, for a fracture of the thigh bone is different from a fracture of the skull bone; and a fracture of the foot bone is different from a fracture of the arm bone; and similarly, all other limbs are different from one another.
And I will recount all types of fracture, explained in their own chapter distinct from the others.
Various types of fracture in themselves. And the types of fracture in the bone vary; for some fractures are arcuate, while others occur at the stellate lines. Some fractures occur according to the length of the bone: such as those from the sagittal suture and the stellate lines, and their additions and non-additions. Just as when preparing to write, a fracture can be by plucking and disruption in the head, or a small fissure.
And for each case, there is a specific engagement or torment proper in restoring it according to the distinct recall of them in their places.
A sign of fracture of the bone. And by this, a bone fracture is known: it shows a bending or distortion of the bone, and an prominence and appearance of the bone upon touch, and pain felt when pressing on it with your hand.
And when there is neither apparent bending nor pain, you should test by touching the bone with movement; if the patient does not find great pain, then it is not a fracture.
It is possible that it is a bending or small fracture. Therefore, you should feel it with your hand and apply pressure; then place your hand over the area where you recall from previous experience is appropriate for that location; and it will likely be straightened by a subtle contraction.
And you should know that the area when it is curved but not split into two or more parts, as in a complete tearing of its tissue, then you should start correcting it from your own time, having a purulent abscess form with a cautery.
And if an abscess occurs at that place, then leave it alone for some days until the abscess ceases; and then treat it in any way you can to promote drainage and healing.
And note that the restoration and ligation of the wound are lighter than dealing with the place where the accident occurred.
And then strengthen it according to how the memory of the wound will return.
More if in the place you find a fracture, then when an extension of this broken member into two parts is necessary, whether it be the arm or the leg; or with your hand if the member is small; or with two cords or one cord and your hand.
And place your hand in the position where you can extend the parts of the broken member naturally, while ensuring that the extensions are made with skill and according to any method you can apply to those areas.
And ensure that your strength is such that it does not cause pain or injury to the patient during your operation; and apply your skill so that one bone fits another, according to their best forms.
And ensure that at that convenient hour you touch it with your hand, and if you see any other cause different, correct it and equalize it by the quantity of your virtue.
And avoid excessive extension and compression, as foolish doctors often cause abscesses through their operations or cause contraction in the limb as we have seen from their operations.
The quality of the fracture of the affected limb is such that I recount; so that you may know that the limbs broken are diverse in their smallness and in their largeness and in the form of those.
And of those that are small like the forearm, the thigh, and similar to those, then cover them with a thin soft cloth.
But of those that are large like the thigh or the chest, cover them with an enclosure that is firm and hard, for the firm binding connects the large and strong limb on all sides by the fracture equally, ensure that no stain enters.
And then begin, as you start your dressing, carefully apply three or four enclosures according to the limb's needs; and firmly hold your hand a little on the bandage.
And then place it at the uppermost part of the location of the fracture, and firmly ensure that your bandage covers the area where you have tightly bound the site of the fracture. And then gradually extend the covering of the fracture area a little, and gradually soften the tension there, while you take from that place a large portion.
And then take another bandage and wrap the other part around the injured area covered by the first wrapping, and gradually adjust the wrappings to the portion away from the fracture; and let your operation be in the tension of the wrapping and in the softening of that according to what we said in the first wrapping above.
And then place the stopa leon or cloth between the wrappings in which the tortuosity of the fracture is equalized, if there is any tortuosity; otherwise, do not pause for any reason.
And then place it on the other bandage, and gradually equalize over these wrappings, make them decent enough as soon as possible, if there is no inflammation or abscess in that area; otherwise, pause over what is the abscess there and what causes the inflammation; leave that for a few days; then strengthen the stellate ones.
And let the stays of the patient's side be wide and formed wisely; or made of pine wood; or of palm ribs; and let the width of each stay match this form and figure:
However, ensure that the bandage placed over that fracture is thicker and a bit wider than the other bandages, and the length of the strip according to the size and magnitude of the member; and place another bandage underneath according to your first structure; and apply it decently with a piece of cloth as we have said about the structure, and let your structure be more where the fracture is, and the more it is stretched from the fracture, the less the structure.
And ensure that the threads are medium in thickness and fineness, and they should be of linen; if the threads are thick, as I have seen in some operations where flax thread was used for securing the limbs, it is a great error when the structure is not uniform.
And similarly, thin threads are not convenient, for you will not be able to achieve the structure with them as you desire, and it is not advisable that there be less than one finger's width between bandages.
And if the patient is injured at the extremities of the vessels near the location, then place those of stopa made from lion's mane or carded wool between them to prevent injury.
Some fractures are cracks, and accidents disrupt the chain, and I will come to remember that in the Capitol according to its singularity.
And know that for all broken members, they are not set by vessels on the first day; this cause is that the member, when large, cannot be placed on vessels but after about 5 days or 7 or more, according to your safety of the onset of abscess.
And this is the method of plasters that the Ancients used to restore, which are applied over fractures and dislocations.
Method of plastering for the reduction of fractures, suitable for complex cases and especially for women and children, which is made from powder of millstone, the marrow of the flour that hangs from the movement of the mill in its walls.
And you must confect it thus, but sieve that white flour of wheat, and place the confection not-thin nor subtle; and then use that.
Another method of plastering for fractures, dislocations, and sprains: recipe of asafetida, of lapdanum, of acacia, of fennel, and myrrh, which is gathered from salvager milkweed, of all take a drachm; of myrrh and aloes take a drachm five; of alcohol take two drachms; all be trisected and sieved and mixed with alcohol water or with wheat flour if the wound of the patient is scabbed; then use this plaster, which is of good composition, and it restores broken bones lightly, and you apply it to both men.
Another method of plaster for which you must confect a fracture and sprain: recipe myrrh and two drachms of white mullein take a drachm; of myrrh and aloes take five drachms; of acacia take six drachms; of Armenian wax take twenty drachms.
All be trisected in a mortar with each ingredient, be sieved, and confect them with water or wheat flour and be administered.
Method to plaster joints and bones separated from their places, and for accidental pain in those areas as well as for cracks and fractures: take fine wool and immerse it in olive oil and wine, then place it over the area.
But in this plaster there is not the virtue of restoration, but rather for the removal of abscesses and pain.
Another method of plaster that restores broken bones: take leaves of fig tree and leaves of wild poppy; mix them all together and make a plaster from them.
Method of a brief plaster to administer for the restoration of bone fractures and when you want the resolution of an abscess: mix root of althea, chamomile flowers, violet flowers, flour of dock, all in equal parts; thoroughly mix them all together and steep them in wine, if the member is not ulcerated.
But if it is ulcerated, then moisten that with water of fennel or with water and use it.
Another way of applying a stronger plaster for resolving the condition when an abscess occurs: take root of althea and seed of linseed, and of balsam, melilot, marjoram, flowers of violet, chamomile, of all parts equally and evenly; all be crushed and macerated in water of sage or water dua or wine, according to the quality of the member and the color thereof.
May Hippocrates not say in his own book that it should be placed over the member soaked to promote its restoration but a plaster made of wax and oil; and he recommends that it be mixed between coarseness and subtlety.
May Galen be seen as having applied plasters over the broken member to promote its restoration and the causes in which drying of low quality is thus such as myrrh, resin, and similar to them among those causes we have recommended.
Another way of applying a plaster to heal and relieve pain: take half parts of cypress, of human skins incised or quince wood ash, of althea, and salt, all divided equally; crush and sift them, macerate in water, and make into a plaster.
When the quantity according to which you should let the joint swell and then dislocate it, is that you consider whether pain has not occurred nor any bruise and the bone is not broken nor displaced from its place, then you do not dislocate it for many days. And if pain occurs violently or bruising or inflammation at the site, then you should apply or dislocate it at once, and apply a poultice to it.
And take a cloth and sponge of the sea, wet them, submerge them in thick wine, and apply that to the site until the bruising and pain are relieved; then place the limb at rest for an hour; afterwards, place on it wool soaked in vinegar or rubbed oil, and cover it overnight until you are sure there is no abscess, and that the inflammation of the limb subsides, and the pain is alleviated.
And then repeatedly apply that fine poultice and do not tighten your initial bandage too much, but keep it subtle so that the area heals.
And if you see that the abscess and the inflammation and the pain and the swelling and all these accidents are already reduced as much as possible, and you feel they need a poultice and a bandage, then you repeat it in this way just as you did at the beginning.
And if no cause of those we have mentioned occurs in the member, then do not remove it but keep it on for three to four days or five to seven; sometimes all this is left for twenty days according to how you judge by the mobility of the member, as we have said, until the fracture adheres and settles into the coagulation of the flesh around it.
And then adjust the bandage tighter than your first bandage, and adjust for the swelling of the patient's abdomen, according to whether the recollection of the illness has preceded.
And if you see that the place of the fracture is already drying and weakening more than it should, then you know that nourishment cannot reach there; therefore, soak that area in pure water all day long. Do this for three days; and loosen the bandage a little, and by this operation supply nutrition to the member, and it will heal slightly.
More than what the fol restorers do a second time when the member is not restored to its beginning, according to where it caved in, and is restored according to tortuosity, it is an error in their operation, and great fear arises. If they were right, this would have enlarged the Ancients in their books and warned of this work.
And I have not seen any of them do this, so it is more reasonable that this does not work.
Capitolsegone: Of Fracture When It Occurs in the Head.
The types of fractures are cracks, and their figures are various, and the causes are distinct. For some fractures, they are caused by the impact of a blow, which cracks the entire bone inside the skull, leaving the bone like this as in the trunk, and for this reason, this type is named "ascial"; or the blow affects part of the bone, cuts its flesh without passing through the marrow; and this type of fracture is named "levatio absoluta.
And the swelling of these two fractures is either great or small, and from such a fracture there is percussion on the foot or grinding against stone, similar to it.
And this fracture is penetrating, nearly reaching the cartilage which surrounds the bone; or it is in the face of the bone, and the swelling of these two fractures is either great or small.
And in this fracture, the bone is weakened in its细小的骨质，由于这一点，这种骨折被称为毛细血管性骨折。
And this fracture is caused by grinding or percussion of a stone, similar to it, which causes some lamina of the bone to enter the internal partitions, and it occurs in the concave location, as happens with the seams of tiles when they are struck, and it results from their partition entering the internal partitions.
And this is mostly done in the bodies of moist bones, such as those of calves.
And all these types of fractures are treated as if they were separate stars. And I will come to remind you of all this in its place.
And we will know all these types of fracture by detection of those and by inquiry of their pain and the appearance of the corrupted flesh that is upon them.
And the capillary type is known because it is discovered upon the bone, it is cleaned, and limits around it with pain, for the fracture appears black.
More in the cure of fractures consider at the beginning the signs of illness, and if you see through these signs that it means a manifest indication of fear, such as vomiting from colera, extension, loss of understanding, absence of voice, fainting, acute fever, swelling of the limbs and redness of those, and signs similar to them in the major dispositions, then you should doubt that it is not healed.
And if you see unusual signs, you hope for health, and then you begin the cure of it.
This cause is because if the injured person comes to you in the beginning of their injury and it occurred on a winter day, then you should study in the appearance of the bone facing the fourteenth day according to all disposition.
And if it is in the days of summer, customarily you should wait for the sores to appear before the seventh day, having that what is left on the bones be corrupted by putrefaction, and that accidents occur which we have recounted.
And if the fracture has already reached the marrow, covering the bone and is broken into many pieces and is crushed, then you should incise the broken part and rub it, according to what I will recount to you.
And you should cut the skin of the patient's wound, expose the bone according to custom and your method as is feasible based on the shape of the wound, and make it shallow over the wound.
And if you detect the bone, flows of pus or abscess, then you should apply what is appropriate to it, and fill the area with soaked cloths in wine and oiled rosin, and let the wound rest until the abscess is subdued, and be sure of the flow of pus; and then proceed with the circumference of the bone and its excision.
And this shall be according to one of two ways of operation.
And one way is that you incise the tissue straight through, and this is its form: And then administer another incisor here, a little further laterally; and this is its form:
And then administer more with the incisor further laterally than the second.
And ensure that you have the number of different incisors, of which some are more laterally placed than others; and some of them are shorter than the others and be at the very tip of their extremities, and be made of iron or steel.
And use them with ease in percussion on the incisors so that the head does not shake and guide it.
And if the tissue is strong and hard, then you must perforate in its circumference before administering the incisors along the travels, which you call shallow cuts.
And we are not called this way unless those who pause the term of the bone at the test (groin) to that which is nearby it, so that along the travel is a rounded extremity or margin over that upon which they leave the head of it sharp resembling a small margin or circle, the which you prohibit from being submerged and passing the thickness of the bone.
And it is convenient that you take of these travels a great number of which each suits the thickness of each bone, during which let the extremity of all be sharp, the quantity in length and breadth be according to the quantity of thickness of this bone.
And this is the form of three species of travels: The quality of perforating in the circuit of the broken bone is that you pause the travel over the bone and revolve it with the nails called until you know that the bone has already been penetrated; then place the travel elsewhere, and pause that which goes through all and takes the quantity of the thickness of the ray or around that.
And then incise with the incisor where each goes through the bone, and make that pus subtle which you can over it at the end of levitas, as we have said, during which you remove the bone, or with your hand, or by some other cause using certain instruments which you will prepare for this, such as thin tannals and forceps.
And make sure that you use great caution so that the scalpel does not touch any part of the cavity.
And therefore, after you have circled the perforated bone and separated it from the cavity if it is continuous with it, and you have extracted that part, make sure you scrape and smooth it to the texture of what is in the bone with another instrument resembling a scalpel, but so ensure it is finer and more delicate than other scalpels.
And if any small part of the bones is removed and separated, then take that with ease using the instrument you should use for the instruments; and then cure the wound with linen and ointments which we have said.
And the other method of operation is lighter, far from fear, which Diyssec Gualia and cuts it for great lausor; this is how he speaks of it: At the beginning, you must start uncovering the part of the bone in the area where the fracture is most severe and most evident. When you have uncovered that part, place your hand on the end of this scalpel slowly and cheerfully, which is its form:
And this is that the lenticular part is lion and you do not incise any cause, and the acute part divides into two cuts in length as you see; that the lenticular part be adjusted to the chip (keel) at its sharp end incident on the bone.
And then you strike on the incision of one part with a small hammer between where you have incised the whole bone as it is rotated, and you be certain of the panniculus that no accident occurs in the manner you fear; and if the medicant were the worst leaf of all men and the most ignorant of them; certainly, and if he were asleep.
And if the panniculus bone has any additional cause in some parts of the bone, he will incise that part at the end of the lenticular incision, and deliver that part as it is freed from its harm and fear.
And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the panniculus, and what is incised or remains of the bone is its surface, and it remains in it roughness and fine sutures, then scrape that roughness away and remove those fine sutures with sharp razors you have prepared in various quantities so that it is possible for you to administer from them the most convenient parts and the right part according to where you have directed your operation on that broken bone and its figure.
And ensure that you apply according to your measure, placing the os at the beginning with those razors, then use close to it from the subtle matter underneath, and do not cease doing this continuously until you reach administering the thick pus and the subtle matter of all.
In any other small fractured bones or subtle fractures, ensure that you apply care according to what is lost for the correction of it.
And it is because they have not studied all those matters in that art. And place it on what we have written about great fractures.
And if the skin is cut when you extract the bone, then you should take a cloth according to the amount of the wound, and submerge it in infused oil, placing it over the wound; then take another folded or tripled cloth, submerge it in wine and infused oil, place it over the first cloth, and do this gently on top so as not to press on the flesh; then apply a plaster, and do not strain it except according to the amount that the wound has.
Leave that point for one or two days until you are sure of the abscess; then remove it and apply medicines to which excessive dryness is superfluous, such as linseed and wheat bran, and powders of thyme and of oregano, and similar.
And you make these medicines into a powder that is sprinkled on the wound, as it is dry; and generally, apply to it all medicine of a性质或功能能够清洁和不刺激的。
And use according to your virtue that the wound in your cure be clean; and do not leave any grease or other ointment on it; for when applied over the cerebrospinal fluid, it corrupts it and spoils it, and brings about the evil malady nearby.
And it happens in the cranium of the head, as when modified the bone and especially when the cure is neglected, and a blackness appears on the surface; and therefore consider when such accidents occur to the patient whether you know that it is perilous and altogether harmful.
And if you encounter blackness only from the medicine that is applied above, and it is due to that medicine causing that blackness, then take part of honey and part of rubbed oil in equal parts, make lines with those liquids on a cloth, and place it over the cicatrix; and cure it according to the species of cure that you consider appropriate until it is healed.
Capitol iii.
For the restoration of the nose when it is broken.
Know that it is not the nose itself that is broken, but two parts together with some additional flesh, or one of those few blows, because in it you have two bones. The part that is left is cartilaginous and not broken; therefore, no fracture occurs to it, but only friction, tortuosity, and sinuitas.
But if one of the two parts is broken, then you should introduce the little finger into the nostril, and equalize that fracture inside with your thumb, and outside with your finger, so that the nose returns to its natural shape. And do this for your own ease, and make sure not to injure the patient's pain.
And if the fracture is in the nasal bone at its split part, and you cannot reach it directly, then apply pressure to the extremity of the ray in which there is a small swelling.
And if the fracture is in two parts, then you make it appear as such.
And apply this to promote the healing of the fracture on the first day of the fracture, if possible; otherwise, as soon as the seventh or eighth day, you should rest the affected area with a cautery.
And insert a pad of linen cloth into the extremity of the nose, if the fracture is in one part, or place two small pieces of cloth, if the fracture is in two parts, and ensure that the piece of cloth has enough bulk to fill the nostril.
And some of the ancient restorers say that the pieces of cloth should be dipped in broth, and kept moist throughout the day. However, I do not see this; instead, ensure that the pad is soaked in honey comfit powder. And leave the piece of cloth inside until the bone has healed and the cartilage has hardened.
And sometimes it is inserted in the nose, in place of a gouty swelling, to relieve more intense pain as it is wrapped in lion's skin fabric; and now you have the broken nose more violently and that the patient not be prohibited from breathing.
And this cause is not necessary for you; and if you wish, do this, and if you wish, do gout.
And if another swelling occurs, apply a cauterization for it. Plaster the nose with cerot or with a hot oil mixture, or with a diachylon.
But if no swelling occurs, then when you need to plaster it externally, use sesame seed flour and powder of cloven acorns with honeycomb; and place your hand on the patient's stopa (a measure), and do not touch the nose for any cause.
But if the nose bones are broken with a small fracture or are comminuted, then you must incise those areas, and extract them with instruments suitable for those conditions; and near the incision, treat that with what encarnates and consolidates, and with plasters appropriate for it.
And if you happen to have a pain inside the nose, then cure that with saline and administer lead canulas when they are completely healed.
Capitol. iv.
For the restoration of the jaw when broken.
When the jaw is broken and the fracture is not displaced, consider whether the fracture is only on the surface and not split into two parts but curved inward. In this case, the pain is mild.
And thus, if the fracture is on the right side, you should insert the left index finger into the patient's mouth; similarly, if the fracture is on the left jaw, then insert the right index finger; and push the blood from the fractured area inward to the parts outside, using your other hand on the part outside of the bone.
And if the fracture of the jaw is already separated into two parts, then you should administer extension to both parts according to the correct alignment so that their adjustment is possible.
And if you encounter a loosening of teeth with disruption, then strengthen those from which you fear that they will break along the edge of gold or silver or lead; then place a cauterization over the broken jaw, place a large diamond star cloth decently made or a single piece equal in length to the jaw under it; and place it above as your ligature allows and as is convenient for the application, without being destroyed.
And command the patient to rest and be tranquil, and place the food and drink away from the sick person.
And if you suspect that the figure has already been altered in any way, then you should wait until the third day and then lance it; then correct what has already been altered in it and apply a plaster using powder of molybdenum, or ochre, or flour of ceramis; after you have applied the cauterization to it, place a lion's wool over the plaster.
And then, once the plaster is applied and adjusted properly, and the position of the bone has not been altered, leave it as it is, without lancing it until it is healed, strengthening the fracture; for this fracture will usually heal in three weeks.
And if another time a boil occurs, then administer what we have said multiple times in the treatment of it until it is healed, and cure that boil.
And if the fracture is open, consider whether it is a bone separated from its place or displaced, then you must distinguish how to handle these displacements according to the removal of those disturbances.
And if the openings of the wound are stretched, then you must enlarge them with bloodletting according to the quantity of your necessity.
And when you have set those displacements, and no reduction is required, then you close the openings of the wound if it is large; otherwise, place over it one of the plasters that are suitable and seal it, until it is healed.
Chapter V.
On the restoration of the furcula when it is fractured.
Multiple times, when the furcula is fractured at the front part, the break occurs in one of three ways.
If it is broken, or separated, or split into two parts rather than at joints; and it is easy to restore; or as often happens in joints, and is difficult to restore; or as the fracture is open.
And the operation in that case, when the fracture is open, is that you have two assistants present, so that one holds the aid and follows the broken furcula, and the other extends the leg at that part.
Then adjust the fracture with the nails called entras so that it forms as it should, and do not leave it with a prominence or concavity.
And if more extension is needed, then place a pad or wool cloth under the patient's leg to determine its size according to your need; extend and elevate the furcula and hold the pad with your hand so that you can adjust the fracture as it should.
And if you cannot pull the extremity of the furcula to the outer parts because it is impinged by the spine, then place the patient on their side over their neck, and position a medium-sized cushion under the muscle.
And the minister presses the muscle of the patient at the parts left between that bone of the scapula when it is in front of them, and then you align the fracture and equalize it with those said ties.
And if you feel the symptoms of the scapula and it is tender, then cut there and extract those symptoms with facility.
And if it is retained in the bone, then you make an incision in it with one of the bistourys that you have brought for this, after having placed the scapula on the table to operate; and it is a bight or iron instrument of which this is the form:
And it is similar to a spoon of which this is the concavity; and its width should be according to what you need of it, according to the size of the bone or its smallness.
And the length of it should be according to what is possible for the operation; it should have two extremities as you see, and one extremity broad and the other narrow.
And if the wound disruption which you have incised when you have extracted the sinew of the bone is wide, and you are certain of an abscess, then you adjust the two edges of the wound with suture.
And if the wound disruption is small, or you fear an abscess, then you use the wound with cloths and powders according to the size of the incision of the wound.
And if you encounter an abscess, then soak a cloth in wine and rose oil and vinegar, and place it over it.
And always, unless there is a sore on the bone above the broken one; and so cover that you see the wound daily, when the flesh becomes softened or see the splint already loosened, then adjust this and strengthen the ligament.
And then place the patient's head on its pillow, and place a small cushion under its neck; so that the support for that side is elevated, and therefore the fracture of the furcula is elevated to the elevation of the muscle; or the arm attached to it.
And do not remove the bandage unless there is an abscess or other issue at the same place within twelve days.
And then renew the plaster if you see that it is effective, and adjust the application and restore it, allowing the fracture of the furcula to be fully restored and coagulated.
And it is strengthened and comforted according to the condition in twenty-eight days, and in some cases, it is done in less time.
Capitol. vi.
For the restoration of shoulder fractures.
Shoulder blade is broken in the middle of the location and not break it but the edges.
And therefore when it is broken in the middle of the location — and it is broken in the middle of the location — and is known only by touch, then according to the figure of the fracture you prepare it and reduce it according to its natural figure in every manner that is possible for you.
And place over the area powder of ground albium of hemp and stopa leon; and place over it dust of doubled cloth; and place on the table thin slice according to the quantity of the spoon all or a little more.
More if you place the slice concave in some of the areas of the spoon, then equalize that concavity with stopa leon, and then adjust the slice to match.
And place firmly above with good construction and with firmness of the slice so that it is not displaced from its place.
And consider the bandage on each day; and all days that it is softened, change another time and strengthen the plaster if it has moved from its place.
And place the patient on their side.
And the spatula is restored in xx days or in .xxv.
And when this number is completed, then you dissolve the bandage. And know that it is from the bones whose beginning was not feared nor their dissolution.
And if you proceed from the place of the bone fracture and place a knot in the ligament, then cut over it, and secure it, and do as we have said in the treatment of the fracture of the scapula with an apostema caut if this happens here.
Capitol VII.
On the restoration of the fracture of the foot.
The foot sometimes breaks in the middle of its location; however, its ends usually become constricted and comminuted.
And concerning the accidents when his meatus is broken, it tends to decline towards the internal parts and causes great pain, difficulty in urination, coughing, fainting, and bloody vomiting; these are declared in the cavity of the broken bone and are not hidden from sensation.
And the restoration of it is that the patient should be supine on his back, and a cushion placed between his shoulders; then press on his muscles, adjust his spine against the bones of his back, and be subtle in the operation and in the equilibrium according to every manner that is possible and suitable, until the figure of the bone returns as it should.
And then place it on the plaster and cloth, and press above the table with a thin layer of wax or salve similar in levity, so you wrap that in cloth; then be subtle about placing that over the broken bone to ensure it is not loose; and carefully bind it around the back several times, and strengthen it with proper tension; and always consider the binding at all times, and when it becomes softened, strengthen it.
And if necessity provokes to incision of that which you have corroded or pricked, or pain, or abscess that has occurred in the area, then you cut and separate that and eradicate the plaster and correct what has occurred by this method of cure; then return the plaster, if you see fit for that part; and adjust the stricture between when it is healed.
Capitol. viii.
For the restoration of the ribs when they are fractured.
Know that a fracture of the ribs occurs only in large areas where they meet in two; and at the extremities of their front part, such collisions do not occur because they are cartilaginous. And the knowledge of this is not hidden from the feeling of the inquiry into it with the fingers.
And the restoration should be such that you equalize the fracture with your fingers according to the possible method, while it is reduced as it fits, and then apply plaster and strengthen the broken bone with wire, if needed.
And if the fracture of the ribs is declining towards the interior divisions, then it happens that severe pain occurs and punctures happen, as with those who have pleurisy, and for this reason he puts a veil on the bone; and difficulties in breathing, coughing, and bloody vomiting occur; and this is of difficult cure.
And the kidneys are ingeniously placed in that region expanding outward.
And from them, we say: place the patient in a position where they can take food that causes inflammation and swelling, so that the abdomen becomes swollen and extended, and the fracture is pushed towards the external parts.
But we do this so that it is not a trivial cause to generate a carbuncle by chance; if it already happens, then help with this.
And some say that it should be placed above the abdomen and close to where urine is expelled with strength; it seems like reasoning, but nevertheless, it is feared that the urine will be drawn to that place due to weakness.
And some of them say that the area should be covered with wool that is already submerged in caut oil, and powders should be placed between the ribs until it is filled, that the bandage should fit evenly as you wrap it according to roundness; and place the patient on a cure of food and medicine.
And if the gout causes intense constriction on which it does not yield, and the bone resists with puncture of the veil, fear for the patient, then cut over the area, expose the broken rib, and place ourselves above that instrument which preserves the key, the memory of which is preceding, and cut the bone with facility, and extract it.
And when we adjust the two edges of the wound, if it is large, with缝合，我们用药膏敷直到愈合。
And if an abscess occurs inside, then incise and introduce powders in diluted oil, place yourself over the area, and cure the gout with what is appropriate for the abscess inside.
And he should be laid on his back on the mat on which he sleeps, until he is cured.
Capitol.ix.
For the restoration of fracture of the spine and neck.
In some cases where there is a fracture of the neck bones, and then to their rubbing, similar to the vertebrae of the back. And when this happens to someone and you want to know if they will be cured or not, then consider whether their muscles are already softened, numbed, and dead and cannot grow, extend, or strengthen those muscles. When you stretch them with your hands or prick them with a needle and they do not feel pain in them, then you can conclude that they are not cured, and in such cases, it is fatal.
And if you stretch them and they feel the stretching in their hands and prick pain, then you can conclude that the neck of the bone is saved and that the patient will recover with treatment.
And if you examine the vertebrae of the neck for their appearance and want to know if they are healthy or not, then consider the feet.
And when you find that they are already softened, attend to those things that occur in the intestines, and observe when they are on their backs, show patience and desire release according to their will, and sometimes they are supine on their backs and wish to urinate but cannot, then know that it is fatal, and then do not trouble with the cure of them.
But if none of these occur, the cause is better and lighter.
And the cure for them is that you apply a cautery to the sedation of the abscess caut which you place over the transverse or rubbed vertebra, or with pieces of hot wax; place it there for some days until the abscess is sedated.
And then place one of the comforting and existing poultices, and cover it with a layer of dough; command the patient to rest and be tranquil and not sleep on the part where he feels pain until he is healed.
If you happen to find the joint of the bone displaced or any part separated from it, then you should treat the ligament and that bone; then adjust the two edges of the wound,缝合如果伤口较大；然后治疗那个部位的肉芽组织，直到痊愈。
If the end of the bone in the heel is broken, then you should insert your left thumb into the wound, and align the broken bone with your other hand as much as possible for second-order equilibrium; then place a dressing and bandage if needed, and strengthen it.
And if you feel displaced bones in it, then you should set them there, and reset them, and treat the wound with the treatment that follows until it is healed.
Capitol. x.
For the restoration of the ankle.
The bones of the ankles are broken, and if they break, then the fracture is simply communication at the extremities of those bones and are split lengthwise, declining towards the inner parts; and pain occurs in the ankle area with puncture, and the leg becomes numb when fractured.
And the restoration of it is that you extend your hand over that inside which is above the fracture where its figure is.
And if the fracture is only in the extremity of the limb, then you equalize it according to what appears to you by equilibrium, equalizing it so that it resembles its natural figure.
But if the fracture is in the length or what has already declined towards the parts, then you place the limb on its side chest prepared so that you can restore that fracture. And when you have equalized it, apply a poultice over it, and then place the wooden or copper splint over it, and bind tightly with a bandage without fearing the puncture of the fracture or the removal of the splint.
And equalize the depression by filling it with something that takes the shape of the limb according to its equality, and command the patient to lie on his back or on his side.
But if an abscess develops, then cease the extension and restoration of it until the abscess is treated with a cautery, and apply something that sedates it according to what has been previously described; then return to the restoration, and bind it thus tightly.
And if it happens in the bone that you find or are fractured, then you set them.
Capitol.
For the restoration of the fracture of the femur.
Adjutori is that which is between the knee and the head of the thigh.
And if it is broken, then the restoration of it is in one of two ways, of which the first is that you take a wooden rod of moderate thickness according to this form:
And insert two pins at the ends, and then suspend it from the elevated location.
And place the patient on a cushion; then insert his broken arm into the rod until it reaches the nodal point of which the curvature of the rod is attached.
And place it over that with some heavy weight, or the servant extend it to the parts left; then the doctor keeps the fracture in his hands meantime, until the fracture returns according to its nature.
And another method is that the patient be supine on their back and suspend their head by the neck with your hand; then command two ministers that one of them hold what is above the fracture with his hands; and the other hold the lower part of him; and each of them extend to their side.
And if you want the extension to be stronger, then strengthen your hold on the fracture with one hand and on another part with the other hand, and each of the two ministers extend to their respective sides.
And so, if the fracture is near the extremity of the muscle, then place the middle of the hand on the tendon and the other hand should hold the fracture with its fingers.
And similarly, if the fracture is near the joint, then place the tendon over that location and over that joint.
Equalize that with ease and skill, and then when it is equalized according to what is needed and applied properly, then strengthen it if no abscess occurs.
If an abscess forms on the seventh day, then leave the stricture intact, place a woolen pad sewn in three places over it, and rub it with oil between each time you apply pressure to the abscess, and then firmly press that area.
The manner of pressing that area is to place a plaster over the fracture, then wrap a cloth bandage around the plaster; next adjust the arm on that support, and place your hand open over its muscle.
Then place the cloth and press the arm on the support so that the arm is in a stable position, unless some cause of the broken bone prevents this.
Then use splints.
Then place that splint over the fracture which is both longer and stronger than the other splints; place the width of each splint equal to the width of a finger, and the length of the splints according to the breakage plus three fingers in total.
Then press the splints on the stricture which I mentioned at the beginning of this chapter.
And that your pressure at the fracture site be more firm. And when the fracture is longer, the pressure should be less.
And so, if you position the bones and apply pressure as we have said when restoring the limb to its position, then you do this.
And if you fear an abscess, wait, then leave the pressure and bones in place as we have said.
And then consider the bandage in all parts for three days so that no infection or inflammation occurs; or is forbidden food to reach the limb due to excessive pressure; and so adjust all this as we have said.
But if you are confident that no such cause will occur, then do not release the ligature for at least three days or more.
And let the patient lie on their back, and their hands be over their stomach.
And place yourself over the assistant who is holding a woolen blanket, and consider at all times during the night or day that the figure of the broken limb should not be altered nor the ligament softened, therefore correct this entirely with your virtue.
And place the food for the patient according to the order we have mentioned before, ensuring that the food starts subtle and gradually strengthens; then increase the thickness of the food as it progresses.
Four days after the assistance and support of the patient, they are usually strengthened over ten days; then it is necessary to make them loose, apply a bath, and use ointments that correct this.
And if the fracture has been aggravated, then do not make them loose of the ligaments and tendons for ten days or two months.
Chapter XII.
On the Restoration of Fractures of the Arm.
The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the ulna and the radius; of which the former is small, and is that which lies on the side of the thumb, while the latter is large and is placed beside the small one.
And when the large or small firestick is broken forcefully, and you are forced to cut them together.
And when the small firestick breaks above, then the restoration of it is light, and its healing is even lighter.
And when the firestick breaks, if you find the fracture is bad, then its healing is difficult.
And worse than that is when two stable bones are broken.
So if the bone that is broken is the small firestick above, then it is convenient for the doctor to perform the restoration, which should be done with a slight extension and placed so that it is aligned.
But if the large firestick is what is broken, then you must apply a greater extension forcefully.
And if both firesticks are broken together, then you must apply the traction more forcefully.
And you must place your hand in the position for restoration and extend it over a cushion, while positioning the wrist above the extensions of the other fingers, more so than all the others. The auricular finger should be below the other fingers, and the thumb should be placed on a tilted surface.
And place a cushion in front of them on their back or side, so that the patient does not further labor.
And then the minister extends the arm of the affected side and places it either on his own hand or on a pillow, and another minister extends it similarly above.
And then the doctor aligns the bone at the site where it dislocated according to the best shape possible.
And if there are fragments in the fracture of the bone, then you must reduce all pieces to their place with your virtue.
And if there appears a separate fragment that cannot be reduced to your hope in the restoration of it, then you set it as is and bind it according to the manner we have said above.
But if the fracture is open, I have dealt with that separately, and therefore proceed with the treatment of it.
And if an abscess occurs at the beginning of your restoration, then you draw a cloth with charcoal made from rubbed oil and white wax, making it medium in thickness and strength. Place the cloth over that area with a thin string between which the abscess can drain; then remove the charcoal and apply a prepared plaster of powder of ocher with honey; afterward place bandages; and let the bandage which is placed over that fracture be more to the side and stronger.
And you shall know that the number of the ribs of the arm I saw in major dispositions, or rather the fracture in one bone or in two bones together.
And return your grip firmly and strongly over the place of the fracture, and when the tension is greatest either above or below the fracture, return the grip a little more tightly according to how the recollection of it is recalled at the beginning of the chapter.
And the cloths that you wrap around the fracture should be moist but not hard or rough, and the fat oil which is strengthened should be of the proper consistency between subtle and thick, as we have recommended.
And consider the limb and the joint for several days. And if any cause arises for which correction is necessary, as often happens to the limb, then you should immerse the limb in water until that disturbance ceases.
And leave the limb unrestrained until it rests, and then return your grip.
And if the spasm is already softened and the bone has already been reduced and appears like those, then correct all this with your virtue.
And consider more if the nourishment is prohibited from reaching the member due to excessive spasm, so that you soften it a little and leave it for some days until the nourishment flows to it, and then strengthen it.
And if to the patient none of the causes we have mentioned occurs, then it is not necessary that it be relieved within about twenty days or around those.
And place the hand of the patient above its virtue of movement agitative, and have it sleep on its back.
And know that this fracture is restored in thirty days or in thirty-two days, or slightly strengthened in twenty-eight days, and all this is according to the complexity and arrangements of the virtues.
Capitol. XIII.
On the restoration of fractures of the wrist and fingers.
Know that at the knuckles of the hand and the joints of the fingers sharp pain occurs, and do not hurt them but rub them gently.
And when hurt occurs to the hand in fracture or rubbing, then make sure the patient remains lying down and before the limb is extended equally, and then place your hand over the one that is extended.
And then the minister extend the broken bones and the doctor adjust those so that they are properly aligned.
And then apply plaster and cotton, if no abscess develops use a cauterization; then place a cloth over it according to the size of the area, and you have already wrapped that in a cloth.
But if the wound is in the inner parts of the palm, then make a pad of cloth, and command the patient to hold that with his injured palm; then tightly wrap it with long cloth.
And let the pad be of cloth on which a weight is placed, so that the body is applied to the palm; and hold it tightly as needed.
If the fracture is on the outer parts, then you should place another piece of the bone above the stone and another piece from the same bone in your palm, so that your hand is open and straight; then place the ligature, as if you were turning your hand at the wrist between the fingers with grain.
If a fracture occurs in one of the phalanges of the fingers, then if it is the finger tip, equalize it according to what is seen and then strengthen it by placing your palm on it; if you wish, place a small splint on the side so that the fracture is elevated and not depressed.
If the fracture is in the other fingers, as in the middle finger, or the index, or the ring finger, then equalize and bind it to the finger where that one belongs; or bind them all according to continuity, which is better; or place a small splint on it, as we have said for the fingertip.
And consider, in your restoration, and nearby, the placement of cauteries and opposition—during your operation—according to what is seen when any cause from those occurs, as indicated in the narrative.
Chapter XIV.
For the restoration of fracture of the hip bone.
The hip bone, when fractured, is felt to shift according to its displacement both anteriorly and posteriorly.
And the restoration is done by first strengthening the ligaments over the fracture and another ligament below the fracture. The patient is then laid on his side and on his face.
And then the surgeon extends the ligament over its proper part according to the quality of the fracture, when it is in the middle of the bone.
But if it is close to the root of the hip, then extend the ligament over the part below the iliac bone, so that the extension reaches there, and another ligament below the fracture.
And similarly, if the fracture is close to the iliac bone, then place the ligament over the iliac bone, and extend it to the parts below.
And then the doctor aligns the bone by bringing his hands close to where you have returned it according to its natural form, and the bone is joined by good articulation; then apply a poultice and bandage, so as not to cause inflammation in the limb. But if an abscess occurs in it, then you let that be for a few days until the abscess is reduced by cauterization, and then return to your treatment.
The bandage should be applied as follows: first, wrap a hard bandage around the fracture, fold it two or three times, and secure it to prevent any excess; then wrap the bandage so that it reaches the ankle and the heel of the foot.
And insert a long needle between the thigh and the nearby bandage at the fracture site, ensuring that the ends of the needle protrude significantly from both sides, and then revolve the bandage over the thigh and foot with any excess of the bandage.
And then place something on the thigh at the location of the fracture, and place a stick over the bone of the foot.
And then fill the space between the waist and the thigh with many towels, so that the contraction is constricted.
And then begin a strong contraction of the muscles over the location of the fracture with three or four layers, and the farther you are from the site of the fracture, the lesser, lighter, and more moist your contraction should be.
And then extend to both ends of the fiber into the parts where it reaches the cavity of the foot, and strengthen both ends of the threads of the other part so that the tissue does not shift from its place.
And then let the contraction remain like this so as not to injure the limb with cautery, abscess, or inflammation and resemble those; if any of these causes occur, then note it carefully, and correct what happens immediately, according to what we have said previously.
If in the bone there is a serious injury that requires placement of a splint, then make sure you equalize it as much as possible; if not, work on it and maintain it, and treat the area where the memory of the injury is present until it is healed.
And sometimes this fracture of the pelvis is reinforced with straps or bands that are adjusted to the stellates muscles, as we have said in the assistant and in the arm.
But still in the restoration in such a manner made no claudication occurs to the patient; and if it is restored alone, or that the other leg is applied, then it is necessary that the one of which it is spoken claudicate.
And know that the pelvis is reinforced in about ten days or a few months, and all this is according to the diversity of the complications and other dispositions.
Chapter XV.
On the restoration of the fracture of the tibia.
Know that the fracture of the tibia occurs less frequently, but it often happens more than a few days with atrophy.
But if the fracture occurs, then it is not a complete break but a crack or a tear in its parts, and this is either one crack or several cracks, and about this everything depends on the sensation.
And the restoration of it is attempted to be equalized what is broken from the parts of it among the fingers into which it is added and joined according to what is possible by equality, facilitation, and fabrication.
And then place the plaster and hold over that round plate, if you need it; strengthen above at the stricture to what is suitable.
And then consider all the dispositions which we have recommended in other fractures, thus as for abscesses and appearance to those that arise when opposing to every accident what is suitable until it is healed.
Capitol. XVI.
Of the restoration of the fracture of the flank.
Know that in the flank there are two bones, of which one is large and is named after the flank; the other is thin and is named fragile.
And accidents to the species of fracture occur as they do in the two bones of the arm, and for this reason, its restoration is done similarly to the restoration of the arm, and its operation is one.
And if you need to break two bones at once, the joint becomes dislocated in all directions.
And if the finer bone is broken, the joint becomes dislocated in front.
And if the thicker bone is broken, you find the fracture, and this is one of those causes that are beyond your control.
And then administer extension, equalization, and ligature of the tendons according to this method.
However, if the joint fracture is loose with visible spots, let the extension be less and lighter, and rely on your virtue to heal it.
And in the joint, if there is a need for an operation on the arm, and when you equalize the tendons and complete your entire surgical operation, then take pieces of pine wood which are placed under the causes that are fixed in stays, and make them from palm branches; select those with little grain, not too thick, and let their length be according to the length of the joint and the distance between them.
And then wrap each one in two layers of cloth according to the length of the foot, and place one layer over the back of the leg on one side and the other layer on the other side, and let them be close to the bottom base location of the foot.
And place the two stitches in three points of both extremities and in the middle point, for at this structure the leg is prohibited from leaning to the right or left side, and it should be in good position.
And already a brace of wood has been administered according to the length of the leg; and place the leg in this position so that it maintains its movement.
And especially ensure that you do this in fractures, and when there is swelling properly.
And then consider the leg on each day and study it well from previous studies, and keep it free from abscesses and inflammation or other similar causes; and if any of these causes occur, then pause treatment until it is healed.
Chapter XVII.
On the fracture of the talar bone and the bones of the foot and toes.
Fractures do not occur in the talus bone; more commonly, fractures affect the bones of the foot; and fractures of the toes of the foot are rare, occurring only when they are improperly handled.
And if fractures occur in the bones of the foot and sometimes those bones need to be elevated over each other, then place the patient's foot on a prepared ground as shown.
Then place the other foot on what is elevated beneath those bones, and compress, press, and align those bones back into their proper places.
Then apply a plaster and bandage over it, and place the sole of the foot on a small table with two convex sides.
Then firmly hold the foot in this position, ensuring that you have wrapped it with cloths and other materials as needed.
And when three or four days have passed, then you untie the bandage, for you will find the bones equalized, or broken, or dislocated, and the operation in those cases is as you know.
And if some are said to be broken, then restore those, and equalize them as I and have shown you in the restoration of the fingers of the hand. And then place the broken finger in position according to the length of the finger, and a little to the side of it; and place the skin on this table which you have previously prepared, and tighten that bandage properly.
And if what is broken of the bones are two or three or more, then you place each broken bone on its own finger slightly above it, enveloped in a piece of linen, and support the table under the base of the foot, and standing over one of the ends of the table, puncture the sole of the foot to ensure good retention.
And you should remember not to overlook that all the causes mentioned to you in the other fractures of the accidents we have discussed are not considered here; and you should adapt this to any similar case.
Chapter XVIII.
Of the fracture of the thigh bone and the patella and the groin of the man.
When the thigh bone is fractured, place the broken ends in proper alignment, and slightly incline it towards the upper part of the leg by a little, and keep it stable behind.
And the midwife fills the fracture with a splint, and it is done in the thigh as desired; then the woman is bandaged, and her leg is elevated little by little, for all this must be done before the part of the thigh as desired and the fractured bone returns.
And place powders on the leg, and when she wants to urinate, moisten the splint to facilitate it; then she urinates, return to her original position according to the manner in which you adjusted that part at the beginning, and then return to her first powder.
And do so for seven days or until it is restored.
And if you wish, take a bladder of sheep and strengthen it by tying a cannula of cane around its neck; then insert the entire bladder into the wound, and proceed to blow through the cannula with virtue until the bladder inflates inside the wound, which aids in the fracture returning.
And it should be filled with pus and left for some days as we have advised, until it is healed.
When the bone of the thigh of a man or woman is broken, then administer in the restoration and needle treatment of it what we have advised for the bone of the hip.
And what is right is not concealed in these nearby fractures and those that rarely occur, especially to him who has some study and use and understands this my free will; for that fracture means to you in the major disposals via recta in the restoration and in the stricture of it, and therefore understand well.
In the case of the thigh of a man when it is broken, protect it from infection, and insert the thigh into it; then place over it an envelop of cloth, and let it be wrapped up, and let it be left for three days or nearly that time, until it is healed.
Chapter XIX.
For the restoration of bone fractures when they are dislocated.
It is convenient to treat those who sustain a dislocated fracture, especially if the bone is large, such as the thigh bone or the fibula, or similar. You should set and bleed that area frequently, provided that the conditions for bloodletting are present as we have said above.
And if the dislocation exudes pus, then keep setting the area and try to retain it by sprinkling saffron on it, if no other cause is present.
And then begin to restore the fracture on that day, and do not delay this, if an abscess does not occur.
But if an abscess does occur, then you should delay the restoration until the sixth day, once the abscess has subsided, and not approach it on the seventh or eighth day, for then you will cause worse accidents.
But if the bone is broken and prominent over the knee joint, then you must probe to reduce it and align it with your hands with ease and minimal extension.
But if the extension is not at your readiness and the alignment with your hands is difficult, then you reduce it with your hands using this instrument; and this instrument is made of iron, its length being seven or eight inches and its width according to the size of the wound; for which reason it is necessary for the doctor to take three or four of them according to the quantity needed in the treatment for any type of fracture.
And it should be round, and of small thickness so that it does not bend during the operation.
And it should have sharp ends, with edges at the outer ends; and be thick on the underside, but thin within.
And this is the shape of it:
And it is called in Greek "labre volentz atelarem", so it is a small palette.
In order that the extremity of the patient be elevated above the extremity of the bone.
And draw it back in one movement so that the bone returns and is aligned with some equation.
And strive to align the extremities of the fracture with each other, and if the broken extremity is fine and does not take that tool for good reason, then it is necessary to insert the extremity of that bone where the instrument has the power to do so.
But if you cannot reduce the bone completely as we have advised, then incise that part using the scalpel which we have mentioned; it may be one of the blades in any manner that is possible for you.
And then scrape out the bone of roughness and small fragments.
And when the bone is reduced, and after the reduction, if the patient experiences severe pain in the bone, then you should know that the bone has not returned to its natural place; then do what you have been taught to give the patient great relief.
When your restoration of the mouth is completed, and then immerse a cloth in vinegar that is tightly bound with a black string, and precisely during summer, and do not remain over the wound too long or any other cause which might be oily, so that no accident such as inflammation and corruption occur.
And then administer steams at the hour of the completion of the bone restoration, and leave the wound uncovered to ensure it can breathe, using scissors where necessary and employing bandages according to the size of the wound.
And guard yourself with all caution that you do not irritate the wound near the fracture, for once the doctors have made their incisions, it is easy to cause death or a severe and corrosive illness in your patients. This is for their health. And if the pain is slight and moist, different from the pain of other fractures.
And if the wound is large or a bad wound, and you fear certain adverse accidents that we have mentioned, and find pain in the area, then do not remain over those steams too long. Instead, use hard cloth bandages in place of steams and strengthen it with those.
And when about one or two days have passed since the sore began to form a blister, then you lift up the cloth you had placed over that area, and soon apply blisters, ointments which according to our custom we use to treat sores, thus applying tetrafarmacum and similar substances to it.
And you should remove the bandage and examine the sore at midday and in the evening while it is consolidated and closed, and ensure that the limb is prepared in such a manner that the pus drains from it with your assistance.
If the sore passes many days and is neither consolidated nor has the blister been removed from it, then you should know that here are situated the small blisters, so examine the sore by pricking it. And of those blisters, those that are separated remain and are extracted, while those that do not separate and cause pain in the limb, forcefully incise them as much as possible.
And if the sore turns yellow or black, it is stiomenios or some other form of corruption and putrefaction. Then you should know that this is preceded by a narration of the treatment for which there is a separate chapter in its own section.
And from where the main speech cavity is located, you make your presence known: when the large bone is broken, place yourself above the limb in such a way as the bones of the thigh and helper and resemble those of the large limbs, and do not presume its contraction or extraction due to visible accidents; through this, death might occur. Have it remain there where it can be left, for it will fall away on its own within about 20 to 30 days; then cure the wound if you see fit, otherwise leave it as it is.
Capitol.xx.
For the cure of a swelling that occurs in the region of some fracture.
Visible accidents occur in this swelling in the region of the fracture's healing, especially near the joints, and it distorts the shape of the limb; therefore, you strongly prohibit the limb from performing its natural functions.
Then consider if the swelling is recent and administer those medicines that have astringent properties, such as aloes, saffron, mirra, acacia, and resemble those; try to use some or all of them, confirm that they are genuine astringents, or made from white oak bark, or are genuinely good. Place one over the swelling in a cloth, and apply it tightly around it with proper constriction.
Leave the constriction in place so that you do not loosen it for several days; then remove it and put another one in its place, during which time the knot should be reformed; or strengthen the lead plate descending from it, as lead has the property of curing whatever is swollen in the limbs.
But if the knot is already in the vein tightened and needs to be loosened, then remove that knot temporarily, and split it along the upper part of it, and incise the superfluous and prominent part, or let it rot away with a cautery during which time it should be reformed; and cure it until it is healed.
Chapter XXI.
For the restoration of fractures, when restored and then the member is subtly returned according to its natural position.
When a bone fracture is restored, and then the member is subtly returned according to its natural position, this is done for several causes: one of which is the excess of ligament solution and the joining of the ligaments not following how it should; or due to excess constriction of the ligaments during which nutrition cannot flow to the member; or due to excess ointment application; or due to excessive unnecessary movement; or due to a lack of strength in the body of the patient and its weakness.
And the cure for this is to give the patient light food and keep his body soft while the disease multiplies within him; administer baths; and insert tubes and joy into him.
And place your hand over the member, so that the hand draws in nutrition, or continue the application of the cold lotion, while the nutrition flows and returns to its natural form.
Capitol.xxii.
For the treatment of broken bones when they are reduced tortuously and prohibit the operation from which this results.
When the member, already reduced near its healing from tortuosity and prominence of the broken bone and nodularity, occurs in the form of a deformity of the member, but nevertheless the member is not prohibited from its natural operation, then you should not receive the word of him who thinks that member is newly broken.
Nevertheless, there are many foolish physicians and reducers who have done this in our land; this operation is greatly reproachable, leading to great fear from the sign of which is fatal.
If claudication and nodulation are recent, then soak them in a mixture of goat's milk in which you have put softening herbs such as althea, radix raziti, melilot, similar to those; and make for it a poultice with a well-made demulcent paste; or that it be soaked in mucilage of raziti and wrapped with linen cloth or oil of cedar, and applied with that; or that it be dressed with fatty figs which are macerated in pigeon's dung, similar to those mentioned in the medicines called amermans consolidatio.
And sometimes it is dissolved with light friction that is applied to the more humid areas, and movement of the limb should be administered at all times in all hours.
And if tortuosity has already gone on for some time and is strong, converted into a stone, and provoked, it is necessary to cure it by cutting. Then, the pus above the cecum and the continuation of the bone should be dissolved and incised. What is superfluous from the nodulation of that part should be removed from the bone with sharp scissors, and facilitation should be administered in that area with solicitude and study.
Chapter XXIII.
On speech concerning dislocation.
Dislocation is the displacement of one of the joints of that part, making it forbidden to move, and altering the shape of the limb, causing great pain and injuries in the patient.
Therefore, when a dislocation occurs, it is important to quickly ensure that it is reduced, and not delay the reduction, for if delayed, the area may become gangrenous, making the reduction of the dislocation much more difficult.
And for this reason, it should not be cut or extended during the time of gangrene, for moist wounds cause spasms and intense pain.
More so when this occurs, it is advisable to perform a flarethotomy on the foot, and allow the gangrene to rest until it has subsided; then the limb should be soaked in warm water and oil, and finally, the dislocation should be reduced with ease.
And every member be treated with the water from which its memory will return to its place.
And I have already ordered the chapters on dislocation according to what is preceded in fracture; from the part of the body first, then proceed.
Chapter XXIV.
For the treatment of dislocation of the jaw, proceed.
When both jaws are dislocated without a fracture; and the dislocation of both is performed according to one of two methods: either they are slightly moved from their places with little movement and slightly softened; or they are completely dislocated and fully reduced, at which point they should be softened at the point of the joint where saliva from the patient flows and cannot keep that position nor close its mouth entirely, and the tongue of the patient is wrapped in a cloth.
More often than not, when the dislocation is slight, it returns to its place with little cause in major displacements.
More often than not, when the dislocation is complete and full, you must immediately administer reduction of it, and not delay it entirely.
And the minister should hold the patient's head, and the doctor insert his thumb from one hand into the side of the dislocation in the mouth on that side if the dislocation is on one side; or he should insert both thumbs together if the dislocation is on both sides, with the other fingers holding the cheeks; and command the patient to cease moving his jaw and bring those going in all directions back; and the doctor equalize the jaw and push it back into its place.
And if the reduction is difficult, especially if both jaws are completely dislocated, then administer evaporation with hot water and oil, while performing a light reduction of both, and do not delay the reduction of both entirely, as we have said before.
And when returned and equalized, and the mouth of the patient is closed and not softened, then place it over those powders of cloth with cerot, made of wax and oil rubbed together; and soon it will be facilitated with many lint pads.
And let the patient sleep on their back, with their head standing between two pillows, so that it does not sweat on either the right or left side; and do not force them to vomit for any cause; having their food consisting of a moderate amount of bread, until when the pains are relieved and the jaws are moistened, then let them sweat as they wish.
And this should be administered with mildness, and you must not trouble the appetite of the mouth; let them eat and drink as they can, until when the jaw is healed.
And if the reduction of two jaws when dislocated at any hour and cannot be returned to their proper places, then swelling and frequent fever occur, and strongly moving the abdomen of the patient causes diarrhea and pure vomiting.
And when you see this, then know it is dangerous; and strong swelling may occur to the one upon whom this happens within a few days.
Chapter 25.
For the reduction of the dislocation of the furcula and the extremity of the muscle.
The furcula is not dislocated from the joint inside by its continuation to the foot; and sometimes it is dislocated at the outer part, and this is declared by the feeling.
And the restoration of it is that the patient lies down and extends his arms. And then compress the area with your palm firmly, for it will return.
And then place your hand over the area with the plaster and powders, strengthening it.
More often, the extremity of that which is connected to the thigh is not dislocated in any day; then it must be reduced and aligned as we have said and according to what is at your disposal.
And then place your hand over the area with the plaster, powders, and compress it, and command the patient to adhere to tranquility and rest until it is healed.
And in this method of cure, the extremity of the muscle is reduced when it is separated from its place.
Chapter 26.
On the reduction of the dislocation of the muscle.
Know that the muscle is not dislocated in any of three ways, one of which is when it is dislocated from the tendon to the bone.
And the second is when it is dislocated from above the muscle, which is called taut; and it is not dislocated at the rear parts by the shoulder; and it is not dislocated at the front parts by the nerves.
And mostly it is dislocated outward and below the parts where the tendon joins the bone, and more easily in those where there are few muscles, it is slightly dislocated; more difficulty is encountered in those where there are many muscles.
And often such people are struck by a blow or fall, and the muscle of the affected area develops an abscess due to a wound, and is thus already dislocated.
Then cover what you have sprinkled there, especially over him, and proceed with the cure of him.
And the dislocation is known when it is in the joints; you must probe; so that you can distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the sound one, which you find to have a manifest difference; and you find at the head of the muscle a concavity; by probing the head of the muscle, you feel it like a hollow, and the patient cannot bring his hand to his ear, nor move it with all movements.
If it is dislocated, probe the foot or above it, and then you will find a clear sensation upon touch, and it is not hidden.
And this dislocation is gently reduced when it is fresh and the patient is in pain.
And the reduction is that the minister raises the patient's hand above the joints; then place your thumbs on either side and probe the area, elevate the joint with strength at its location, and the minister raises the patient's hand, extending it properly; then place your fingers there so that it returns gently.
If, however, it does not return by what we have said, and the dislocation occurs from its initial beginning, for several days, then the patient should be bathed in warm water and a wet compress that softens and lubricates should be applied as if made of roots of almond, fenugreek, and melilot in water, and this should be administered.
And then the patient should be placed face down and kept in this position until the wool felt is equal between levity and stiffness, and then the doctor places his hand on the spine, raises the head of the muscle by its virtue, and pulls the patient's hand so that it does not get stuck at the joints, and another attendant holds the head of the patient to prevent it from getting stuck at the joints, for there it will quickly return to its place.
And if you wish, reduce the second as follows: and let there be present a man who is longer than the patient, standing on that side of the limb, and insert his muscle under the skin of the patient and raise the skin above the joint while the patient is suspended in the air, and another attendant pull the patient's hand from the joints below his abdomen. But if the patient is light, then find what other cause is suspended, so that the serious one returns quickly.
And it is reduced by another method: and it is that the patient be placed on the ground with a long stick whose head is round in shape, like the bottom of a mortar, neither thick nor thin, and then place the patient; then cover its head with lion skins, and the patient stand according to the length of the stick. And extend your hand at the parts below from the other part; and extend the body from the other part with strength, for the joint returns to its place quickly.
And if the reduction is difficult due to all the causes we have said, then use this cure: and it is that you take a stick whose length is two cubits, and its width is four fingers, and its thickness be enlarged at the base according to this form.
And place lion skins over the round head so that the stick does not slip off the patient.
And then place the patient's legs outstretched, and extend your hand or arm along the side of the body between the parts, and tie the limb to the supporter and the arm and the extremity of the hand.
And then place the arm on a step of the ladder according to its width, and the hand extended between the parts, and the other side be suspended from the other part, that the joint may soon come together.
And when the instrument is complete according to any manner that is possible for you, then take a waiting thread of wool of equal quantity; and place a plaster prepared of powder of moly ammen and honey over all the muscle, thus thoroughly mixed on top, and strongly tie the thread around the area; let the plaster be thoroughly applied over the thread, and the hand be attached to the collar of the patient, and do not move the hand for seven days.
And ensure that the diet of the patient is light, until the limb is comforted, for it is easier to recover.
And then the food should be given more seven or five times and exercise should be performed; and thus if it is closed and not softened, then it is already healed.
And if the joint is dislocated due to repeated humidity that affects it or for another cause, then you must apply a cautery three times, as mentioned earlier in the chapter on cautery.
And if all this is done and after seven days the ligament and joint are not closed, and the plaster and stricture remain over it for several times, and still are not closed with catgut and the arm cannot be raised above the parts above, then you should know that the nerves of it, which are at the head of the muscle, are either incised or extended or softened, and you should know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
For the dislocation of that which is caused, you should raise the foot and the thigh or the parts behind, and the reduction is done by impulse and extension with the hands, while it returns.
And it should be applied to the other stricture, and care should be taken that it be healed within.
And if there is a delay in the healing and a decrease in the movement of the limb, then the patient uses warm baths until the swelling is alleviated and returns to its natural state.
Chapter XXVII.
On the treatment of dislocation of the shoulder.
Know that the joint of the shoulder is dislocated with difficulty and seems to return with difficulty; it can be dislocated in all directions, but most commonly in front and behind. The dislocation is not hidden; whether you see it quickly or feel it by touch depending on the figure that is dislocated, when you reduce the dislocated shoulder joint into place, this is clearly manifest to you, for the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm or reach its own muscle.
And note that when it comes to the collarbone, reduce the dislocation as soon as possible before an abscess forms; for if an abscess forms, reduction is difficult, and even with a strong effort, it may not be fully healed. Especially behind, for this is worse than all other types of dislocation, causing more pain, and warm poultices can lead to its death.
And the restoration of it, when that is possible to reduce, is that the hand of the patient be extended between two more, and the arm of the patient be stretched out, and the doctor's hands be on the sides and let him, and push the joint with the heels of his hands or with the edge of his palm as it returns to its place.
And if the dislocation is in the front parts, then return it thus by bending the hand against its own hand, between striking the knee with the edge of his palm.
And if the dislocation does not yield to reduction, then administer strong extension and a firm movement.
And let two ministers extend the arm, and hold that position with two ministers so that the extension is not reversed.
And then rotate the arm completely around, as it is wrapped in a long folded cloth around the patient's hand, or bandage.
And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, anoint that area with some oil so that it helps in the lubrication of the joint for easier movement; and then push the joint with strong pressure as it returns.
And after the reduction of the cavity let it be placed on that bandage in which is applied a poultice of album of hog, and be externally treated with a strictura descent, and the arm be suspended from the neck, and let it be left for some days.
And then it should be released; and so if the joint is formed in that place, then you release the ligament and leave it.
And if you see the joint not well strengthened, then reapply the poultice and ligament, and leave it for some days until it is healed; and then release it.
But if accidents occur to it gravely after the reduction of the joint, and its disposition is in movement, then administer moistening in bath and gentle friction, and compression, until it is healed; or pause over the joint for a day or two, so it is a matter of grassy motion; and then bind it, and leave it over the bone day and night. And then immerse that in bath; and when soaked, then friction the joint with tempered friction, and then apply over it for a day or two, so it is a matter of gentle motion, once, and the second, and the third. am intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.
And if you wish, place your hand over that wet and scraped groove on the edge and firmly hold it there; do this several times, for that is wet and reduce it to its disposition.
Capitol. xxviii.
For the treatment of dislocation of the shoulder, it is of the joint that is between the arm and the hand.
Shoulder of the hand is sometimes dislocated, and the reduction of its dislocation is easy. The opposite is true for other joints; however, more importantly, it requires speed in the reduction of it at the hour when it is dislocated, before the area becomes infected or an abscess occurs.
And the reduction of the dislocation is that you place the shoulder joint of the patient on a table and instruct them to extend their arm. The doctor then places his hand or palm over the vicinity of the joint and gently push it back into its proper place.
But more importantly, one should consider if the palm is already placed on the abdomen of the hand, then the patient places the two hands on a table to extend and reduce; and if the dislocation has preceded, then place the two hands, while intrinsically positioning the hand of the physician over the table, so that the physician's hand falls over that potentiality of the joint.
And so if it returns quickly, that is good; and otherwise, then strengthen that by binding the abscess and leave it as it is; and do not repeat this, for if you do not, you should neither endure nor be able to force anything beyond what passes in his days.
But more importantly, the joint is to be treated according to its tortuosity; and do not notify the patient any cause, but let your hand be softened and cannot strengthen any cause; then you know that the nerves are taut or stretched, and then there is no need in it but to strengthen it by cautery near the insertion and make it firm with this you confer some cause.
And since the joint has returned, then place it over the binding which we have recommended, and let it be softened and strengthened for five days; and then release it and let it be left, and exercise the hand of the patient.
But if the movement in it has been sustained and occurred with some gravity, then gently apply that which has warm water and some friction several times, until it is alleviated.
Capitol.xxix.
Of the treatment of dislocation of the fingers.
In some cases, dislocate the fingers all at once.
And when one of those fingers is dislocated at the base of the palm or in the finger itself, then hold the finger and push the dislocation back with your thumbs, until it returns to place.
And then hold the tip of the finger, and suspend that part which is dislocated, leaving it for two days.
And then suspend that part and extend it until it is straightened in that same day.
And when it is night, tie it according to that narration, and do not cease to loosen it during the day and exercise with movement, and tie it at night; do this for several days until it straightens.
And make it seem as if you are doing so, even if dislocated in the hand, and bind that to that part and do with this your first operation, until it is healed.
And make it seem as if you are doing so when it is dislocated in the other parts.
Capitol.
For the cure of dislocation of the cervical vertebrae.
When a dislocation occurs in any of the vertebrae of the back or the neck, and multiple vertebrae are displaced from their places, then there is no cure for that, for death will follow.
And the sign of this is that the patient's excretion is forced out against their will, and they cannot retain it; often several times, the limbs, or both sides, or one side of the body become soft. Or a vertebra is displaced from its place, for multiple times a vertebra is displaced, and multiple times the removal of those to four parts is performed.
Then it is already reduced to the parts behind and is named gelbozitation.
May the cure of it be that when you consider if the gelbozitation occurs from pregnancy, then in that case there is no cure nor will it heal completely.
May it be that in those cases that arise from birth or by percussion or similar to those, the Ancients have already detailed the methods of cure at great length, about which the best is reserved for prophecy; but I shall now abbreviate what I know of that, for the sake of simplicity and proximity of my explanation, with which I have expanded and arranged it in various instruments from which I will show and expand upon that.
And of those, only the one that occurs in the two places properly so-called is cured as I recommend.
And it is that the patient be extended on his back close to the wall, and be covered with a moist cloth to prevent his feet from getting cold.
And place a straight stick, placed in the ground at the end of the back near its head, and another stick across its feet at the other end of the stick.
The minister hold the stick, and it should not be fixed in the ground; another minister hold the other end according to that form.
And wrap a cloth around the patient's head and tie it tightly with a leather thong; extend the end of the thong to the stick which is placed at the head, and fasten that end on it. And wrap another leather thong around the patient's hips under his armpits, and support his legs; and adjust all the thongs and fasten those on the other stick which supports his feet.
And the minister carefully extend the thong to the part of the stick, and do not move the two sticks and the thongs in which they are placed, but do not fix them as we have said.
And the doctor places his palms on the spine with strength until it returns, or he places one hand on a table and adjusts his feet on the table as it returns.
And if it does not return in this manner, then take a table of which the width or length is about three braces, and cut into the wall which we said is close to the patient a place between the ends of the table. And place the majority of the table's surface on the spine, and the doctor places his feet on the other end, and presses firmly so that the spine is compressed and returns to its place.
And if you wish, open a turn which is revolved in your hand; and when you stand on the ground, place the patient's head at the heel of two sticks, the length of which is one brace, and place his head at the heel of two sticks similarly. The distance between each stick should be one palm. Now draw a circle around each stick with thread, and make sure each is firmly fixed to the ground so that it cannot move.
And there should be a round stake on which the torn part is placed, and it should be turned in the two cuts of the two stakes.
And at the end of it is a cut on which the stake is formed, the length of which is one palm's breadth as it is turned; and in the other two stakes it is similar to that.
And then strengthen the ligaments you have stretched in the feet of the patient in the cut where you place its head, and the ligaments you have stretched in the thighs of the patient in the wound where you place its feet.
And then you should place each wound and have a minister twist the wound with his hand, and the doctor straighten the spine as we have said.
And once the spine is returned and the area is straightened, then cover it with a paste poultice of swine's grease, and some wool; place a strip of cloth over the paste, the width of which should be about three fingers or nearly those, and its length should accommodate the area of the yellow bile, and over the part of the spine.
And then apply the incense which we have mentioned, and use the patient of subtle nourishment under which it heals.
And if there is any danger at the place near the end of the healing, then it should be treated with medicines that moderate and soothe over a long period as we have recommended; and already a lead plate has been administered in that place.
Sometimes dangers occur near the end of the vertebrae in the back, and are caused by that dislocation; it is that bone where you already suspect that no strong medicine should be applied to it, as it might cause your patient to die.
Capitol.xxxxi.
On the treatment of dislocated hip.
Know that the joint of the hip and the joint of the muscle should occur only from dislocation, and not from what occurs in other joints due to slight movement and凹陷。
And the joint of the wrist is dislocated according to four manners, which is dislocated to the inner parts, or to the outer parts, or to the front parts, or to the back parts.
And mostly it is dislocated to the inner parts, and rarely to the front or back parts.
And the sign of dislocation to the inner parts is that when you adjust the leg of the healthy side against the affected side, the injured part becomes longer and the swelling is more prominent than on the healthy side. The affected limb cannot bend its foot, so it must be stretched. This is the place where one should apply a cauterization to an abscess, so that the head of the swelling has been reached here.
And the sign of dislocation to the outer parts is that the symptoms of the injury are contrary to this dislocation.
And the sign of dislocation to the front parts is that the swelling expands according to its complement, but it cannot bend the part where the pain is located. If forced to move towards the front parts, it cannot do so; and his urine is retained, and his congestion is an abscess. You should apply treatment to this area on the thigh.
And a sign of dislocation in the rear parts is that the buttock does not expand, nor can it bend what is before to bend the injured part, and the thigh is shorter than the other, and the injured part is softened, and the groin is displaced to that location.
The main reduction of these species of dislocation is that you consider, at the time, if the dislocation is old, whether it has already hardened. If so, then after you have had it near you, you administer the reduction according to its disposition, but not in all of that treatment; then one should not conjecture about it.
For the one where the dislocation is recent, and it is one of the four species of dislocation, then you should attend to this by reducing the joint and extending it to the internal and external parts, and move it to the right and left, as it will naturally return and you will not need any other treatment.
Moreover, if it does not return in this manner, then you should prepare a strong remedy and extend the thigh from the part left out, or on its hands, or with linen which is tied over the thigh above the buttock; another remedy extends the hand from above so that it touches the tips of its feet; and apply hot linseed over the groin, and have another person hold the end of the linen.
And it is an extension of the lung or from the inside part to the angle at the forked part, or from the back part to the side of the diaphragm.
And it is the extension of all those in one swoop where the patient's body rises from the ground and bends.
And this species of extension is special for all four.
And so, if the dislocation returns as we have said, it will be good; otherwise, for every species, what I say about its own cure is necessary.
In the reduction of its own, when dislocated, and the dislocation is from the inside parts, make sure the patient lies on their side; then place the bandages around the thigh in that location where between the base of the thigh and where the bandage meets the angle of the hip. And extend the bandage from the part of the hip to the other side of the forked part.
And then another minister firmly holds the thighs, compresses the thick part of the thigh, and extends to the outer parts by strong extension, so that it returns to its place.
And this species is of such gentle cure for which this member is reduced more than other species.
And if it is excused for you and you do not obey the instruction for this cure, then ensure that both feet of the patient are tied together firmly but gently over both ankles and insteps.
And let the length of each be that of four fingers, and let the patient's leg be extended more than the other by the amount of two fingers.
And then hang the patient's leg over the top of the stake, and let it be supported by the hand; and let the length of the rope be that of two braces.
And command a strong young man to hold the patient's thigh, and let another strong man hang the leg, with one holding the thigh firmly to help return the joint to its place quickly.
And in the proper reduction, when dislocation occurs at the outer part, ensure that the patient lies on his side according to what we have recommended for lateral decubitus; and strengthen the bandage around the affected leg and over its ankle.
And then two poles be placed, one on the foot and the other on the head; and then poles adjusted be placed in the middle of the stake fixed over which wet cloths be wrapped, so that the patient is not damaged by the pole being between their thighs, for you must allow the extension of the parts left undone.
And then each minister extend to their part, and the doctor with his hand equalize the reduction according to the art.
And when the dislocation is in the front parts, then it is good that the leg be slightly extended, and this according to this narrative method for the stake; and the doctor places the palm of his right hand on the gouty joint, and then ties it with the other hand, and with that tie he fixes the extension at the back part relative to the front part.
If the dislocation is at the rear parts, then do not allow the patient to stretch out his legs and stand on the ground; instead, elevate him above the ground. You should place him on a hard surface, just as you would if the width of the joint were dislocated outward, as we said regarding its position between two widths; and his face and thighs should be stretched out, as we have said, with little difficulty.
A compress should be applied on the area where the joint protrudes.
So, when the reduction is completed as it should — and you notice the sign of the reduction, which is that you can extend both legs of the patient, and when you test them and find that the limb returns to its normal position — then adjust the thighs and apply padding and wrap tightly so that the width is not altered in any part; and adhere the limb to rest for three or four days.
Then remove the bandage and padding, and compare one leg with the other.
When you see the equal marks in the wound, then you know that the dislocation is already fixed, and then let the patient go.
And if you see any cause of swelling, then return and apply a plaster there, and extend that according to your first structure, and let it be for three days.
Then loosen that, and let it have an ambulation on each part for some days until it is comfortable.
Capitol.xxxii.
On the treatment of dislocation of the shoulder.
The shoulder is dislocated in three ways: it can be dislocated to the outward parts, to the inward parts, and to the front parts more than to the back parts; it is not dislocated to the rear parts.
And the sign of shoulder dislocation is that when you command the patient to apply their hand to their hip; then you know that the shoulder is dislocated.
And the restoration of all these ways is that you make sure the patient lies straight, try to extend his side as much as possible; attach your two hands to the face of him, and place his foot between your feet; then make sure the sole of him adheres to your palms, hold those between your toes on the sole of him with strength, and another minister extends his foot so that the sole returns to its place.
And the sign of relief is that his side adheres to the flank with light, effortless ease.
And then apply that and make the side adhere to the flank, and place those continuously with a bandage for three or four days, and later remove those.
And do not use the patient for labor for some days until he is healed and comforted.
But if the reduction of it is excused to you, then administer strong extension to the limbs of which in the treatment of the hip the previous narration was given.
Chapter XXXIII.
For the treatment of dislocation of the ankle.
The ankle is sometimes reduced by a small movement, and sometimes dislocated according to the injury, and the dislocation of the ankle is performed either on the inner parts or on the outer parts.
And the sign of the ankle dislocation is that you see the ankle swollen coming from the part to which it is dislocated.
More the treatment of reducing the ankle is by gentle movement, and it is that the swelling be reduced with ease and return to its normal position.
More in the treatment of the ankle when it is dislocated according to the injury, make sure you correct the deformity properly, and have a strong and brave assistant behind the injured limb at the midpoint of the leg.
And then place your right hand on the top part of the foot, and with your left hand hold the lower part of the foot at the location of the heel.
And then draw the foot to your right hand, and towards the left by two passes, and extend the left; and push the foot on the right should lower the leg well.
And do this twice as we have counted.
And then push the foot towards the thigh for the third pass, and you are at the ankle.
So if it returns in one or two passes in this manner, and if you grasp the foot properly, that is good; otherwise, then iterate the operation, for it may not have returned.
But if the reduction is forbidden to you as we have prescribed, then place the patient on his side on the ground, and insert a firm stick between the patient's thighs, and you have already wrapped it with a cloth to prevent the stick from touching the patient.
And then the minister hold their thighs, and another minister extends the foot with their hands or with a cloth tied around the ankle of the foot; and then each minister extends themselves against the extension of their part, and the stick remains between the patient's thighs holding them, so that the body of the patient is not drawn to the sides as you lower its extension.
And then the doctor equalizes the dislocation with his hands, while another assistant holds the healthy thigh at the points left, so that the dislocation returns with ease.
And then as the dislocation returns and its reduction is declared to you as healthy, then apply a plaster and bind the foot with strong lint to the leg.
And beware of the nerves behind the ankle, for strong lint over that area might irritate and severely affect them.
And then leave that area for two or three days; and if the lint has become moist, change it.
And then remove the lint on the third day or the fourth, and prohibit the patient from walking for forty days. But if it is necessary for the patient to walk in that area, then there is no guarantee that the dislocation is not dissolved and corrupted, and such cases do not respond to treatment.
And if an abscess occurs at that site, then ensure that you administer as we described in the previous part of our narrative, in another location for treatment and fomentation, until it is ripe.
Chapter 34.
For the treatment of dislocation of the toes of the feet.
First, ensure that what is dislocated can be reduced with little extension; and whatever is not difficult, it is easier to do so quickly.
But if the dislocation is in some of the bones of the foot, then you should place the patient's foot on a flat surface or on a table, and have them lie as if they were sleeping.
Then stand on the patient's foot, and place your hand over what you suspect to be the joint. Gently push that area with your hand to promote its return to place, and observe whether it has been reduced and no prominence appears in the area.
Then place the patient's foot on a table that can hold the entire foot, which has two ends. Gently maintain this position with a strong, steady structure for three days; then release it and allow the foot to rest by walking for several days, until it is strengthened and reliability is assured.
Chapter 35.
Of the types of dislocation that occur from blows or fractures or any other way.
When any of these causes occur, and you are involved in the treatment and restoration thereof, mishaps may lead to death.
And for this reason, you should not presume in the treatment of it, but rather someone who is skilled in the art, long accustomed to its use, merciful and pious; one who waits, not eager or presumptuous. He should use medicines at the beginning that allow the abscesses to come to a head with cautery only, leaving the fate to divine judgment, but to whom you hope for a cure, for alleviation of the illness, in which some hope appears. And then strive to perform the reduction at the beginning of the cause, before it develops into an abscess.
And then, if the limb returns as we wish, proceed to administer treatment that allows the abscess to come to a head with cautery and heals the wound according to what is suitable for it using drying ointments.
And if dislocation or fracture occurs in the separated bones of the foot, then you must realign their joint, and do so as we have said in the simple ailments that precede here in those places.
And guard and avoid according to your virtue that of the instrument in the ways of fear according to which my preaching precedes you; for this is better for you from your Creator, and more permanent for your glory, and more greetings to your true essence those in your time. Thus you finish the words of Al-Bucasis perfectly, for which may God bless him. Amen.
