O, children, now that I have completed this book, which is the last of the science of medicine, for the completion of which I have labored long, and through its explanations and declarations, it is clear to me that I complete for you here this treatise, which is a part of my surgical operations.
For the operation of surgery is established in our region and in our times as entirely private, despite the importance of the science of it and the evident traces of it; and there have been no substantial descriptions of it except in some small accounts in the works of the Ancients, which corrected many errors and hesitations, but have closed the understanding of it and lengthened its practice.
And it is evident to me that I should vivify that order in this treatise according to the way of explanation and declaration and abbreviation; and for the forms of the surgical instruments such as cautery tools and other implements of the work to be added through the declaration and preparation, which are necessary causes.
More than that, the reason why a good craftsman does not place his hand well in this our time is because the art of medicine is long and that his actor before this must be exercised in the science of anatomy, which Gualia knew, entering that he was acquainted with the youth of the members and their forms, and the conjunction and separation of them; and had knowledge of the bones, the nerves, and the tendons, and the number of them, and their integrity; and of the arteries and veins, active and quiet, and of the places of the contraction of them.
And for this, Hippocrates says that in the small work, but more so in the art of the hand.
More than that, we have already spoken of this in the introduction to this book; for who does not know what we said about anatomy will easily fall into error, which can lead to the deaths of many people, as I have seen too many such cases. For some are formed in this science but fall back into the errors of those sciences and experiences.
For you saw a doctor who fell ill and inflicted an ap斯塔西奥病于一个妇女的颈部，因误切了一些颈动脉，致使妇女流血过多而死。
And there was another doctor who almost removed a stone from a man who had been in his state for a long time, and the stone was large, and it came to him, and he extracted that stone using a piece of the bladder, so that that man died on the third day.
And I have already called for the stone to be extracted, and I see that due to the size of the stone and the position of the patient, he will likely die.
And there was another doctor who took a stipend from a duke of our land for surgery, and he came upon a black slave who had a fracture in the patient's thigh; and because of the doctor's ignorance, he extracted the fracture, over the wound, with pillows and splints of strong structure, and did not allow the wound to breathe.
And then the dislocation according to his desires, and then the reattachment, and then let it rest for a few days, and command us to release the ligament; and thus remain until the thigh and foot are well healed, and proceed to recovery.
And I was called to him, and prepared to release the ligament, and tranquility and an attempt to alleviate his pains was achieved.
But however, since corruption was confirmed in the member, I could not restrain that, and did not cease to walk the corruption in the member during the illness.
And I saw another doctor who incised a cancerous abscess, and it became ulcerated over several days, during which the evil increased greatly in him and in his lord.
The cause is that the pain is purely of melancholic humor, and does not affect everything entirely, but rather affects a member that suffers from being attacked by it.
And for this reason, my children, it is necessary for you that the operation be devised in two deviations: one where the operation is associated with health, and one where the work is perilous in the major dispositions.
And I have already existed here in all this chapter where the operation is filled with error and fear; therefore, it is necessary for you to keep this and leave that, so that the leaves do not find a way to speak against you and dishonor you.
And therefore take your weapons with diligence and protection of God, and your patients with joy and firmness.
And use the best way through the grace of God seeking salvation and praiseworthy success, and lay aside the terrible illnesses difficult to heal, and oppose your weapons to what fears you, so that sitting in your faith and in your name you do not falter: for more remains to your glory, and greater still in the world and beyond in your sanctities.
Gualia already dissected in some surgical cases: Do not treat illness wrongly, so that bad doctors are not named.
And I have already dedicated this treatise according to three chapters.
Begin the division of the treatise, and first of the first part. The first chapter ordered in the foot, regarding the forms of the instruments and the tools of the cautery, and what is necessary in the operation.
The division of the second part. The second chapter, on drying and perforation, and on suction cups, and on plaigs, and on extraction of arrows and similar, all chaptered and ordered by the forms of the instruments.
The third chapter, on restoration and dislocation, and on the cure of tortoises and similar; chapter ordered by the head between the feet, and by the forms of the instruments.
Know the quality of those coals for the cautery and the harms from them, and in what condition the cautery should be prohibited.
Therefore, I say that the discourse on the quality of the cautery coal and its harm is long and prolix, subtle by science, and secretly hidden; and much has already been said about it by wise men, and they are in disagreement. For my part, I content myself with a little from their sermons, to avoid excessive length.
And thus say that cautery benefits all complexions universally which is of or has matter, except two complexes, which are complexes of seminal matter.
In the complex of gout and dry matter, it becomes desiccated; for some said that cautery is beneficial for that, while others said the opposite, that cautery is not suitable in illness which is due to quality and dryness, for the nature of fire is quality and dryness, and it is inappropriate that such an illness, which is gout and dry, be healed by what is hot and dry.
And say to those who say the opposite, that by cautery one is cured in all gout and dry illness that comes in men's bodies, for when you compare the body of a man to its humors in relation to the complex of fire, you find the body hot.
And I say according to his speech, for I have already experienced this several times myself.
However, I do not claim to have experienced this as one who has been extensively trained in the Capitol of Cautery through recent exercise, and who knows the diversity of human complexions and the disposition of illnesses in their manifestations, and the causes of those, and the accidents related to them, and the span of time for those.
In other complications, there is no need for fear, and especially in wet and inflammatory diseases, since all doctors are agreed on those, and do not differ regarding the use of cautery in such cases.
Understand, children, that the secret of curing by cautery with fire and its goodness lie in the burning medical instrument, for the fire is simple, its action reaching only the member being cauterized and causing no significant harm to other members it touches.
Yet the action of the burning medical instrument reaches to those members which it touches, and strongly makes come into the affected member a disease that is difficult to cure and quickly afflicts it.
Yet fire, by its subtlety and the goodness of its substance, does nothing but cause superfluous heat. We are already well aware of this through experience and long service in studying the art regarding the true causes; and for this reason, I excuse myself from the length of my discourse. If it were not that this is not written at liberty in this pause, and to reveal your secret about fire, its quality of operation on bodies, and its expulsion, which you use to expel diseases, I would deliver a philosophical demonstration, which would be useful for your people.
And know, sons, that they disagree about the time at which it is convenient to perform cautery and when is the best season of spring.
And I say that cautery is convenient at all times, because the damage due to accidental weather changes is submerged in the youth of what is affected by the cautery, and especially if the cautery is for pains or necessary pains, strong wounds, and fissures, which do not suffer delay because it is feared that those caused by malice are greater than small damage entering through time.
And thus do not trust in these, sons, for they esteem only the common people and the foolish doctors, since they say that the illness that is cured by cautery is not constant at all times, and they withhold this knowledge.
And the reason is not thus because they consider it so, for cautery is not but a method in medicine which alters the composition and dries the humors, which are the cause of venous pains.
But still, excessive cautery over medicine for the swiftness of its validity and virtue of its operation and greatness of its lord.
And it is possible that the patient's illness returns at some point in time, according to the nature of the illness, its location, and its virtue, as well as what is prepared in the body from the aggregation of superfluities in it, and what is received by it in its acquisition through food and likenesses of those causes; but if the illness where cautery is administered is a subtle illness in a member with few superfluities and humidities, like cautery for toothache due to pain and similar to that, it is possible that such pain does not return, but this is done in small quantities.
And more common speech is that cautery is the last remedy of medicine, and it is the language of surgeons, not what we understand by it, for I believe it is not a cure that helps either medicine or any other cause except cautery.
And the cause is the opposite of this; and the understanding that cautery is the last remedy of medicine is only when one administers the methods of cure for some illnesses, and those medicines do not work, and at the end of the cause, one administers cautery, which helps in that. And at this point, the last remedy of medicine is a cautery, not according to the understanding which I understand of the vulgar and too many of the foolish doctors.
And the ancients said that a cautery of gold is better than one made of iron, and they did not say this only because of the equality of gold and the sublimity of its substance.
And they said that the place for a cautery does not hurt much, since it is not absolutely severed, for I have applied it and tested it, and found that it does not do so in all bodies as in others, and a gold cautery is good and better than iron thus they say; but when you make a cautery with fire of gold, it is not up to you, for it ignites according to the quantity you want due to the reactivity of the gold, and it prepares to receive flame; and if you adjust over the ignition, the gold melts by the fire, and cases in the fire some sheets so that the artisan can cut by the occupation of that.
And for this, you should apply the iron cautery more lightly and more precisely to the correct position of the operation.
And I have already ordered this chapter concerning the cautery according to other chapters, and I have ordered those of the foot in the caput, so that I delay the request of the patient what he wants from me.
The first chapter.
This cautery addresses the cold and humidity over the servery accident of which there are two causes, these being the cause of soda and many traumatic fluxes, called corissa, from the head to the parts of the neck and the ears flowing, and many sleepiness, and tooth pain, and the gullet, and universally all illness that comes through coldness, such as paralytically, soda, and apoplexy, and similar symptoms in those illnesses.
The form of this cautery is as follows: first, you command the patient to be evacuated with a medicinal laxative for the head, for three or four nights, according to the power of the illness and the age of the patient and their habits.
And then command him to place his head on a pillow, and place that cushion between your hands on a sloping bench so that he rests his hands on his own foot.
And then place the edge of your palm near his mouth on the razor between his heels. But more importantly, since the right place has been found, mark that place with a needle, and then heat the olive cautery of which this is the form:
And then place the heated cautery over the marked spot with a needle, in such a way that it descends gradually, and your hand is gradually pressed firmly, while you rotate it.
And then lift your hand slightly and examine the spot, and if you see any part of the bone being revealed through the skin, lift your hand as much as the amount of flesh has been burned away. If not, return your hand to that iron or another, if it is cooled, so that what I have said can be seen on the bone.
And then take a little of salt and dissolve it over the area and leave it for three days.
And then place yourself over the inflamed wound and leave it there until the scar of the fire is destroyed. And then cure the area with ointment of tetrafarmacum until it is healed.
And we have said that when the wound is opened wide, it heals better, for it is better and more beneficial.
And some of them say that the joint should be cauterized inside the bone, and that the cautery should remain until a part of the bone's surface is charred.
And then scrape what is burnt from the bone, and then cure it.
And others say that the cautery should reach the marrow, pressing forcefully into the bone until it chars, and this is the method of Alphcatai. And they believe that from that place exhale the vapors of the head.
And let the wound be kept open for a long time, and soon it will be cured once it is consolidated.
But I have not seen these two kinds of cautery for all, only in some men according to the way of fear; and leave that one, I advise you, it is better for health when it is; whereas the head is developed by solution of continuity of the head as we have testified in other members, and especially when the head of the patient is of cold nature.
And the first kind of cautery is safer and better, I advise you; use that one and perform that work for health.
Capitalize second.
Of the cautery for the head.
When chronic and long-lasting pain occurs in the entire head, and this is prolonged in the patient, and he uses bandages, pillows, head purges, plasters, poultices, leeches, gloves, and other remedies, and especially if the head has already been cauterized with a cautery that does not improve him from any of those causes, then consider whether the head of the patient is of strong constitution in its nature; and if it is not cold or does not have great inflammation, then that cautery should be replaced by another. And then cauterize that on the top of his head between where the vein is parted. Incise the vein and uncover the quantity which we have counted, and cauterize that with a cautery at the back part of the head in the place which is called vas, — and this is the place where suction is applied. And move your hand in this way, but do not uncover the skull, for the patient experiences great pain different from the pain of all other head cauterizations.
And I will say this about the cauterization in its place, for I know that the cauterization of the horns of the head and the occiput is a finer cauterization than that which cauterizes the middle part of the head; and this is the form of it.
Top of the head.
On the cauterization for new migraine.
When there is a sharp pain at the back of the head or a dull pain inside the skull, the head should be treated with medicinal powders to purge it, and then the other treatment I have described for diseases should be administered; and if this does not help, cauterization in these two ways may be applied: either with a burning acute medicine, or with a iron.
May a cautery that burns in medicine be that you take a piece of aloes, incinerate it, and abridge the extremities of it from both ends. Then place the location of the pain on the temple with a lancet laid gently there, and let the needle be hidden.
Then strengthen above the place stopped by descending constriction, and leave it for the space of three hours; then remove the aloes, and let the wound remain for two or three days, and then place your hand under it submerged between the borders until the area becomes warm.
Then cure that wound by anointing it until it is healed.
And if you wish, do what some burning medicines allow, which I have written in the second treatise of burning medicines.
May the cautery be performed according to this manner: ignite the cautery of which this is the form:
and it is called a knuckle, because the head of it has the form of a small crystal and in the middle part there is a slight prominence.
And then place your hand over the locus of the pain, and retract it—so that the artery left is not burned—and rotate the small iron gradually with speed.
And if the quantity that is burned due to the severity of the burn is considerable, lift your hand so that the artery left is not burned, so that there be no flow of blood.
And then soak it in salt water and place it over the locus, and leave it for three days; then place it near a warm spot, and cover it with ointment until it heals.
And if you do, cauterize at the tip of the knife blade according to the cautery, and guard against cutting the artery in this not-so-old migraine.
Capitol quart.
Of the cautery treatment for ancient headache.
When you cure a headache as we have said of the previous cure, and as we have said in the divisions of diseases, and if the cure does not improve the patient, and sometimes due to the disease being too severe for what we have said about the first cautery or the cautery with fire, then you should heat the surgical cautery until it is white-hot. Place your line on the site of pain along its length, or any part of it; then hold your hand for a moment and strongly press it there to incise the artery and penetrate to the bone.
However, it is necessary for you to guard against the continuity of the mandible, which is weakened by chewing, and ensure that the tendon does not adhere and the nerve which causes this pain does not result in a spasm.
And if it concerns the care and precaution of the flow of synovial fluid in the artery that is incised, for in its incision there is a fear, especially for those who do not know what they are doing and are not studious or cautious; and leaves the operation at its beginning.
And I will recall the regimen for the flow of blood following an arterial accident according to its manner, in this place of this treatise.
And if you see in this patient that this cautery does not reach the wound and you find the condition of the patient tolerable, cauterize it in the middle of the foot as we have described, and cure the wound while it is healing.
And if you see, apply the cautery which we have said in the chapter on strengthening the artery with a cautery, using two knives. This is a better and more effective cauterization.
Capitol V.
On the cauterization for pains in the ears.
When there is pain in the ear due to cold and it is treated with conservative methods and another treatment as described in the division, and if the pain does not subside, then apply the cautery, which is called puncta. This is its form:
And then puncture near the beginning, and let it be led to the environment of the whole ear thus as a wheel is turned, or in the circuit of each place if the pain is in any place. Lengthen the cautery of the hole of the ear little by little until you feel the place.
And if the cautery reaches all points in the whole ear, and you withdraw it, then thoroughly cure the areas between as they heal.
Chapter VI.
On the cautery for the wound.
The wound which is cured and treated with a cautery is only due to the substances that flow through phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of diseases.
Avoid using the cautery for the substance that flows due to dryness or spasms of the nerve.
When you cure that substance of the wound with jerris, capipurgi, and guarismes, and your treatment does not bring relief, then when you treat the disease with three cauteries: the first, the hole of the ear; the second, a small opening in its vicinity; and the third, the junction of two lips.
And place your cautery on the opposite side of the malaise, for relief only comes to the part that appears healthy.
The method of cautery is to apply the cautery on the outer side of the ear near a small area above the corner of the mouth, and on the temple, where the length of the application is according to the length of the upper lip, and then place your hand over the area until the quantity of the matter of the scabby lesion is burned.
This is the method of the cautery, and it is specific to the surgeon, the form of whose practice is described below. But more subtle is that you use just a little, as if you could see it; and cut with the knife to avoid unnecessary roughness.
And place your hand over the area as described, keeping it treated until it is healed.
Capitol. vii.
On the cautery treatment for ancient apoplexy.
When apoplexy is old and you have treated it as we said before and there is no fever in the patient, then cauterize that with four cauteries: over all the horns of his head; and with a cautery and the middle of the head, as we said; and with a cautery on the scrotum. The method of cauterization is made according to what was said above.
And it has already been cauterized on the opening of the stomach; and it is more posterior; and then it is treated as you proceed.
Capitol.viii.
Cauterization for oblivion through flame.
Cover what is given to the patient at the beginning with large stones and pills of the servant's body.
And then wrap the head of the patient completely and place plaster as described in the treatise on plasters on the scrotum.
And pause that for some beats, as that is a way of cautery. And do this according to the method and order which I have already said.
And so if these good methods work; and if not, then make three cautery marks on the rear part of his head, which should be descending from the upper part of the head to the lower part of the neck. And pause for the thickness of a finger between each cautery, and then proceed with the next cautery.
But if you add more heat and the patient can tolerate it, then make the cautery in the middle location; and if you have a greater addition of heat, then cauterize there above the two horns.
And proceed with the cautery while it is still hot; let the cautery be olive-shaped as given in the figure above.
Capitol.ix.
On the cautery treatment of hemorrhoids and the soothing of the entire body.
Cover that you process in modification of the head with stones and as we have said; then shave the head of the patient, and then cauterize that with a cautery in the middle location of the head, and cauterize over all the horns of the head, and cauterize over the back part of it, and three cauteries over the vertebrae of the neck.
And if it is necessary in the disease of softening of the body for more and the patients tolerate the illness strongly, then cauterize that with four cauteries over the vertebrae of the back, and directly with a cautery between where the spinal cord meets it, and lift your hand. And then cure that when it is healed, and this be a橄榄油 cautery.
Capitol.x.
Of the cauterization for epilepsy.
No is cauterized the epileptic, but only if the epilepsy is due to phlegm.
And therefore cover that you modify the brain of the patient at the beginning with years and with the other cure which we have said in the division when the illness is great and the patient tolerates it except for the exclusion of medicines.
And if the child does not tolerate the medicines, then for several days beforehand, prepare masticators and gargle remedies for the servant to modify.
And near the head of the patient, apply a cautery in the middle of the forehead according to the preceding method, and with another cautery on the occiput, and over each horn of the head he cauterizes. And if the patient is strong and tolerant, then cauterize those areas as I have said, while keeping the body paralyzed and softened on the vertebrae of the neck and the vertebrae of the back.
And use olive oil cautery as previously described.
But if the patient is a child, then use a subtle cautery according to this method.
Capitol.xi.
On the cauterization for melancholy.
When the causes of melancholy are damp and thick flames, then cauterize that area with the cautery we have mentioned in the discussion on paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is superfluity diminishing into melancholy, and the body of the patient is humid, then give him to drink what purifies his brain according to what was mentioned in the division.
And place the patient's head upright, and carefully make a tartar over the circle, and then place that in the middle of the head.
And let the patient lie on his back, and be held from all sides.
And place the liniment; it is more worthy of an ancient shepherd to apply it. And heat that over the fire for tempered warmth by measure, which the patient can bear when more of it is in him. And place that in the middle of the patient's head in the circle, and let it remain until it is well rubbed.
And do this to the patient once in all weeks, following the other regimen until he is healed; or if you wish, cauterize it by making small points according to its condition, but keep your hand on a properly arranged cautery: this is a kind of cautery which moistens the brain in equal measure.
And place that incised area on the border or on the folds of linen.
Chapter XII.
On the cautery for water descending into the heel.
When the beginning of water in the heel has been declared by the signs which I have said in the division, then begin and give to drink to the patient that which modifies the head of it, and keep the other free from all moisture.
And boil that sugar in water for several days.
And command him to rub his head, and cauterize that with a cautery in the middle of the scalp; and cauterize that with two cauteries on two temples if the beginning of yeast water is in both heels, or one lump if the beginning of the water is in one heel.
Apply the cautery to all the veins and arteries which you leave open; and let the cauterizations be in that long length across the temples.
And guard against flows of blood when cauterized; and if you see flows of blood, stop it with any medicine which is within your reach.
And I will come with wisdom which is in the extraction of arteries and in the cutting of those, as well as the caution regarding flows of blood.
And sometimes it is cauterized on the neck leaving two bones with two cautery marks.
Capitol. xiii.
On the cauterization of ancient tears.
When tears from the feet are ancient and frequently present in the veins and arteries which are in the obvious location on the head and it is verified that these are superfluous phlegmatic discharges, then cauterize that with a cautery as we have recounted in the Capitol of the commencement of flowing water in the feet, and with a cautery in the middle of the head, and with two cauteries on the neck leaving two temples, and with two cauteries on the neck leaving two bones. And if you need to add a graft, then cauterize that in all length of the hair line at the end of the eyebrow with a small cautery.
Capitol.xiv.
Of the cautery for nasal odor.
When you treat that as we said in the division and your treatment is not effective, then prepare and give to drink the cochias to the patient for three nights; and shave the head, and cauterize it with a medium cautery and an olive oil cautery. And cauterize that with a flower cautery on two cauteries above the eyebrows, leaving the hair a little.
And be careful not to burn that.
And the flower cautery is used in this way.
Capitol.xv.
Of the cautery for softening the eyelids of the eyes.
When the eyelid of the eye is softened by illness or humidity, then cauterize that eyelid with a cautery similar to this lunar cautery; and this is its form:
And if you, cauterize that over the two eyebrows with a small one from two cauteries in total, and let them be long from the temples. And let the length of each cautery be according to the size of the eyebrow.
And do not press too much with your hand on the cautery, but according to the amount that the inner part of the eyelid is adhered.
Capitol. XVI.
For the cautery of the eyelid of the eye when the skin is converted to parts inside and palm of the hand.
When the skin of the eye is converted to parts inside, I must treat the eye according to two methods: either with a cautery or with burning medicine.
If the cautery is from fire, command the patient before this that they let their skin be cleaned as those which are bathed, entered while they are extended and equalized; and if you pinch it there, then strengthen the heels with a bandage so that it does not get damaged while the skin is growing.
So when they are grown and equalized, then place the head of the patient in a reclining position, and around the eyes of the heels of the cautery tent, mark with this sign the shape of a leaf of hawthorn, making it the beginning of the mark proper for the skin.
And around place a small amount of honey or mucilage of flax on the heel.
And then heat the cautery with which this is done.
And then cauterize over the figure which was marked, little by little in stages, until the surface of the wound is burned like a hawthorn leaf, entirely apparent properly.
And a sign of health from your work is that you see the eyelid of the heel already contracted and the hairs on it raised after the puncture of the heel.
And lift your hand and leave it there for three days, and place it over the wound between that the scar is eradicated. And apply ointment there until it is healed.
But if it returns through the skin for some cause near their origin and the eyelid becomes softened, then make another time the cautery over that area just as you did first.
But if the skin is on the eyelid, then cauterize that area until it is raised to its natural place and is equalized, so that the skin does not cover the heel.
But the cautery with burning medicine is that you command the patient to let the skin be prolonged and equalized, and then make it of linen cloth in the shape of a laurel leaf.
And then take known soap and a live caustic paste about an ounce. Mix these well, do this quickly so it is not diluted; spread this over the parchment which is made thus in the shape of a mulberry leaf, place that on one or both; let the root of the patient be in the middle.
And place the aforementioned on the medicine and press it slightly so that the patient feels the bite of the medicine, for the bite is upon it thus like fire.
And thus, to perceive that the atrophy feels the bite, then let the medicine go and press it on the patient's chest as previously mentioned; therefore, when the bite ceases, then return the medicine and wash the area with water; then consider if the eyelid has been raised as it is washed; if so, apply heat or incision, for then it is good; and if not, return to the place where no pressure of the medicine was applied and ensure that your operation is not compromised and contract the area.
And then place your hand over the joint where the dislocation has been removed, and cure that with an ointment or something else until it is healed.
And you must, in performing your operation, keep watch with great diligence so that no error in medicine occurs. If the eyelid becomes softened and some cause of the skin puffs up in the eye, then reapply your medicine to that place where the eyelid has become softened, and do it in the same manner as at the beginning, and soon let it heal.
This is the way of using the mulberry leaf.
And know that the eyelids of humans are diverse in size and smallness, and therefore the operation should be performed according to this.
And the way of correcting it will not be hidden from those who study in this art.
Chapter XVII.
On the cautery treatment of a fistula in the lacrimal gland of the eyelid.
When you cure a fistula as we have said in the divisions of diseases and do not apply your cure, then when you cauterize it according to this manner: command the patient to place his head in your lap, and let some minister hold the back of his head between your hands in such a way that it is neither hurt nor agitated.
And then place the cautery on the vein in the foot or on the wart of a blister over the heel.
And then ignite the cautery, the form of which is as follows:
which is round, as formed like a cane or a bird's claw, from one end of which the cautery is made.
And if you wish, penetrate it into the other end. And if you want, let it be drawn out like a tent.
But nonetheless, that which is concave is better for your work.
And then press the fistula if it is opened, and draw from it clean and dry that which comes out. And if it is not opened, then open it and extract the pus from it.
And then place the well-ignited cautery over it, and hold your hand a little above the nose, so that your hand does not err or the patient be disturbed, and then place the cautery on the nostrils and destroy that area.
And so, if at the beginning of your cautery it enters into the mouth, that is good; and if not, then iterate the cautery one or two times, as needed; and leave it thus for three days, and then place your hand over that spot to keep it dry until it heals.
But if more than ten days have passed and it is not healed, then place the sharp corrosive medicine over it until the bone is revealed and removed according to your decree in your treatise.
And another way to treat a fistula, which some first doctors will say: identify the location of the fistula and do it there; then place your hand gently over that small fissure through which it is shaped: put in that location one ounce of melted lead; keep your hand well on this with good retention, so that the bad humor does not enter where the melted lead does not reach; and pause above the opening of the bad humor as if in white of egg or water, because lead adheres to the location of the fistula and heals it through a marvelous healing.
And if the fistula is healed as we have said of the cautery and the cure, well and good; but if not, then it is necessary to administer a nasal draught and reduce the fistula to the nose's body according to what will come in its proper place.
Chapter XVIII.
On the cautery treatment of the wound from a boil.
Small vesicles often occur in the lips, and particularly in the lips of children.
Then when you cure those cracks as we have said in the divisions and your cure does not improve, then ignite the small surgical cautery according to this form that is taught:
And let its cavity be according to the subtlety of the knife.
Then place that hot hand over those cracks until the cautery reaches the base of the cracks.
And then cure that with cerate until it is healed.
Chapter XIX.
On the cautery treatment for a fistula in the mouth.
When an abscess is located in the root of the uvula or on the palate or in the roots of the teeth, and subsequently forms a boil, eventually breaks open, heals over, and then becomes chronic, forming a fistula, and your treatment does not improve the cure, then ignite the cautery according to the quantity received in the fistula, place that ignited cautery into the track of the fistula, and keep your hand there until the burning iron reaches the base of it. Do this one or two times at the end. Then cure that with what we have said about the treatment until it is healed.
And therefore if the abscess is incised and healed, well; but otherwise, it is necessary to uncover the place and cauterize the corrupted bone according to what will come in its chapter.
capitol .xx.
Cauterization of the teeth and softening of the gums.
When the gums are softened by humidity and the teeth are decayed, and you have cured those with medicines without effect, then place the patient's head in hot water, and soon ignite the cautery in the form which will be described below. Try to pause the cautery over the tooth and insert it into that area strongly burning, keeping it just a little while so that the patient feels the heat of the fire reach the root of the tooth.
Then lift your hand, and repeatedly apply the cautery several times as you see fit.
Then the patient should close his mouth with salt water and keep it for an hour, then spit it out, as the decayed tooth is sealed and the softened gum tightened, and the corrupted humidity is dried up.
Chapter XXI.
Of the cautery treatment for tooth pain.
When tooth pain is due to inflammation or there is a swelling, or if medical treatment does not bring relief, the cautery treatment for that area can be performed in two ways: either with a cow's horn cautery, or with a fire cautery.
The cow's horn cautery is done by taking a horn from a cow and boiling that part where the iron was attached. Then take a piece of it and wrap it around the end of the cautery, and immerse that portion in the heated horn, placing it over the painful tooth quickly before it cools down.
And then repeatedly apply it several times until the heat from the fire permeates to the root of the teeth.
And if you do, soak some wool or a piece of leather in the horn mentioned above, and place it over the painful tooth. Then hold the hot iron over that area until the heat reaches the root of the tooth.
Moreover, however, the cautery with fire, you must attend to the tip of the iron or reed, and in its body some coarse substance be placed so that the heat of the fire does not reach the opening of the patient.
And then shape the cautery as it will come, and place that part over the tooth and put your hand inside so that the cautery is well lubricated; and do this several times to prevent the pain from worsening on that day or the next.
And ensure that through the impression of that cautery, the patient opens their mouth well and keep it that way for about an hour; and this is the form of the cautery.
And cauterize as much as you can determine or wish to.
And this is the form of the catheter:
Chapter 22.
On the cautery treatment for exstrophy.
When hernias are due to phlegm and humors that are not obedient to digestion by medicines, and you have the digestion of those lightly, then apply the cautery to the form of which this follows, having two open extremities so that smoke comes from one end through the other, and place that ignited over that abscess for a moment, and another if you find it necessary before it reaches the root of the abscess.
And if the abscess is small, then place the cautery according to the quantity of the abscess, and leave it for three days, and keep it over the hot spot between the time that the fire has consumed.
And then apply ointment and dress the wound until it is healed.
Capitol XXIII.
Of the cautery for hoarseness and the constriction of the throat.
When the humidity of the venous blood affects the channel of the lung, and especially when this is due to a complex coldness, then it is necessary that the patient be treated with laxative medicines at the beginning, and then cauterize the depression below the diaphragm in the compressed area.
And see to it that you do not apply the cautery to the diaphragm or burn the rib cage, but only a little.
And cauterize that with another cautery at the junction of the neck and the lower part of the spine. The cautery for the rib cage should be applied according to the previous method.
And then cure that with what was preceded until it is healed.
Chapter 24.
On the cauterization for lung disease and cough.
When cough and lung disease are caused by cold humidity, and the patient does not have fever or consumption, and it is an old lung ailment, then cauterize that with two cauteries over the furcula in the compressed areas of the chest; and with another cautery in the middle location of the foot between two mammary regions; and let the cautery for the rib cage be applied according to the form previously mentioned.
And if you wish, let your cautery puncture in the form of a puncta, the shape of which you precede in the punctation of ear pain.
And make points inside the cells for those; and then cure that with what is applied when it is healed.
And let the cautery having three edges; for the cautery is made in this manner: with one passage you can make three cauterizations according to this form.
Capitol.xxv.
On the cautery for tililic, which is the head of the helper.
When the head of the helper is dislocated due to lubricating humidity and does not return in the hour of its return, you must reduce its dislocation while it is about to naturally return, and then by a small movement, it will be dislocated as it strives to return, as we have testified. First, reduce the dislocation, and then lay the patient on their back or on their side; and lift the chin which is in the inner part of the tililic to the outer parts above the thumbs of your left hand if the joint is dislocated inwardly.
And then heat the cautery having two heads; this is its form:
And then cauterize the chain where it penetrates into the other limb; and the figure of the cautery will come when of two heads the cautery has.
And sometimes it is adjusted according to this count and for what the cautery .8. are.
And then place on the cautery pores covered with salt, and then adhere the patient to bed rest, so that the limb is not swollen for some time until it is comfortable.
And if the dislocation is above and heat is applied there, then cauterize over the muscle with a cautery on the clavicle or with pointed cauteries, so that the joint is confirmed and the humidity is relieved and the patient is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.
Of cautery of the stomach.
When pain in the stomach is caused by moisture and humors that extract from its composition and multiply within it, and if you continue with the methods of cure and they do not bring relief, then you will find that the patient lies on his back, extends his hands and his legs, and then cauterize that area three times: in one cauterization place the foot with the width of a finger with a pointed cautery, and in two cauterizations place on both sides of the cautery so that the figure becomes triangular; and extend those not closely aligned to cause suppuration.
And if the depth of the cautery is the width of two-thirds of the thickness of the cord.
And let the figure of the cautery be as follows: If you wish, cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form; this should be a circular cautery according to this form.
And let the stomach be cauterized with points where the cautery is scared: and you prick the stomach with a point according to the quantity you wish on tent, then cauterize that with the cautery at the points; and cure that with the cure that is performed until it is healed.
Capitol xxvii.
Of the cautery for the sole of the foot.
When pain occurs in the sole of the foot due to coldness or humidity or excessive windiness, which deviates from its normal condition through an excessive outflow, and the malady is not relieved by what we have said, then you should ensure that the sole of the foot is heated over its neck, and test with three cautery applications according to this form and quantity placed on the sole of the foot below the hips, the heat extending to the side of the body.
And the space between each cautery according to the thickness of the finger, and the cautery according to the length of the body straight.
And do not make the cautery too hot.
And if the quantity of what is applied is equal to the size of the quantity of the hotness of the iron, and it is not adjusted; and if the malady standing on the sole of the foot; and if not standing, then lying down, which has extended its parts, lifting its flanks.
And it is possible that you may sear these cauteries with a surgical cautery when your subtlety and prudence in the art are sufficient.
And beware that you do not burn too much in the searing, but adhere to the subtlety of the entire cord so that the whole body is burned and it penetrates into the intestines; for the cord here is subtle; and know this.
Chapter XXVIII.
On the perforation of an abscess in the foot with a cautery.
When there is inflammation or an abscess in the foot and you want to know whether the abscess is in the flesh of the foot or in the skin, then if it is in the flesh of the foot, the patient experiences a severe swelling and acute pain.
And if it is in the skin of the foot, then the pain becomes very acute, often to such an extent that it exhausts even the doctors with its treatment.
Then cover the patient's head with their pillow; and place the spot where the abscess is to be incised; and heat the cautery which is shaped like a blade, the form of which was shown on the previous page. And cautery the area until the entire chain is burned, until it reaches the chipac, until in it there is healthy scab.
And place the cure for the others until the abscess is healed.
And ensure that only those who have studied this in the art of medicine use it. Most of them are aware of the maladies associated with improper use. However, I have observed from experience several times its use in this operation, so I leave this to your discretion, for the better.
Chapter XXIX.
On the cautery for piles.
They said that the ancient cautery for hemorrhoids should be made according to this manner. This is what you should do: take from the branches of aristologia a long piece of wood, which is found there, and let it have the thickness of a finger.
And then immerse it in oil and place it on the fire, and then cauterize with a cautery in that place which is between the continuation of the furcula to the neck; with two small cauteries guide them, one slightly inclined towards the side where the beard starts, and with two cauteries in what is inclined between the fifth rib and the hip bone, inclining slightly towards the rear sides; with another cautery in the middle of the foot; and another on the stomach, and three cauteries at the rear sides; and with one cautery in that place which is between the two shoulders, and with two cauteries from both sides of the foot, placing the cautery where it is between the two shoulders.
And do not hold your hand on the cautery, but rather at the distance of the chain in action.
And some ancients have also said that certain men use a cautery of iron resembling a ray and ignite it, and place it in that place which is between the ribs, until we bring it to the boil and it becomes sound, as we have said about the boil on the flank.
In this puncture, there is no fear of burning, for he will soon recover in the place where the fistula occurs, which does not heal.
Capitol.
Of the cautery of the boil.
When you cure the illness of the boil, as we have said in the division concerning treatment, and do not align your cure, the cautery for it is according to three ways, all of which are rightful. The first way is to make three or four lines according to the length of the boil, following the figure of the cautery iron, the figures of which have preceded.
And the distance between each cautery should be the width of a finger or a little more, and the method of the cautery should be the method we have said for the cautery iron equally.
And do not hold your hand on the cautery; let the patient be over its back.
And another way to cauterize, so that you ignite the cautery having two vertices, which we have said in the chapter of dislocation of the muscle, and lift the chain which is in the middle of the blade the hole through which the juice of the left thigh passes.
And your elevation should be such that you lift the chain according to the length of the body, so that the cautery can be applied according to the breadth of the body.
And then insert the two vertices, ignite them, in the space where you pass the chain from the other side.
And then remove the cautery; and thus he makes four cauteries.
And if you choose, cauterize with the cautery having three vertices.
And then you treat the cautery more when it has been allowed to burn for too many days; this is more conducive than the other preceding causes in the treatment.
Capitol .xxxi.
Of the cautery for dropsy.
Cauterize not for dropsy but for gout properly.
When you treat the dropsy, follow the methods of cure that we have said in the division and do not vary your treatment. Instead, if it is necessary to cauterize for gout, use four cauteries in the circuit of the swelling and one on the stomach, another on the liver, another on the spleen, two between the spinal bones of the back, one on the right side of the foot, and another on the stomach. And the depth of the cautery be similar to the thickness of a finger.
And place the cautery open so that it burns for a long time.
And do not evacuate the patient of fever near the cautery where it is necessary, so that two intentions are added to it, and it will be hastened by supportive healing.
The shape of the cautery with which the abdomen is seared should follow the form as described above, and it is with this that the two olive shapes are seared according to what was previously mentioned regarding their form.
Chapter XXXII.
On the cautery treatment of feet and thighs.
When the feet are swollen and full of yellowish water, you should cauterize the feet on the outer side of the foot between the ankle and the thumb, and raise your hand with the cautery without twisting that area; then lift your hand, and do not return it completely, as the yellowish fluid will drain.
The cautery should be applied as follows: And on each thigh, make two cautery marks, and on each thigh, apply the cautery at the end of the surgical knife's blade. The cautery should be applied along the length of the thigh: and place one end above the middle of the thigh, and the other below the middle; and on each thigh, make two cautery marks.
Leave the wound open for a long time so that any water residue from it can drain.
And then cure the ailments which we have mentioned.
Capitol XXXIII.
On the cautery of the abdomen.
When the abdomen is inflamed due to infiltration by cold and humidity, it is caused by the digestive and retentive virtues, which are located in the stomach and the intestines. This condition is treated according to the methods of treatment and you do not apply any additional remedies. Sometimes the patient suffers from a cauterization of virtue, so cauterize that part with a large cautery on their own stomach as previously described in the cauterization of the stomach. Use the ring cautery and four cauteries in the circuit of the fine fibers, use a subtle clavil cautery; or apply a large aloes cautery, or two cauteries.
And if sometimes the excessive humidity and the patient tolerate it, then cauterize that part on the pentellic membrane and on the intestines, and strengthen the stomach by applying two cauteries near the inguinal region, which is a perfect cure for rejuvenation of which you will not err.
Chapter XXXIV.
On the cautery treatment for ancient hemorrhoids.
When they are in the nature of old hemorrhoids or one of thick humors or corrupted humidity, and are cured as we have said in the division, and you do not perform your own cure, then cauterize three times on the base of the pus spot, leaving a small triangular mark, and with a cautery above the navel down two fingers.
And if you suspect that the stomach is affected and the food has not been digested, and the face appears pale or jaundiced, then cauterize that area on the stomach with a large cautery as previously described; and with one cautery on the navel, and another on the liver with a pointed cautery. Let the cautery remain in place for some time, and cure him only when he is healed.
Chapter XXXV.
On the cautery treatment near the ligation of the artery.
When you incise the thigh, then ignite the cautery that is similar to a spear. Then insert that ignited cautery into the incised thigh, and keep your hand there until the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which the blood flows.
And do this one or two times; if the veins are too many, then cauterize each of them according to how we have counted, and place ointments on those areas until they are healed.
And if you cauterize with a large cautery on some areas, it is more effective for healing.
Capitol.xxxvi.
Of the cauterization of fistulas that occur in the parts around it.
When nature does not comply with the work we have recommended in its place, and the patient is frightened by this, heal it with a cautery.
When there is an old fistula in the nature behind and corrupted by good health and humidity, then what is most worthy to be tried is to use a fine probe, and you know the quantity of its depth with the aforementioned probe.
Then heat the cautery that resembles a ray. Then place the heated cautery in this fistula, according to the quantity in which you insert the probe.
And repeatedly apply the cautery until those corrupted vessels are burned through once or twice or three times, according to the quantity of your necessity.
And guard yourself from burning nerves and veins; or if the fistula goes to the cavity of the bladder or the intestine, then guard yourself from all those areas; and do not do this unless the fistula is in a fleshly location and you perceive that it is not penetrating.
And then cure the area until it is healed.
And if the area is sealed, and the materials are cut from it, and it remains this way for a long time, then you can see that it is completely cured.
And if the materials are not from within, then you can see that it is penetrating or in the peril of the bone decaying, or this comes from one of those causes which will be recalled in its place.
Capitol. xxxvii.
On the cautery of warts.
When warts are painful due to inflammation or excessive moisture, and for this reason the patient's discomfort is reduced, then you should cautery those warts with a cautery over each wart using the claw-shaped cautery as previously recalled.
And firmly cautery it the second time with a slight pause, for three linear cauteries will follow, and thus they will be more effective in healing.
Capitol. xxxviii.
Of the cautery of the bladder.
When there is a debility and softening of the bladder due to cold and humidity, such that the patient retains urine, then cauterize it in its part, placing something over the bladder where the skin of the penis begins, and cauterize with one cautery on the right side and another on the left side.
And the length of each cautery should be according to the size of the toes; cauterize it with one cautery at the lower part of the big toe, or with two cautery points if necessary.
And the cautery should be applied according to how it is needed.
Capitol.xxxix.
Of the cautery of the vagina.
When there is venous congestion in the vagina with cold and humidity, and thus conception is prohibited, and the menstruation is corrupted, and the induction of labor is delayed, and joint pain occurs due to these conditions, then it should be cauterized with three cauteries around the navel circuit, as we have said for the bladder cautery; and a cautery over the lower part of the big toe, or with two cauteries, and the cautery should be pointed.
Capitol.xl.
Of the cautery treatment for dislocation of the ankle.
When mucous humors infiltrate the area of the ankle and cause displacement of its location, a sign of this is that the swelling extends over the other leg when compared between them. And the location of the dislocation is treated with the affected foot.
Then, make a circular incision on the foot around the ankle with the cautery, as you will have marked with a point along the circumference of the area as it is turned, so that the area falls in the middle of the circle.
And the form of the cautery as described above is used in the treatment of the stomach.
And if this cautery is not present, then use three large olive枝繁叶茂的 cautery instead.
And make the cautery according to the intensity of the pain in the entire limb; and then cure that which remains until it is healed.
Capitol forty.
Of the cautery for the sciatic vein.
When pain occurs in the sciatic nerve and its cause is cold and humidity, the patient is treated with what we have said and you do not mix it, and this is ancient practice. Then apply a cautery to the area where you sense the presence of large humors through pills made from rotten substances or artificial ones resembling them.
The method of the cautery in this case is according to two methods: either a cautery with burning medicines, or a cautery with fire.
Sir according to two scientific methods, of which one is to make three triangular cauteries over the broad part of the leg in this form; and do so with good depth. And let the space between each cautery be the width of one finger, whether the cautery is small or large.
More often, apply the cautery in the middle of each location on the back of the thigh, as there are four cauteries.
And if you wish, cauterize around the circle where the form precedes in the cauterization of the dislocation of the ankle, which should be a circle that burns the sensitivity of the entire tendon.
And this is the way to cauterize for the ankle when pain is localized to the ankle and not extended down the leg.
But if it is extended down the leg, then cauterize there with two cauteries on the thigh over the area where you will push the ankle that causes the pain; and with one cauterization on the heel, a little should be applied to the fibrous part.
And for the surgical cauterization, the depth of the cauterization should be according to the sensitivity of the tendon.
And if you push the ankle where the pain is extended near the base of the toes, then cauterize there with three or four points, or more if needed.
And if you push the ankle and find pain in the heel of the foot, then cauterize there with a surgical cautery.
Guard yourself in all cautery that you do not end with the cautery to such extent as to burn nerves or great artery, and that by this you are over the patient harmfully or constriction.
And I have seen others who cauterize on the sole and end in the cautery, and the bed is inflated where the tumor reached the foot, and fire perforates and corrupts all the flesh. And then follow a strong convulsion of the belly, and then death follows.
And if the pain is in two parts, cauterize each separately according to this manner.
And the wise will say about the cautery in the cautery of water, which is done in this manner: make it resemble a circle of iron, the diameter of which is the width of one palm; and its holes should be according to the size of an finger bone or at most a little less.
And inside that circle, there is another third; and the space between them is the quantity of a thumb's width; and those circles are opened in two parts; and the length of those gaps is one thumb or two thumbs, and make on those iron edges decently fitted into the circles; this is the form of it.
It is heated in the fire until it turns red and sparks, then placed on the part of the water, the patient lying on the mat. And then cauterize it with three round cautery marks in one go.
And then leave it for three days; then apply a plaster with broth and leave the wound open for many days; and cure it by anointing it until it is healed.
Albucasis says: Son, my children, we have used this type of cautery seldom because of the fear of its appearance, and due to what few of us have found regarding it.
More than those who suffer from good cautery, he finds it in the place where it is applied.
More effective in medicines that adhere are those that you make two circles having a perforated frame through which the smoke from the iron door passes; let the length of the walls where they are placed be such that they span two or three lengths.
And if the space which is between each of the quantity of the swelling of the digit; and be opened both below and above, and should contain themselves among them according to this form:
And then place your hand on the side of the ankle where the patient feels pain, and hold your hand on the side of the water; and then take hot water and pour it between two circles, and let the quality of that be with a small fire gradually, and have that for the quantity of one hour, and allow the gout the biting and attachment of it — for that atrophy bites like fire — until the biting ceases.
And then raise your hand with the instrument and remove the hot water from all around the ankle with cold water.
And then let it be for three days and place your hand on that border until the blackness of the attachment subsides, and let this be for some days, after which the inflammation will diminish; this is the method in youth.
And then cure it by applying ointment until it is healed.
And if the pain is extended to the thigh or hip, apply a pad containing water according to how it is done in the water.
And this is the way to apply water cauterization, and I have already written that in the treatise on the rectification of medicines. Recipe for alkaline solution and for the extinguished caustic, one part of each, three parts of water, and place them in a new vessel in which one part is perforated with a small hole, according to the quantity that enters it.
Place the bottom of another vessel upside down over the alkaline and live caustic in water, let it absorb those until you can grasp them with your hand for good compression, and then allow the drop of the sharp water to fall from the part perforated into the inverted vessel.
Then adjust all that water, and pour the live caustic and renewed alkali over it; for then it will be of strong acidity, which is administered in most operations of medicine and in the cautery of other limbs, for the operation makes fire.
And some of the medicines, which are cauterized widely, such as terebinth and mel anacrat, it is tried that they be mixed.
And Gualia recounts of an ancient man's operation and cure for water pain and sciatic vein pain, magnifying the great feat of that one, and says that no other treatment was necessary, and he was cured in one session as recommended, for he immersed himself in warm baths and exercises, as already said of him.
And it should be placed near a vervain herb, and if no vervain is available, a fig recent should be used; it should be dried for a little with gray ashes and placed on the water in which there is pain, or on the thigh, or on the chest, and it should be applied.
And it should be left for the quantity of three hours or for the amount that the patient endures the application.
And then place it in warm water, and when the patient's body is relaxed, insert it into the soil, for the pain ceases and the patient is cured.
And be aware that none of these medicines are used with a cautery except perhaps near the body's evacuation.
And now Escorides say that when making a cut in the tendinous vein it is cauterized, it will heal better; and let the cautery be used in this manner: take wool and soak it in old oil, and place it between the toes of the foot and on the calcaneus.
And then take a dry cut of goat skin and immerse it in fire to make it char; and place it over the wool and let it be dried out. And then repeat this, and continue doing this until the glow from the bite penetrates into the water and stops the pain.
And this way of using the cautery is called the cautery of cows.
Chapter 42.
On the cauterization of pain in the toes.
Sometimes pain in the two legs is caused by multiple reasons, such as inflammation or puncture or excessive evacuation, and other causes similar to those, through the infiltration of wet material.
And the cautery is not used for cutting, but only in this single instance where it is applied due to the infiltration of wet material.
Therefore, open the space, then perform evacuation of the malaise with pills that resemble them, which are applied over each leg where the pain is three lines according to its width. Then mark any line five times with a cautery or more, according to the quantity that comes from the tolerance of the patient and the virtue of the leg.
And perform the cautery with a pointed cautery.
And if you want, cauterize with three or four cauteries using a medialawl cautery in this manner:
Capitol. xliii.
On the cautery from the beginning of gilbositat.
When observing this illness in small children; and the sign of the beginning of it in children is that they have accidents regarding their structure at night, during sleep, elevation, and movement.
You find in the lower vertebra of the back and those nearby that it is beginning to overmount the other vertebra.
And when you see this and want to prohibit it, then cauterize that with a cautery shaped as a circle according to this form: let the cautery cover all parts of the vertebra equally.
And if you want, cauterize around the vertebra with a pointed cautery two or three lines wide. And let the points be close to each other.
And then cure the area until it is healed as we have said.
More importantly, ensure that the cautery is not applied in inflammation caused by nerve spasm.
Chapter XLIV.
On the cautery treatment for gout and joint pain.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
And therefore, since gout caused by cold is cured through a method of treatment and not alleviated by remedies, it is often treated with cautery.
And you cauterize the area near the foot joint with a cautery to facilitate the evacuation in that region.
And the olive-shaped cautery, of which this is its form:
And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. And if the pains ascend into the toes or other joints, and you observe this, then cauterize that area on each toe with three or four cautery marks using this olive-shaped cautery.
And if you need to use cautery irons for these cauteries, then cauterize that area and do not press your hand too closely against the cautery before, only around the size of the cone.
And if the pains penetrate to the groin and thigh, then apply the cautery which we have mentioned in our chapter.
And if the pains are only in the bladder and is called dysuria, then puncture along the course of the nerves as it twists, puncturing in those two lines.
And if the pains remain in the fingers, then puncture along the course of the nerves on each finger and over the back of the hand.
And if the pains remain for several days in the elbows or muscles, then cauterize the areas around all parts of the arms.
And if you do not evacuate the bladder properly and with the reception of medicines, then even if good regimen and flame are applied, this cauterization will be in vain, God willing.
Chapter XLV.
Of cautery for ruptures.
When there is a rupture in the groin and intestines, with the intestine visible through the skin at the groin, when this begins to appear, then as you command the patient to fast on that day and use gentle remedies so that the wound of his abdomen may close.
And then place the patient between your thighs over his abdomen, and command him to keep his head between them until the swelling goes down or the skin or intestine becomes visible.
And then return that pad to its place, and test the rupture over the bone of the thigh, marking the extremity of which appears similar in diameter to the upper parts of the body.
And then heat the cautery of which this is the form:
until it is hot and glows with sparks. Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent it from coming out.
You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
Then place the cautery over that mark on your hand where the cautery is straight, and put it there so that you can reach the bone of the shin in the middle of the thigh; and repeat with another pass if you have not reached the bone in the first pass.
Observe wisely the condition of the hernia during your cautery, that you do not burn the hernia so that it does not come to the patient's death or any other great harm.
Be mindful that when you use the cautery, do not touch the bone, as it could compromise your operation.
Ensure that the cautery for children is fine according to their size and measurement.
And take care of the place of the cautery for three days among other treatments until the scar from the fire is healed.
And take care of it along with other ointments until it is healed.
And the patient remain on their back for 10 days until the place and wound are sealed.
And ensure that the nutrition is withheld according to the length of the healing time of the wound which closes his abdomen, and that the intestine does not come out with the effort to heal.
And when it is time to lift the wound after 10 days, properly administer healing ointment, and keep it for another 10 days.
And the patient should reduce work and replenish food and drink, and use strong voices, for when following this regimen of healing entirely, he will recover.
And I will describe the healing of ruptures in other parts of the abdomen. At the beginning, if they do not tear further, then cauterize the rupture with a round cautery according to its size; and what is drawn from the thigh should be done similarly to the tender part of it. Then take care of that place as we have said, and it is not adjusted.
And some have said that a rupture should be seared with a triangular cautery according to this form, rather than with forceps.
And a line is placed there for the width in the cuts above the rupture, and another line on top; then place your hand with a cruciate cautery, but the first cautery is lighter and better.
Capitol XLVI.
Of the cautery treatment for a tornio (likely a surgical term or condition).
When pain persists in certain members due to closure or percussion and does not respond to medical treatment over a long period, then you should sear it with a pointed cautery.
And the cautery should be applied to the entire member according to its size and smallness, its virtue and depth, and the location of the tornio and pain.
So if it is healed by the first cautery, that is good; but if not, then repeat the cautery on it; for customarily, those pains are pierced in a member near the one where they occur, so that you may achieve the desired effect by the cautery while the patient is healed.
Chapter XLVII.
Of the cautery treatment for leprosy.
Lepers are sometimes treated with a large cautery for a long time, especially when the species of leprosy is caused by the putrefaction of flame and melancholy.
And so, if you want to cautery treat that area, consider whether the leprosy is common and similar to one we have cured as described in the division, neither of which it is. Be wary of the patient's condition where corruption might encompass his entire body and all its complexities; therefore, cautery the affected area on the head with five cauteries: one in the middle of the head, leaving space between them, and ending at the forehead by the hairline; two over the horns; and one behind, on the neck or servant (muscle).
And finish your hand with a cautery slightly inside where it leaves a small impression in the cheek, so that the expulsion of thick vapors is alleviated. Cauterize over the cheek as needed.
And if leprosy is already spread over the thigh and manifestly apparent, then you cauterize that area as well as those cauterizations which we said in the head; on the extremity of the nose, and on two cauterizations on both eyebrows, and on two cauterizations on two vertebrae of the neck, and on six cauterizations on the vertebrae of the back, and a large one near the knee, one on the kneecap, and two on the ankles, one on each ankle, and two on the heels, one on each heel, and two on the knees, and two on the muscles, and two on the tendons of his foot; cauterize that on all joints of the fingers of the hand and of the feet, and on each heel of his feet, and on the bones of his legs.
And guard the nerves which are over the heel that you do not burn those.
And sometimes cauterization is done with one cauterization on the bone of the pelvis and another on the entrance to the stomach, and another on the liver.
And know that the more tightly you adjust the cautery, the more beneficial and effective it is; and know that the patient does not feel pain in the cautery as they do elsewhere, since the patient's body is already numbed.
And know that the cautery should be large or small according to the limb and joints as indicated by the specifications of the instruments.
And then cure the cautery with a mixture of burned flour and honey, as well as other treatments until it is healed.
Capitol. liv.
On the cautery for numbing.
When a limb is numbed or asleep and treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, and does not heal, then cauterize that numb limb with cautery according to the size of the limb or its smallness.
And let your cautery penetrate the depth of the wound a little. And then cure that which is ointed until it is healed.
And in some cases, a cautery is applied to certain stumps which affect the thighs and the feet, and the spine of the two, and examines the condition of the nerves which run through that member, and revivifies the stump.
But do not presume upon this, but only those who are skilled in the anatomy of the members and the exit of the nerves throughout the moving body.
Capitol. xlix.
On the cautery treatment for swellings that become morula.
When swellings are old and do not respond to any of the medical ointments, then cauterize over that area with a cautery, using a small amount according to the quantity of the powder, until the whiteness and color of the swelling are revived, and its color is changed.
And then cure that which is treated with flour of alum and lentils in rubbed oil and leaves of rosemary, or with the fat of dove or the fat of goat, from each take a part, all be mixed, and then apply a cloth over the area until it is healed.
Capitol I.
Of cautery for the knee.
When cancer begins and you want to stop it, then cautery the area with a circular cautery along the circumference as it is rotated.
And the wise will say that it should be cauteryed with the last cautery in the middle place; but I do not see this, for I fear it is ulcerated, and I have seen this several times.
And it is better to cautery the area along its circumference in a circular manner as we have said, or with several cauteries.
Capitol II.
Of cautery for adenitis.
When some adenitis is delayed in maturation, this is either due to excess causing it, or due to the patient's condition, as they are old and decrepit, have few veins, or due to time. If you want to hasten the maturation of adenitis; then cautery the area along its circumference with several small puncturing cauteries; and leave that which will mature on its own.
And if you want to perforate it with a cautery, then heat the cautery of which this is the form: and place that in the middle of the inflamed area where the probe will penetrate.
And if you place the cautery in that location, let it be, so that the limb will be relieved; and then cure that which is to be healed.
Chapter II.
On the cautery for corroding.
Corroding is a gradual corruption in the limb, which corrodes it as fire consumes dry wood.
Therefore, if you find the corroding in a location where you intend to apply a cautery with fire, then heat the cautery with several small and large coals as appropriate for that location where the corrosion occurs.
And then cautery that completely, as you eradicate all the corrosion and do not leave any cause of it.
And after that let it be for three days, and place a hot cloth over the cauterized areas until all the scabs have fallen off and all the corruption is gone.
And then cure that with ointment generating flesh.
But if after three days the flesh grows healthy in the area where there is no corruption, that is good; but if not, then iterate the cautery over what is raw in the corrupted areas.
And after medicating with some sharp medicines several times, use half of it in place of the cautery. But however, a cautery with fire is beneficial for superficial wounds.
And I have already described the treatment with sharp medicine in the division, so use it when you need it.
Chapter III.lix.
On the cautery for ulcers and similar conditions.
Small stones found in the foot of the sick person that are called clau, and this is a large cause, entered, which affects the foot; in those cases, two types of cautery are used, one with fire and one with water-based cautery.
The cautery with fire is when you heat the concave cauterizing tool resembling a pen tip, which is made of iron according to the quantity it should contain the stone from all parts, and it should have thin edges.
Then place the ignited cautery on the stone, and quickly move your hand with the cautery in a circle around the stone until the cautery reaches the depth of the stone. And let it be for three days until it begins to scab. Then apply a poultice to it using wild thyme boiled in salt water, and leave the poultice on for one night until the stone is fully expelled.
Then treat the area with a cream of generative flesh until it heals.
If so non-convertible, and many blisters occur on the surface of the body, especially in the thighs and feet, then when you administer cauterization with water, take a ring of elm or iron or penknife, place it over the nail; then put in the ring of water a small quantity, hold your hand, and you rotate that with compression of your hand from all sides, and press the edge of the ring against the root of the nail, and you will find the water seep through the perforation of the nail; wait for the patient a little by the bite of the seeping water for an hour, then remove it, because the nail will have its roots eroded.
And do the same to them and nearby where you come over all of which they have in their body.
And then cure those boils where the roots of the nails have been eradicated by applying ointments where the flesh becomes inflamed.
Capitol. liiii.
Of cautery for trembling.
When there is a tremor due to irritation of the nerves or fever as a cause, or for another similar reason, then you should cautery it with four or five cauteries on the spine, placing one cautery between each vertebra; and one cautery on the feet, and over the stomach, place an olive cautery.
And the tremor subsides, and the health of the illness improves.
Capitol. Lv.
Of cautery for white accidents in the body.
When in the body white boils are spilt, and sores or fissures are made by materials grossly corrupted; then at the beginning as they appear, they should be cauteryed over the entire length of the fistula with a fine cautery using a sprig of myrtle, the end of which is extended over the fire; or with an iron rod from eristologia longua; or with a lancet-shaped cautery.
And sometimes a cautery is applied additionally at the beginning of its expulsion according to this manner; and they are not creased, and when the excess is ruptured, it makes them and heals them.
Moreover, I prefer that this be done near the beginning of the evacuation by phlebotomy.
Capitol lvi.
Of the cautery for flux of blood from an injury by arterial incision.
Many times, there is flux of blood from an artery that is incised either at the wound site, or at the incision for an abscess or cautery on the member, and then it seems difficult to stop that.
Then, when such a case occurs, hold your hand firmly over the opening of the artery, and place it there until the bleeding has stopped, and let go, and do not allow it to recur.
Then, over the fire, apply small and large olive cauteries, several times, and blow on them until they are ignited.
And then take a small or large one according to the place and wound where the artery is broken, over that vein forcefully press after you have already cauterized as I said, and keep the cautery between so that it narrows and restrains the bleeding.
And if the blood is expelled from the orifice of the artery when you press as I said and tighten the cautery, then take another cautery freshly from among those in the fire that are prepared, and continue to do this one after another so that the bleeding is restricted.
And make sure you do not burn the nerves here, or bring about another illness on the patient.
And know that when blood flows from the artery, it is not possible to restrict the bleeding with a cautery, especially when the artery is large, unless one of four methods is used: either with a cautery as we have said, or with extraction when it is not extracted, or when it is extracted the ends of it are cauterized and the bleeding is restricted, or with ligature with pitch or with hay for strong constriction, or with bandages over medicines from which the virtue is to restrict the bleeding; and they should be tight with a pulvinar and proper constriction.
May he who administers relief decently to him with the knife and with stricture of cloths or by position of causes burning and similar, not compare so much.
May it happen to some and not be the doctor present or medicine, then open carefully with your finger the indicated part over the holes of that vein as we have said, and understand at the large constriction within which the scar has remained from the upper part of the wound, and above the archery the said do not be tampered; and above the archery let water fomentation of very cold friction be applied while the flesh is congealed and swelled; and may he cauterize or use medicine if necessary.
Of incision and puncture and vents and of venesection and of wounds and their appearances.
We have already said in the first chapter all illness in which cauterization with fire is convenient and medicine burning, and the occasions and causes of it, and the instruments necessary for those cautery forms; and I have ordered the chapters from the upper part of the head to the feet.
And you shall proceed in this chapter in that manner, so that the one seeking this may be relieved of what he has requested.
And before you begin this, listen, sons, that in this chapter we treat of the fear that is in the first chapter on cautery.
And therefore, listen carefully, for in the operation which is in this chapter, you must be wary of various evacuations which can lead to danger, where life is at stake; you should apply the sprinkling of the vein or incision on the abscess or puncture or excision or cleansing of the wound or extraction of an arrow or incision of the boil and their like. And for all of these, there is accompanying fear and trembling, and in the greater part of them, death.
And I warn you that this should not fall upon you in the position where there is a vacancy, for at times vacancies can lead to your mishandling of patients due to lack of experience. And from them some you will take to his illness and if it is light you let him die, and this because of the vehemence of what he finds of his illness, and for the length of the illness, and in the illness is fear which means death.
And of those who give to you their account and testimony, you expecting from that health, and his illness is harmful.
And therefore do not consent to him who comes to you of whom this manner is; and your caution be greater than covetousness and your greediness; and do not presume any cause upon that but rather certain science which verifies what you must do, and to which by succession glorious success shall come.
And use in the cure of all your patients according to their prognosis and indication of them to which health is converted, for in that you have assistance in the acquisition of fame and memory, glory and honor.
O, children, God inspires his understanding in you and does not deprive you of direction and protection, for that is in His hand.
And I have also established this chapter distinguishing it into chapters according to what was preceded in the chapter of cauteries, concerning the treatment from the head to the feet, so that you may be aided by what you ask for and about which you have need.
First chapter.
Of the treatment of water that is contained in the head of the child.
Know that this illness often appears in children during birth and when the mother strengthens the child's head during nursing.
And sometimes it appears for hidden causes which are not known.
But I have only seen this illness in children; and for all those whom I have seen it afflicts, death often follows, and thus it has been left to me to work on them.
And I have seen that a child's head was full of water, and his head remained constantly swollen until it could no longer bear its own weight due to the size of his head, and more importantly, the moisture increased to such an extent that it led to death.
And this moisture or is added between the tendons and the bone, or is placed on the bone over the flesh.
And if the operation in that case where the moisture is between the tendon and the bone and the abscess is small, you should make a slit in the middle of the place about the width of two fingers so that the moisture can drain, and this is the form of the spatium:
And if the moisture is much increased and the abscess is larger, then here make two slits in this manner:
And if the moisture is on the bone, the sign of this is that you see the edges of the tendon widely separated and the water oozes out when you press it with your hand inside, but this is not what you are looking for. And if the moisture is between the tendon and the bone, you should make three slits in the middle of the place in this manner:
And draw out the incision completely to drain all the moisture; tightly close the slits with bandages and quilts; on the fifth day, pour oil over it and apply a mixture of water and oil; later remove the bandage and treat the wound with bandages and ointments, and strengthen the tendon with equal parts; let the patient eat dry food with little moisture until the limb is comfortable and healed.
And another method of incision, which consider as great the magnitude of the abscess and the collection of the water, for in some passages it is more in the occiput, or in the front part, or on the right, or on the left; and therefore attend to the incision where the abscess and the filling with water appear, and do so according to what seems best to you.
And observe that you do not incise the artery and strive for flows of blood and delay the patient's recovery through this flow of blood by evacuating humidity.
Chapter II.
When one encounters a catharsis or wound in the heel or foot, this is an ancient practice, and you should not rely on the treatment of medicines for it; rather, the ultimate cure in this case is the incision of those two arteries.
And when you want to incise those where the evil humor carries its head, then rub the area with rough cloth so that the arteries appear, and tightly wrap the neck of the evil humor with some cloth; and consider where the pulse is in the vein; and the places over which these are close to the auricles pressing on them, and they are hidden from view in some people.
And then press on the artery with your hand, and incise each one with a sharp spatium entering into the mouth, and do this for the width of the head.
And if you want, insert the spatium leaving the artery and transect it at the incisions on the parts above.
And let the length of the incision be about two digits wide, for when a vein is incised, the wound is closed at the pulsating exit, which leaps forth frequently.
And if the artery does not appear at the incision, then measure from the auricle the quantity of the space of three digits, and press with your hand, and do this into the mouth.
And that which flows from the wound is a quantity of blood one pint, and more or less it throws out, and all this is according to the quantity which appears from the virtue of the malady and from the filling of the artery of him.
And then consider the wound, and thus if any cause of scab remains on the bone, cut this away so that no abscess forms.
And then strengthen the wound with feathers and pieces of cloth, and then cure that with ointments until it heals.
Chapter III.
On the extraction of arteries which are in the temples.
When an old or acute migraine occurs due to dampness and the quality of the vessels in the temples, or is very severe and resembles those, and is treated according to the methods of medical cure, if this does not bring relief, then we have resorted to the extraction of arteries in the temples, or cauterization of those as we have shown.
And the manner of the operation and extraction is that you raise the skins which are on the temples; and understand the apparent artery in the temple where it is shown to you by your own pulse, and is hidden in only a few men through the strength of cold.
And if it is hidden to you, then hold the neck of the patient tightly with some cloth; and then rub the area with a rough cloth or evaporate the place with water until the artery becomes clearly visible to you. And then you take the spatum of which this is the form: And then you incise the skin with it until you reach the artery; and then insert a probe into it and extract that part above until you remove it from the skin and uncover those of the tunics which you leave there, from all parts.
But if the artery is fine, then wrap it with the tip of the scalpel, and then incise a part of it according to the quantity for which the ends of it are long and contracted, and thus will not allow the flux of blood; for if not incised, it will not rise up.
And then evacuate from the vein one. into three.
And if the artery is large, then you should divide it into two locations with a needle doubled strongly at each or with threads long, and do not cut into it before the consolidation of the wound and ensure a flow of blood.
And then incise the superfluity which is between two sutures; and do this at that time or nearby another time.
And if you want, cauterize it with a cautery on the bone and with a surgical cautery where the sutures are made, and it will serve in place of that metal work.
And it is better work if the patient has fever or is of febrile composition; for the cautery is among those causes that help with final humors, and therefore it is better in treatment.
And you should then perform the extraction of the arteries that you place in the correct location, and let them dry over fine powder properly made, and afterwards heal it with dry medicines so that flesh arises and in time it is healed.
And if while working another time you encounter flow of blood from the artery, then you should constrict that blood, or with a cautery, or what you fill the place with cloth, and strengthen your hand within so that the blood is restrained. And if for any of those reasons it is not at your presence, then place your hand over the area until the bleeding is constricted, and pour cold water on the area until the inflammation subsides, and strengthen according to what is needed.
And for the lighter case in extracting from an artery, you should cauteryize the vein with this cautery having two knives, after you have marked the two areas with probes, and place hot pincers between them until they reach the bone and cut the vein into two parts, so that what is between the extremities of the vein can be elongated, which are not completely cauterized by this cautery.
And this is the form of the cautery:
And the sharpness of the two knives is essential. But if the acute pain is such that two knives are better, for if sharp like two knives it approaches each part quickly, and you do not cut the flesh too swiftly.
Then, when there is some swelling, hold the heat from the fire in those areas and the flesh is cut slightly.
And this work is better in all works and more slight.
And let the space which is between two knives be the quantity of the swelling of the digit.
Capitol quart.
Of the cure for bodies affected by acute and acidic tears in the eyes.
When the tears are acidic, and the body is affected by those veins which run over the top of the head, and you find no cause for the cure in medicine, and sometimes the face of the patient turns red and feels a crawling sensation on their forehead as if it were being traversed by ants, and the eyes become weak, moistened, and seem to be known, with the eyelids scalded by the acuteness of the tears, they should use antiseptic remedies in the cure of those for this operation, and name that cure "spassa.
And you command the patient to stretch the skin on his forehead, and then incise the forehead with three equal distances according to the length of the forehead. And if the length of the incision is two digits: the first incision should be equally distant from the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second according to the length of a small movement of the tears which are in the lacrimal area, and the third on another part.
And beware of the beginning of the arteries which are in two branches, and keep your hand away from the continuation of both jaws. And if the space of each incision the quantity of three digits adjusted.
And if you have a piece of sponge prepared or dry cloth, place them where the bleeding stops.
And then insert the point of two sharp extremities, of which this is the form of the incision: that is from the temple part into the second incision. Excise all the tissue that is between two incisions near the cavity which is above the bone, and then do this with the middle incision into the second incision. Then incise this space and insert it into the first incision another time with another instrument which is called a scalpel, sharp on one side and blunt on the other.
Then place the blade of the sharp side against the adjacent flesh, cut the tissue inside the bone, and insert it so that it reaches the middle fissure, and cut all the vessels that descend from the head to the feet.
More than that, continue the incision to where the tissue appears, and then do this in the middle fissure between the other fissures.
And when the bleeding has stopped in equal quantity, squeeze the areas of the ankle joints where the blood has pooled.
And then place your hand on any gouty fissure of the old foot, and place over those powders mixed in wine and oil and vinegar, and make sure that no abscess forms.
On the seventh day after ligature and administer a large infusion of horse chestnut water, and then cure what is treated with an ointment of basilicum in olive oil and others until the wounds are healed.
Chapter V.
Of the cure of tears through purgation and those phlegm drops descending from within the head.
When there is an acute purgation continuing, and the gouty drops from the foot are small and weakened, and their appearance shows debilitation, and the eyelids are ulcerated and of this condition the skin, in the front of the head there is sharp pain and subsequent swelling, then you can see from these accidents that the materials and purgation do not come from venous motas within the parts.
And the best cure in these cases is this: you command the patient to rub his forehead, and then incise a small slit right through the middle of the forehead, about the width (and start from the left temple between the right temple; and let the incision go into the bone; and extend your hand from the ridges of the temples which are very painful, you should saw through), until the bone is exposed.
Dry all the blood with sponge or dry cloth and then insert between the two edges of the wound a piece of cloth or sponge. Strengthen on top with powders mixed in wine and oil so that no abscess forms.
And when you lift it and see that the abscess has already diminished, then rub the bone inside where the new flesh begins to form, and then cure that with an exsiccative regimen which makes the flesh mature, as if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of resin and mix them, and from them make a plaster and administer it to these wounds of the flesh's origin.
Capitol. vi.
For the cure of what attacks the ears.
All cause that attacks the ears is of four species: either it is mineral stone or a cause similar to stone, such as iron and vein, or it is from plant, such as mustard or bean, or it is a fluxible cause, such as water and wine and their like, or some beast.
And when a black cat jumps into the ear or another cause similar to those causes that do not fit or press in the ear, and you pause the ear to the sun, and if you touch the black cat, then it distills in that certain cause of violet oil or sesame, then return the extraction of it, and make him sneeze with a condiment, and plug his nostrils to prevent sneezing. And place some pieces of cloth or wool in the circuit of the ear, and extend the ear to the parts above, where motas (small particles) are usually expelled by these causes.
And if it is not expelled, then perform the extraction of it with the instrument called gesti epicicarios subtil, of which this is the form:
And if it is expelled by the gesti, well done; but if not, then perform the extraction of it with the fine, doubly curved hook.
And if it is not expelled by this, then make a cannula of wire and insert the end of the cannula into the tract of the ear and close around the cannula with wax and with oil softened so that it is not too large but only the cannula. And then extract the bile with strong suction, for too many passages like what we have recounted.
And if it is not extracted in this manner, then take some alum or vinegar-soaked cloth, upon which the breasts are placed a quantity, place that at the extremity of the ray, and then wrap around that area properly. And then insert that into the canal of the ear with ease, and then dry the ear of its moisture.
And if it is not extracted by all the causes we have recounted, then you should operate to excise that which intends to become an abscess or spasm.
And the way to excise it is that you begin by incising the malate of the phasic vein and extract the blood according to the manner of its virtue, then make a crescent between your fingers and convert the ear to parts above, and make a small fissure in the ridge of the ear, place its greys in the well-padded area. And let the fissure of lunar figure reach to the heel, and, if the heel is blackened, obstruct it if possible with appropriate instruments; then immediately apply speed in that hour, and cure it while it is sound.
And if the cause settles in the ear is one of those oils that clog and are inflamed, then administer the treatment and extraction of it; but if it does not respond to your application, then take thin subtle spatum according to this form: And administer the extraction of that oil which is settled in the ear.
And do not do this when you think that it is already moistened by the vapor of the ear, and place it on fine wicks, and then extract it in those areas near the cartilages or with subtle gestures, as we have said before, for it facilitates the extraction.
But in the water which has entered into the ear canal that the patient uses to sneeze with a cold, fill it with some old rag, and pour this water over the ear in which the water is, and if by this it is forced out, well; but if not, then take threads of blue or lion's wool according to the length of the finger, and boil those in the fire for a little while, and have the patient insert one of those into the traucheal part of his ear and shake over a part of that mixture and strike it with another stone on the stone which is inside the ear. Do not stop applying the perry until all the water has been expelled.
Do not stop applying the perry until all the water has been expelled. And once the water has been completely expelled, try taking a piece of paper or cotton, and put one end in the ear and extend the other end into the fire until the cotton is burned.
And place another piece of cotton and do this several times until all the water has been completely expelled, then squeeze out the excess with a cannula as previously described.
More in the extraction of a small foreign body entering that ear, carefully and gently treat it as we have said in the division. But if it is a larger object causing immediate pain, then perform the extraction quickly and decisively, as the cause is less severe compared to other causes that may occur in the ear.
For the extraction of a worm in the ear, when you treat it as we have said in the division and in the treatise on distillations, and if your treatment does not seem to be effective, then carefully examine the ear in the sunlight.
And so if any cause of worms appears here, then extract that with forceps or fine tweezers, but if no cause appears, then take a cannula and stretch it open, this is its form: And insert the fine extremity into the ear according to the quantity that the patient can bear; and then suck it with strong suction, doing this several times until all the worms are extracted.
But if your attempt does not succeed, then plug and close the circuit of the cannula with wax as we have said; then administer distillations which have already proven effective in the treatment of worms, and you will find this in the treatise on distillations.
And let your application be with that which you pour medicinal oils into the ear with this instrument, whose form is as follows: And make it of silver or copper, stretched out, in which there is a small hole, and a flat surface above.
And so it should be done in order to have it in the cavity of the catheter here where it will be necessary. And if you wish, take the wick and wrap it properly around its end, then place oil in the cavity of the ear, or the juice of some herb, or any medicine you want from these—those are in the auricle—and insert the wick carefully above, pressing it with your hand so that the oil is expelled into the cavity of the ear and the illness feels the oil inside.
And what is infused in the ear should already be heated over fire for a little while. And make sure that the medicine you will distill in the ear is not too hot, for ear medicines cannot withstand this.
Chapter VII.
On the Treatment of Ear Abscesses.
Sometimes children inherit the cavities of their parents' non-perforated ears, and this happens in some adults as well, with an abscess in the meat of the ear due to a wound or without any apparent cause; sometimes this abscess forms in the preauricular region which does not show external signs, and sometimes it occurs in the outer parts.
And that which occurs in the region of the loins, which does not present a visible wound, is in the major dispositions of difficult recovery.
And in that where you can see the wound, make sure that you place the patient in the sun and look at it. And if you see an apparent abscess, open that with a thin lancet from which this is the form:
If the extremity of the lancet where the width is small, and one part is acute while the other is not; and the lancet has two points to prevent it from lodging in the ear.
And if the abscess is in hidden flesh in the ear or in the meat of the ear, then use thin lancets and incise that area forcefully until all the flesh is exposed.
And if the abscess is in the region of the ear, then take a thin pointed lancet and heat that iron a little in fire, and place it in the flesh of the ear.
And so, if you sense an abundance of that which the patient suffers due to difficulty in urination, increase the pressure on it by means of urination; and be careful not to injure the nerves of the ear.
And then place the cloth over the ear according to the amount of swelling you have wrapped in the Egyptian ointment; and do this for several days until you are sure of the healing of the wound; or that you insert some and press it into water and powder it over the dry trissar, using it; and if you see the ear already perforated, then remove the pus and replace it with another liquid which you wrap in a cloth made of linseed oil, until the abscess is drained; and cure it as it heals.
But if a bloody flux occurs, then submerge the sponge or cloth in fresh water, wring it out, and place it over the ear, and use the other treatment which constricts the flow of blood, which is called in the treatise on distillation.
Chapter VIII.
For the care of swelling which occurs in the eyelids.
Swelling of the eyelids which sometimes become moist, at other times dry.
Then take those that have been heated or boiled, and incise them over the swelling of their eyelids, and place your hand over the areas just applied.
But if there is pain with a flow of warm blood, then cauterize those points with a thin cautery.
And the best cautery is over the incisions, and the wounds heal when there remains any cause of their swelling; and when they are cauterized with fire, those swellings are burned and do not return.
Chapter IX.
Care for great swelling in the eyelids.
Swelling in the eyelids of the eye sometimes occurs due to some cause which is similar in its strength and hardness, and for this reason it is called great swelling.
And it is an addition of thick humidity in the eyelid above and below.
And the operation in them is that you consider whether the enlargement is present in it where appears from the eyelid and is palpable at all parts; and the cause of it is slight.
And make a incision there for its width, and then probe it from all parts with ease as you evacuate, and suspend it by an ounce and cut it off.
And if the figure is large, then you adjust it with sutures; and care for it until it is healed.
And if it is small, you will not suffer harm from it because the ointment of it restores and heals it.
And if the enlargement is decreasing in the parts inside the eyelid, you adjust the inner surface, then evacuate the eyelid and suspend the enlargement by an ounce, or another you choose for incision, and press it from all parts. If the eyelid is stretched by incision, this is noted in no cause.
And at the beginning, wash the area with salted water; and dress the place with a dressing until it is healed.
Capitol.
For the cure of excision in the upper eyelid.
Excision is caused by gray matter that is generated in the tunic of the upper eyelid, and most frequently affects children, aggravates their ailments, and may lead to their death; and they cannot look at the clarity of the sun because this causes tears to flow into those areas.
And for this, they often cry on their own faces all the time, and on their faces they sleep; only above their left eyelids are their eyebrows wet, which already cover inflammation, and the imminent appearance of excision is in the eye; and when you press the area with your thumbs, you can feel excision among those.
And some method of operation is in that the patient rests his head on your hand, and then you place a cloth around him and her, making a girdle according to the quantity it contains of arthnach from all parts, and then place it over that and press with your thumbs all around so that excision is aggregated in the middle of the circle, and then make a slit in the middle of that wetness by incising along its breadth, and let the slit not be larger than the slit made in flautotomy.
More in the preceding part where you open the wound completely until you reach the arcarnach, for in the later stages you proceed to incise through a fissure according to the form of the white grease.
Then extract those from the cloths which you have wrapped around your thumbs and fingers, and mix between your right and left hand until it is dispersed.
And make sure you do not press too hard at the fissure, so that you do not injure the muscle and leave it loose.
More if your alternach does not appear at the beginning of the fissure, rather that you press a little bit at the fissure as you proceed with your alternach; then extract those as we have said; and then immerse cloths in water and vinegar and place them over the area to strengthen those with powders.
And so apply salt and place it in the cavity of the fissure to remove what remains of that humidity.
And cure it until it is healed.
And if an abscess occurs in that place, then cure it by applying linen plaisters until it is healed.
Capitol.
Methods of palpation of the whole body.
When in the eyelids of the eye there are tight openings that cause natural skin to become dry and wrinkled, then those signs are means of illnesses such as constant tearing and softening of the eyelids and tissue. This can be a cause of damage to the eye, which is called tactinir del huel, and it is cured in four ways: either with a cautery from fire; or with acute medicine as previously described in the Capitol on cautery; or by incision and suturing; or with cannulas as I will say later.
And then ensure that you place the head of the patient in your left hand; near this, move the eyelid of the eye with your left hand. If it can be moved, it is good; if not, insert a needle into the one where the thread of the incision was made on the edge of the eyelid, and drive the needle with thread upwards, so that it penetrates close to the margin of the eyelid where the skin joins, close to the skin, and pull the thread towards the upper part of the eyelid, then move that part.
And then in the inner part of the eyelid, place the skin tightly against the aqueous humor of the major lacrimal gland into the minor lacrimal sac; and extract the pus, powder it with small pieces of cork or cloth, and sprinkle on the eyelid with a tent, as shown by the figure of a mirt leaf.
Moreover, I must clarify that the figure should be according to the amount of swelling of the eyelid, for which varies in women, and those among them who need a significant incision from the eyelid based on the amount by which the eyelid becomes softened.
And then make the aqueous humor along the two lines you have marked, and start from the major lacrimal gland into the minor lacrimal sac. And if your incision near the natural skin is as thick as the king's thumb.
And then place the needle in one of the two angles of the wound, and scrape that area entirely, and then stitch the two edges with a thread or fine woolen string, and clean the exudate, and apply what remains from the strings over two sutures for some viscous causes. If you want to do this, and if not, you do not proceed.
And after that, leave the stitches of the wounds between three and four days, and then heal this.
And if you wish, leave the wound open without stitches, and heal it by what dries and constricts, for when the eyelid is swollen you should seal the wound and its addition; more stitches are better. Therefore say this to the ancient taxanirs.
But more importantly in it be diligent about the patient, and it is of good operation, and not in its fear.
And another way to treat it, and that is to figure the eyelid as a leaf of myrtle, and then elevate the eyelid by three inches separating and joining according to this form:
But if this is not possible, hold the pins, and this is not exact, then take a needle with thread and place that in the middle of the figure, and insert the other thread near the major lacrimal gland, and the other thread near the minor lacrimal gland, and adjust between the ties such that the threads are equal, and then raise your hand for elevation equally, raising the entire bundle on which it is marked as we have recommended.
And then adjust the two edges of the wound with stitches, and cure what is inside until it is healed.
If you happen to make an incision or a fissure, sew that abscess with thread and match its appearance, and apply ointment to it.
And in some cases on the eyelid, if its edges need to be converted, then use the incision method we have described; but sew only when it is more artificial.
To treat canthiaria (an inflammation of the eyelid margin) according to this method: And you convert the eyelid and split the figure that is inside, as I have recounted; then make two canthri (small sticks or splints) or two thin strips of material whose length should match the length of the eyelid and their width should be similar to the width of the space. And you have incised at the extremities of each division, where you have the threads.
Approximately add some subtlety over what you have excreted from the eyelid of the wound, and compress the canals of various parts with strong constriction, and let that remain for a few days, because the scab through the constriction will die and be rejected and it will be possible after that to fall by itself.
But if it is delayed, then break the crust on the sores, and proceed to cure the wound until it is healed.
Then since it is solidified, the eyelid is raised and the skin does not sting.
And this is the way of two canals which you will make according to this form: and has neither more nor less in the length and width.
Capitol. xii.
For the elevation of stinging skin in the wound, use an awl when the skin is hard.
When they are unnatural, hard, rough, and stinging wounds, the operation for them is that you take a thin awl and place it on that fine thread of each hair, and then carefully adjust the ends of it using tiny nuts in a very subtle manner. And let the length of the field be the width of one palm.
And then make another fine field briefly, and use the ends of that if you want to.
And then place the patient's head in a warm bed, and keep it close to the sun so that your work is effective, as it is a delicate and fine operation.
And then insert the needle into the edge of the cut skin, adjusting it with a tool you have prepared, and let that penetrate deeply into the eyelid, while extracting the one above the natural skin.
And then pull the skin up and insert that into the incision, with the skin being one or two or three layers, but not more.
And then pull your hand through so that the skin is loosened in the eyelid with alcohol on the natural skin.
But if the alcohol is applied and the skin is not loosened, pull the alcohol-soaked piece of cloth to the sides with the field you have made, so that in doing so the alcohol from the wound will remain.
And wrap that part with a cloth, for when you have tied the thread and tightened it, and closed the wound, leave it open for two or three days, until the hair adheres to its place and grows over that good flesh.
And if the hair is shorter, then you adjust a longer piece of natural hair, elevate it at that place, or let it grow over some space, and then elevate that.
Capitol XIII.
For the cure of ahetherization which occurs in the upper eyelid.
When there is ahetherization in the wound, and it is a contraction of the eyelid that conveys to its upper or lower part due to poor consolidation of the wound or section or cautery, it is called leporina. This ahetheration can be natural or accidental, and is caused by the consolidation of the wound or sections or cautery, or by resemblance to such conditions.
For the method of the operation, you should cut away the consolidation and separate the edges of the wound. Place a strip of linen in between them, and tie those edges together until they heal.
And you must use the cure for those causes which dry up and constrict; for if you do this it will worsen the condition more than doing nothing at all.
Use for those causes that mollify thus as with fenugreek, and apply it to the water in which are cooked herbs or linseed, or a liquid unguent, and immerse the hand in that, and cure with that.
And the treasure of your cure is that you puncture only what is not consolidated according to the form it was at the beginning.
And this operation which we have said is nothing but a correction of hernias that do not return to their original form.
Chapter XIV.
Of the cure for hernias which is performed in the eyelid.
This hernia which is performed in the eyelid is called specifically a vertian hernia; and it can be either natural or accidental.
More accidentally it is caused by a wound or by a cut or by a cautery or by other similar means.
And the way of the operation is that you take a needle on which you make a double thread, and place that in the flesh, and that you make it pass from the lacrimal of the left into the lacrimal of the right, so that the thread reaches the two extremities of the flesh.
Then extend the flesh at the upper parts with the needle and sew that with the needle, and incise with a broad blade. And so, if you return the shape of the eyelid as it should be, that is good; otherwise, take the thread and place it in the incised figure, and with that, turn the eyelid, and make the two fissures in the tissue of the eyelid.
And let the extremities of the two fissures be at the corners of the incision, which you have made where they converge, and form an angle between them so that when they are brought together they form a figure.
And this figure is Greek: the lambda.
And then bring the flesh there to the amount that is the length of the sharp point left out, what we call the palpebra.
And then adjust the separated parts and close them with a thread of wool; and then treat those with what we have said about the softening medicines and the waxes until it is healed.
And if you incise for a fissure or suture or cautery, then make the incision in a straight line on the skin of the eyelid as previously described. And then separate with the wax between two lips as we have said.
In the summary of the discourse on the cure for incision when it is above or left behind, let it run in the operation, according to how it is prepared in the form of an incision, and that is in the form of various spots.
And the wise craftsmen always prepare engen in any manner that is possible for them to return the figure to its natural form or close to it, and the patient according to their convenience during the operation and with the instruments in the major arrangements.
Chapter XV.
Of the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
When this consolidation occurs in men, they attempt to solidify the eyelid above by securing it to the white of the eye, and prohibit its ease of movement and its natural actions. Therefore, you should insert the pointed needle and release the eyelid, or extend it over the eyebrow, or widen it over the upper eyelid.
And then you incise the adhesion with a subtle scalpel, which should not be of great sharpness, having a slightly obtuse edge so that the patient is not disturbed by the operation. Remove the scab to avoid damaging the eye with its sharpness.
And let your incision be such that it excoriates the adhesion with ease, so that the eyelid returns to its natural form and all the adhesion is healed.
And then place salt water in the eye, with which you rinse it; or use distilled water溶解在水中。
And then separate between the eyelid and the swollen area of the eye, and place over the swelling infused wool in honey, and for three days use conservative methods until it is healed.
Capitol XVI.
Of the incision of the gland and the prominence of flesh of the lacrimal apparatus.
Know that the gland can be performed in two ways, either nerve-like, which is similar to a thin hard cord; or non-nerve-like, resembling a white thickened moisture. When you touch it, if it must be cut, it is divided and the moisture is not injected into it.
And both species do not begin but from the major lacrimal gland, which gradually covers the eye and prevents light and the movement of the eyelid.
The method of performing the incision in the gland is that the patient places their head in a tilted position, then opens their eyelids, and elevates the eyelid with your hand. Then, you collect the gland with a small amount of moisture and extend it to the upper parts. And then take a needle and insert into it a hair of horse or bull or cow, or similar, or strong thread, or gradually double the tip of the needle little by little and place it in the middle of the nail, and penetrate it with the needle, and bind the nail with thread; extend it to the parts above, and peel off the skin the liquid of the nail which cures the pupil. And then you follow it under the skin to the back of it.
And then you incise the rim of the eyelid with a thin spatum or small pincers, and leave the natural flesh of the eyelid so that by the incision it will not cause continuous flow of tears.
And sometimes the nail with the sole of the foot stretched or with thread, as we have said, and then it is peeled off with a lion's spatum, which is the form of this:
And be careful that with the spatum you do not touch the corneal membrane, and even if there is a rupture in it, and that the pupil is not pierced.
Near the incision make a small cut with salted steel or iron made from tin, and leave that inside for another day; then cure that which is within so that it heals.
And if the swelling is not nervous and you cannot put the needle there, then spots of this kind of swelling are cured with medicines, and it is healed thus as described in the division.
And if you want to incise it, then open the space of the malady and take a thin slice of hot steel according to this form: with subtlety. And if you see that it is rarified and confluent and embedded in that tissue, then distill from your mouth into the wound of steel made from tin or of rusty iron or of salted steel, and cover the wound with another day.
And repeatedly perform the operation until all that is of it is removed, so that instead an abscess does not form in the wound; then leave that, and cure the beginning of the abscess until it heals.
And then repeat your operation as much as necessary until it is healed.
The lacrimal gland, if noticed to cause great discomfort, should be suspended by an onion; and incise part of it, but do not complete the incision so that you do not cut off the flow of tears.
And then let the lacrimal gland drip with hot rog and apply a dressing until it is healed.
Chapter XVII.
On the incision of algazardenic and what arises from flesh pressed into place.
In some cases in the eyes, pressed flesh rots and grows, and is over-packed until it covers the pupil, or strengthens near the eyelids and swells, pressing the eyelids to the parts outside and adheres to the edge of the eyelid.
The operation in the eye is that the patient places his head in the heat; then open the eyes and collect all that flesh with suitable incisions, using forceps or tongs; then incise the flesh from the beginning until everything is finished with the scalpel, and keep the opening covered to ensure you do not lose track of your operation.
And let your incision be where you incise those or with the spatula which we have recommended in the incision of the elbow, or with small pincers from which is taken silk according to the form it will take in this chapter.
So when your incision is completed and the entire flesh is reamed out, let the wound be filled with coarse salt, or sprinkle upon it powder resembling that of corrosive sublimate, and place something over the wound outside as a paste of alum until an abscess is assured.
And if any cause of alguniche (a type of abscess) is guarded and seared with cautery, and you fear an abscess, then leave the wound open and treat that abscess with what yields the abscess, and repeatedly perform on that area until it is healed, and similarly do in the adjusted flesh which you encounter in the wound of this species.
But you must ensure that all cure of the wound by way of natural healing or by accident be left to nature. Do not place your hand in any of these operations until you see that that limb is suffering from that operation.
Chapter XVIII.
Of collecting sweat in the well.
Sweat so veins rogas which are swollen over the well and prohibit their operation, and expand the well for days.
Therefore, at the beginning, you must consider if the well in which sweat is collected is strong and contains no other illness than sweat, then you collect that sweat.
And you command the patient to place his head in cold water, and then suspend those veins at one or two inches according to your prudence; and let that inch be of subtle doubling according to this form:
or let it be two inches gradually in one piece according to this form:
And let those veins be collected with strong subtlety, in subtlety, and cleanse the sweat hour by hour, while observing that those veins are drawn from the well and are stirred.
And guard thou that thou lead not the hot iron to the extremities of the spine; and if thy operation in midday before the sun, and be steadfast in thy operation that thou enter not save those veins.
And when thou hast completed, then distil thou in the hot vinegar or rue to cause that which is removed from the sore to acquire its acuity.
But if that is not possible for thee to collect all in that hour, then plaster thou wholly with that which relieves the pain thereof, and let it be for a few days until the pain thereof is subdued and an abscess secured.
And then iterate over it according to the manner of the sore as it heals.
And this is the form of the fórfeixs:
Capitol.xix.
Of the reduction of hernias to the nose.
When thou curest hernias with a cautery or with burning acute medicine according to the narration of its history and it is not healed, then do not hesitate but cut into the abscess to await its maturity, and extract all the moisture which is within it and the pus until the bone is uncovered.
And when the bone and veins within are discovered to be腐烂或变黑，你便要用一种工具处理它们，这种工具的形式如下：
And it is named aspre cap, and made of iron, with a round head such that when holding it, the head is punctuated by holes made with a file or delicately punctuated (as in the following form).
And place it over the corrupt part of the bone, and then rotate it between your pincers, and press your hand gradually into the area until you know that the corruption is superficial.
And do this several times, and then restore the area caused by drying and constrictive treatments.
Then if the area is consolidated and has good hidden flesh, and the diseased part is removed from the body for 40 days, and does not regenerate, nor腐烂再现，且没有发生意外事故，你便知道它已经痊愈。
And if not, then reduce the fissure to the shape of the nose, and do so according to this manner: you uncover the bone with iron or sharp medical instruments, and as the bone is discovered, you take three pieces according to this form:
Let the end of the instrument be triangular, and the shaft of the instrument be enlarged at the extremity as you see.
And then place that over the bone, and let it be close to the lacrimal; extend your hand a little more, and then turn your hand among the grooves until the entire bone is penetrated, and it feels the pain through the hole it finds as air exits when you move your hand.
Then restore the place with medicinal powders drying as they should be done.
Then since the flesh is dry and the place is hardened, the material which it was exuding to the surroundings returns to its normal state, thus this is lighter for the pain.
Capitol.xx.
For the reduction of the prominence of the swelling.
When the swelling protrudes completely and there is no damage or diminution of sensation, then you should relieve the pain, subsequently follow with scarification and bleed at the neck several times; place warm liniment made of acetate of lead and aloe and enses and dragon's wax over the swelling, and firmly apply the plaster with powder on top.
And the manner of powders is that you take linen cloths from lion's mane, and each cloth be folded into four parts; and make those folds.
And then place them one over the other according to the quantity that it has to be used. And then tightly bind them with a firm bandage; and repeatedly apply the suction cups with several incisions; and then place the suction cups and leave it tight for the day and night.
But if in the meantime the bandage becomes moist, then change it to be tight again.
And then place the bandage on the area during the day and night as we have said.
And if the swelling has already subsided, that is good. Otherwise, then repeatedly apply the plaster with the powders and the bandage along with the suction cups until it is healed.
Book XXI.
On the incision of the prominence of the sclera.
When there is disruption in the tunica uvea, and it protrudes and appears like a degree of scar, and this forms the shape of a person, and you wish to incise it, then the operation on it is as we have recommended, that you insert the needle into the edge of the uvea from one part to the part above, and then place another needle with a double thread in the part of the lacrimal, and let the latter penetrate while leaving the first needle according to its position; and then incise the location of the double thread and lift the part of the uvea in the circuit of the needle, and strengthen that movement.
And then extract the needle and place it over the thread soaked in album of honey, letting the thread remain in the eye.
And then care for the wound with what will comfort it as the injury heals.
And sometimes gather all the parts in a circle of cloth around the wound, and then let it protrude with a fine needle that comes from under the edge of the wound, carrying the humoraceous fluid, which reduces the swelling and enters quickly.
And then strengthen as it heals.
Chapter XXII.
On the cure of ulcers.
This illness called an ulcer is nothing but a wound that appears similar to water descending and is not the other.
The way to treat it is to have the patient sit on a prepared and straight chair, and then take hold of their head with your hands at two parts and pull them gently where you see the wound bring the health to the edges, and then dry it thoroughly so that it does not descend, and keep the light, and the patient will see the causes as if they were seeing.
And if it does not descend to the lower parts, you know that it is water.
And if the descent of health is not prepared as we have said, then have the patient sit between your hands and then take a fine spath and do so over the conjunctival tissue, gently brushing a little along the continuation of the conjunctiva on the cornea (in the area indicated), until the health is expelled.
Then, as it is forgotten, when you distill into the hot water in which you have mixed honey or sugar in the water in which you have already boiled fenugreek and honey.
And then treat the other causes until it is healed.
Chapter XXII.
On the treatment of water descending from above.
We have already mentioned the species of water in the division and which is appropriate to perforate as we declared, then proceed according to its healthiness.
Then you must place the patient's thighs on a cushion and tie the area tightly with a string.
Then place your left hand near the eyelid of the affected side, if the side with the water is the left side; or place your right hand, if the side with the water is the right side.
Then place your right hand on the pillow, if the side is left; or place your left hand, if the side is right.
And then place the extremity of the hand close to the crown due to the size of the ray in the white of the eye from the lower lacrimal gland, and then cover the hand with virtue and turn your hand there.
And then penetrate into the white of the eye and feel that the hand is already permeated by virtue.
And note the size of the hand's passage when pressing against the space which is between the pupil and the edge of the black part, for this is the crown of the eye; you will see the pupil through the hand with the clarity of the corneal membrane.
And then place the hand inside the location where the water is, and then draw it down a little bit several times. Therefore, if the water descends quickly, then you see the patient below where his vision reaches quickly, and the hand in his eye.
And then rest for a moment; therefore, if the water has descended, then you continue with another downward movement before the hand is fully inserted.
And when it is drawn out and does not descend, then you extract the abscess with facilitation, and roll your hand little by little over it, and return a small piece of clear salt into water and with that wash inside thoroughly; then place outside a cloth or stopper or infused wool in olive oil and egg white and tie with this the wound.
May our Lord and those of our time pause over this with egg white.
And if the abscess does not yield to your probe due to its hardness — which is common in some men whose flesh is hard — then scrape out the pus which is called albidus, and this is its form:
And then puncture that conjunction, and do not withdraw your hand into the wound, but rather make a way to the abscess location beneath.
And then introduce the probe as we have said.
And you must complete your work, so prepare the patient's sleeping bed decently made in which he lies on his back in a dark house, and prohibit all movements.
And pause in his nature as such so that his nature is smoothed, and do not let his head tilt to the right or left side.
And the ligament should be placed according to its position on the third day.
And then remove that one in the more obscure area and expose the frozen vision, and make the eyes some causes, and then return the ligament on the seventh day.
And do not perform this during the hour of cure or very close to the infusion. Have you already done this so that the water may flow slightly freely and vigorously through the regardment.
More if you happen to find an abscess, then remove the pus before the seventh day, and correct that with what gives way to the abscess.
And when you have cleared the vision of the patient and pause over his face near the mouth so that the swelling of the cheeks may subside, let him remain for some days in the more obscure area.
And then it should be gradually withdrawn and changed in its causes.
And know that in surgery it is not excused the disciple from seeing some times, and then you be near the operation.
And we have been informed of some cases in which they are affected by the Artach, and some say to make fire in the Ayrac magnam perforated with which water is extracted.
But I have not seen anyone in our land who has done this perfectly, nor is it mentioned in any of the ancient books; and it is possible that this is new.
And these are the forms of the species of magdaam so that he may know them who ignores them:
And they should be made of iron or properly of steel, and their ends should have this subtlety triangular, the sharp end like that is the form.
Capitol.xxiv.
Of the cure of flesh nothing in the nose.
When in the nose there arise various growths from which some cause is gathered like the sting of a heavy pest or a polyp; this illness is called polypus, which is similar to that pest represented. And it is fleshy, dark in color; and from it comes the fleshy lion not of a dark color.
Therefore, in that which is in these fleshy growths not fraudulent nor cancerous, first separate the illness by pressing your fingers and place it in the sun, and rub the nostrils with it, and prick the tumor in those fleshes. And then extract it to the outer parts, and carefully divide what you have grasped with a sharp thin blade from which you can see that all the flesh has been reached; if any part remains due to some cause where division is possible, then quickly cut this with one of the fine instruments so that it may be divided for any reason. If there is an abscess or an infected boil, then pause at it where it conforms; if it is a malignant abscess, then incise it and cauterize the area from which the pus will be drained completely.
And then apply hot poultices to the nose near the incision and apply either heat or water. If the nose is opened and there is a process of humidity entering the palate, then you can see that it is already healed.
If the humidity does not penetrate as it should, then you can see that inside the nose there is no flesh but only bones of the nose where incision has not been made.
Then, where there are any lumps in the nose, use myrrh and sprinkle it in the nostril. Place the quantity of a finger or less between each nut, insert the other extremity of the myrrh into the nose using a probe or another method that is possible for you.
And after this has been done, let its odor enter through the nasal passages and settle on its gold thread. This is why many children at school find it amusing to perform this action, but it is a light matter for one who wishes to do so.
And then place the two extremities of the bowel, one that protrudes near the nose and the other that enters the nose, and then apply a flesh clamp at the site where the nerves are in the bowel, and do this before you can sense that the flesh is on the nerves of the bowel.
And then extract the bowel, place something in the nose near the opening of the nostril, and do this for three days or more until the ointment dissolves all that is rotten from the flesh.
And at the end of the treatment, place a lead cannula in the nose for several days until it heals.
If you need to speed up the cure, use that one.
And this is the form of the instrument for making nasal infusions, where oils and medicines are distilled in the nostrils:
And make it of silver or copper, which should resemble a small open lamp, like a small basin, and the mouth resembling that.
And if you wish, make a tube closed like a cane, and the end of the instrument maker's canula should be flat, open; into which you shall manipulate it from behind, with which you will have that through which you heat oil or what you want from the juices and suctionable causes.
Chapter 25.
Of ulcers in the extremities of the nose.
Moles that appear as ulcers at the extremities of the nose, and are enlarged and oozing for several days until the mole is noticed.
And for this reason, you should intervene at the beginning of the appearance of the mole, and excise all of it. And then place your hand over the spot or cautery or burning medicine which was at that location.
If the incision is delayed until it becomes enlarged, consider if it is ripe, hard, of dusky color, and of little sensation. Then do not touch that with iron which is an abscess; for motas (small spots) often appear in that which you incise this abscess because of its great malice towards the one upon whom it had acted.
And if the abscess is from a blow and not of dusky color, and incision is possible throughout, then drain the poison and incise that without fear, and treat the area with what dries and constricts until it is healed.
Chapter 26.
On suturing the nose, the lips, and the ear when the continuity is dissolved by a wound or similar injury.
Know that when you encounter dissolution of continuity in one of these cartilages, you should consult with several experts rather than acting alone.
Then examine when there is any such cause of those, whether it is fresh wound blood, and then you adjust the two edges of the wound with suture, and place it so that it heals.
And if the edges of separation are already separated, and any one is made healthy, then examine that you extract each part of its tendon before it exudes blood. And then adjust the two edges with sutures and strengthen them, and sprinkle dragon's blood powder and ninefold resin over them, and place a piece of transparent bandage on the powder, or some other consolidative plaster, and leave that paste for two days or three. Then remove it and change the plaster, and let it heal until the threads dissolve by themselves.
More on the method of suturing, you should add the continuity solution or thread as we have described in suturing the abdomen, or add the continuity solution with threads as you are made to know.
Chapter XXVII.
For the extraction of those causes that occur in both cheeks in the internal parts.
Small spots appear in the internal parts of the cheeks and grow into hard boils resembling lard, some are small while others are larger.
Then carefully extract all parts of the cheeks and glands around those hard swellings, and after the incision, fill the area with tripe skin strips to tighten the wound, and subsequently wash it with vinegar and treat the area with astringent water until it heals.
Chapter XXVIII.
For the incision of flesh adhered to the gums.
Large spots first appear on the flesh adhered to the gums, which the ancients called "albulus." Then, you should suspend that part with a thread or ligature, and make an incision there to allow the pus to drain or the wound to heal.
And then place something warm or another astringent or excitatory powder over the area.
And if that flesh returns, then incise it secondarily, and cauterize it, for after the cauterization it will not return.
Capitol.xxix.
On the reason for teeth pain.
When on the surface of the teeth both inside and outside, and between the gums, there are sharp, rough edges, some are blackened, and others are yellowed or decayed, causing corruption to the gums, the teeth become painful.
And so you must make an incision in the patient's thigh and place its head in a bowl of water, brushing the teeth where these edges and similar causes appear, ensuring that no cause is left unbroken, and doing this to remove the blackness, yellowing, and other such changes.
Therefore, if what is at the beginning of the reasoning is good, well and good; otherwise, then you iterate the reasoning to those other days and the second and the third until it reaches the final statement in what you want.
And know that teeth have often required incisions in various forms and of diverse figures according to how your operation is prepared. And so, with the razor by which the tooth is cut from the inside, it is another razor by which it is cut between the teeth according to other forms. These forms of razors you must prepare, which you will often see.
Capitol.xxx.
For the extraction of teeth.
Cave that when you treat the tooth of its pain with great skill and delay the entire extraction, because no cause can substitute for its removal when it is extracted, as a substance is sublimated during the process of extraction.
More importantly, know that when the patient is forced to extract the tooth, you must firmly be certain which tooth is painful, because many times the pain deceives the patient and leads them to believe it is in a healthy tooth. Therefore, you extract the allegedly diseased tooth, and soon the pain does not cease until the diseased and painful tooth is extracted, for we have already seen this through the operations of barbers.
Therefore, you must be certified which tooth is painful, and that you know well, when you incise along the circuit of the tooth with a spatula in which some virtue may be contained, so that it dissolves from the root of the tooth by all means, and then use those ties or fine scissors gradually from the beginning little by little so that those concussions occur.
And then moisten it well with strong ties for good speech or strong injury, and place the head of the patient between those ties so that they do not suffocate, and then extract the tooth according to straightness in a manner that does not break it, nor give greater pain to the patient.
And if it is not extracted, then take one of those instruments, and place it well around the tooth with ease and effort in such a way that it is done at the beginning.
But if the tooth is broken or corroded, then you must wrap it with cloth and tighten it at the end of a fine thread so that it does not break during your operation on it.
And ensure that you operate meticulously around the circuit of all parts of the gum and guard well your strength so as not to break any part of it, and return over the illness because its malignancy is greater than the first pain of it.
And guard that you do not do what some ignorant barbers do in their manipulation and audacity regarding the eradication of their work; for they do not administer what we have advised; which malignant spots can bring great illnesses upon men, which are harder to treat than broken bones, and the reasons for their failures all, or some of those, or that they extract from certain bones of the jaw as malignant spots we have testified.
And after the eradication of it, wash the mouth with vinegar or water mixed with salt.
And if there are fluxes of poison for this, as malignant spots often do, then take some ginger and sprinkle it over the wound. If this does not work, cauterize.
The form of the forceps and fine tongs used to extract a tooth at the beginning should be long extended, short manageable, and thick, so that they do not bend when you need to use them.
And so it is that you use large needles when they are tight, make them short and pointed.
And they are made of iron from India, straight and pointed at the tip. At the tips of these, there are teeth that enter each other and are strongly fixed by construction. Some times, the tips of these are in the shape of a heron's bill, called a ciconia, and are of strong construction.
Chapter XXXI.
On the Extraction of Teeth and the Removal of Fractured Jaw Bones.
When you need to extract a tooth that is fractured due to some cause, first ensure that you apply pressure to the area carefully for one or two days until the area becomes softened; then insert forceps or tongs at the tips of which are shaped like the bill of a heron (called a ciconia or guanta), the form of the forceps:
The tips of the forceps should be made in such a way as a file orawl.
And if your attempt with these forceps or tongs does not obey you, then cut over the crack and spread all the flesh open, and insert the instrument which is named atali, that is a small lever of which the shape is like this:
And briefly, let the end be thick at one point and thin, so that it is not twisted.
So if the crack is not punctured, it is well. Otherwise, help me with these other instruments, of which these are the forms: the form of the first instrument is triangular-ended, in which there is some thickness at the end.
The form of the second instrument is triangular with a finer end.
And now help me with this instrument having two ramps, of which this is the form approximately as follows: And with other instruments which are used for the rasp of teeth; for this young person, this instrument, which resembles a large claw, is made as follows:
From the triangular extremity that is twisted or shortened, which is some swelling, and not engulfed such that it is not twisted.
And another note that the tooth extraction tools resemble other instruments.
But the wise and subtle craftsmen find means by themselves according to what the operation and various ailments signify to them; for there are ailments to which the ancients neither would nor could apply their proper instruments due to the forms of different species.
But if the bone of the mandible or other bones in the mouth are twisted, or if you must, then place a weight over it in its location. This is what is convenient from among the instruments and forceps that we have mentioned in the extraction of the roots of the teeth, and the gesture from which this is the form:
And let it be some small swelling gradually, and hold or press it with your hand so that it does not escape or flee until the bone is thoroughly pierced; then apply appropriate medicines to the area.
If in the bone there is a small pus, then drain that pus and the blackness from it, and cure that once it is healed.
Chapter XXXII.
Of the treatment of prominent teeth over others.
When the teeth are prominent not according to their natural position, especially when they protrude in women, and particularly in venerable old women; therefore consider this: if a tooth is slightly close to another tooth and cannot be removed by extraction or there is no gap between them, then extract that tooth; but if it is not attached to another tooth, then incise that tooth with this instrument, which has the shape of a pig's snout, and make it from fine Indian iron with an extremely sharp edge.
And let your incision be such that you incise that tooth over multiple days due to its hardness, and that it is not another tooth among the teeth.
And if the tooth is prominently exposed and needs to be smoothed, then smooth it with a fine Indian iron file of this shape:
And let it be all made of iron and steel; and let there be small pointed points thus like a file from which needles are made, on which the tooth is filed little by little over days for convenience, so that there is another sharp tooth. And draw one there at the end, and cut another with a few razors.
And if a tooth is broken and the fracture pricks the tongue, then you should file that area where the sharpness of that fracture is stopped and smoothed, so that the tongue does not get injured and the word does not become distorted.
Chapter XXXIII.
On the restoration of decayed teeth with gold or silver foil.
When the front teeth suffer from concussion or removal due to impact or extraction, and the patient is unable to strengthen the area where decay has set in, and you have treated this with styptic medicines without success, then for those that are strong use gold foil instead of silver, because silver turns green and may corrode over a few days, but gold does not change at all.
And let the honey be in such fineness and coarseness according to the quantity that can enter between the teeth; and the form of the dose is that you take the honey and place twice its amount between two healthy teeth, and soon there will be two wrinkles of the honey between two molars, or one or spots, until the tissue reaches the healthy tooth on the other side. And then push the tissue into the part from which you started, and strengthen your hand with ease and skill until it is not molar.
And let your grip be such that when you pull the honey you should tighten the roots of the teeth so they do not slip.
And then cut the excess threads of the honey with forceps or scissors, and add them to any place with your hand, and convert those and the hidden ones between the healthy tooth and the molar, so as not to injure the tongue. And let it stay thus tight as a Roman belt.
If it is slipped or broken, strengthen that or those wounds in such a manner throughout its entire time.
This is the way of the teeth and the figure of aligning two healthy teeth and two molars, as you see these bindings:
And when one returns a tooth or two to their proper places in the socket, and they have grown back as we have described, and that they are replaced.
And it is not done by just any craftsmen or fools.
And sometimes it is fitting for certain causes of the bones of cattle, and it is made from them as the form of a tooth, and is placed in the place where the tooth failed, and is strengthened as we have said, and remains and serves for a long time.
Capitol.xxxiv.
Of incision of the ligament which is in the tongue and forbids speech.
This ligament which leaves the tongue in some intervals or is natural as one is born with it, or accidental and due to a wound which has already consolidated.
And the operation is that one opens the mouth of the patient, whose head exists in the operating table; elevates the tongue, and then incises that ligament nerve according to the width between which the tongue can be freed from its anchoring.
But if there is any hardness or induration in that area, and this is due to the consolidation of a wound, then you gently incise it along the width at which you have already incised the ligament and dissolve the induration.
And be sure that no crack is made in the subcutaneous tissue and that you incise here without cutting the arching tendon, so as not to cause a flow of blood.
And then wash the incision with vinegar or with wine or with cold water; and place the tongue in a cushion; so that the patient keeps the tongue out at night to prevent it from becoming hardened again.
If there is a flow of blood, place a vitriolic plaster on the area; if the blood continues to flow, then cauterize the location with a long-cautery suitable for this. And then proceed with other treatments as the patient recovers.
Capitol.xxxv.
For the extraction of a cyst, let the tongue proceed.
Sometimes, an abscess resembling a small boil appears, prohibiting the tongue from its natural operation; and greatly enlarges as it fills the mouth.
And the operation is to open the mouth of the patient wide before the fire and examine the abscess.
And if you see it of a brown or black color, hard, and the patient does not feel any sensation in it, then do not touch that area.
And if it has turned white, in which there is moisture, then you place the onion in it and incise that with a sharp blade, dividing it completely. And if blood flows during your operation, then cover it with a vitriol plaster, so as to restrain the blood.
And then return to your work after you have brought him to completion, after he has been washed with warm water and salt; and care for that with the other cure when it is healed.
Capitol.xxxvi.
Of the extraction of boil from both ears and that which is near the jaw and other boils.
When a boil is found near the jaw, these are glands that are closely assembled lymph nodes, which sometimes appear outward and are named the two ears. When you treat them as we have said in the division, and if they do not heal, then consider whether the boil is hard, of dark color, and has little sensation; then do not touch it with a iron.
And if it is of red color and the root is large, then do not touch that with iron to prevent the flow of blood; first let it mature, and then either you will lance it or it will break on its own.
And if it is of white color, small, and the root is fine, then this is to be incised.
And the operation on them is that you consider, before your operation, if the abscess has already been drained completely or if it has diminished somewhat; and then you cut open the patient in front of the sun, their head is in your lap, and you hold their mouth, and the servant taking between their hands the tip of the tongue of the patient, leaves with the noblest instrument of which this is the form:
And let it be made of silver or steel, and let it be thin like a knife.
So when you press on that tongue and show it to the patient, and place your thumb over it firmly, then take an oncia and put it under that, and pull that outwards as far as you can. Another thing you pull from the tunics, and then place that with the instrument of which this is the form:
Another thing you pull from the tunics, and then place that with the instrument of which this is the form: and it is similar to forceps, but the ends of it are curved, so that the opening of each of those is in the straight part of the other, sharp points, which are made of iron and well tempered.
If this instrument is not present, then incise that slit from which this form comes: it should be sharp on one side, but not on the other.
And since you have incised one slit, incise the other according to this manner of incision, and near the incision, the disease will be relieved by washing with water.
If there is a flow of blood, relieve it with water from the decoction of bark of dog's-bane or of rue and similar to those causes that constrict the flow of blood, and cure it when it is healed.
And sometimes boils appear in the groin or other abscesses besides those of the two ears, and incise them according to what is said in the incision of two slits equally.
And I have already treated a woman with an abscess which was located in her groin, which abscess had a dark color, little sensation, and had closed the groin area. The woman was breathing directly, and had been forbidden to eat or drink any water, and she was near death if more days passed without water for one or two days.
And the abscess had already matured so much that there were two fingers' width between them which would go through with two thrusts.
Then I incised it sharply and clamped one of its ends, then pulled that end, and the large portion came out. Then I incised the other part, and pinched its mouth, held its tongue, and clamped the other end in the abscess.
Then I incised a large part of it, and there was not much blood flowing from it. Then the swelling of that woman subsided, and she began to drink water soon, and then eat food. Then I continued incising that abscess for a long time without stopping, and an abscess formed in its place, which kept recurring as long as that one was prolonged.
Then I engaged in this and cauterized the swelling of it, according to ancient practice; then I wandered around and did not know what God had done to that nearby me.
Capitol.xxxvii.
When cutting the vein when it is stretched out.
When phlegm settles in the uvula, and it is stretched out and long, then it is named perpendicular; if it is in the part large and round, then it is called a bubble.
When it is cured as we have said in the division, and you do not see your cure, and thus you know that the abscess cautery has already passed and become subtle, then seek to incise that which is added round; if it is at that length, and is bloody, of dusky color or black, and not a centimeter, then fear the incision of it, for there is fear of the disease.
And when you see it according to the manner that I have said of its whiteness and length, then cut out the disease and press the tongue with the instrument by which its form is determined and then place the ounce on the new, and pull that down and incise it with one of the two instruments, which are called in the incision of two bites.
And be sure to insert only what is adjusted over the natural term of addition, for if you insert more, it will alter its speech.
And near the insertion, use what we have described for the insertion of two fingers, and ensure that it is healed within.
And if the patient is frightened by the insertion, be sure to use something for comfort in the cautery to ease his fear, and the way of the cautery on him is simply with sharp water. You should place the head of the patient's penis in your hand, and then press the patient's tongue against the instrument as we have said. Then take the water which we have mentioned in the chapter of cautery, and apply it to the living part without being too thick or thin, and fill the cavity of the instrument of which this is the shape:
Let the external part of the cavity where the medicine is applied be as wide as the width of a ray's tail. Place the instrument on the medicine over the vulva, and the patient should spit into his own hand so that saliva or mucus from his mouth flows through the internal medicine, thus not staying there for any reason due to the swelling in him and making it pass.
And then place your hand on the medicine, and express it over the uvula for half an hour between each time you let it darken due to the bite of the medicine.
And if you wish, take some cloth and wrap it around the end of the ray, then immerse the cloth in the medicine, and insert the ray with the cloth into a tube so that the cloth adheres inside the tube. Do this several times until you achieve what you want from cauterizing the uvula, and then let it dry and fall off over three or four days.
And if you need to apply the medicine again, apply it, and then cauterize the area around the uvula with a cloth dipped in boder, and modify what is in the circuit of the uvula by the medicine, and let it be washed with water, and be externally treated with an application, and internally with remedies until it is healed.
And this method of treatment is both safe and long-lasting without fear.
Sometimes the uvula is cured with what is finer than cautery and incision, which is cured by subfumigation in this manner: take calamus, hyssop, origanum, rue, scitrus Arabicum, camomile, powder of these herbs, and adjust all those causes or some of them into one vessel, and be submerged in water, and boil; let the liquid be well strained, and in the middle of the liquid a sponge, over which an instrument congueille of iron according to this manner; make it of silver or iron.
And insert the extremity in the mouth of the patient so that the vapor goes to the uvula over the quanela, so that the uvula becomes somewhat obscured.
And then it repeatedly passes over those spots several times while they are dry, and guard that you do not perform this cure at the beginning of the appearance of carbuncles, for it would too tightly constrict the carbuncle. You should not do this, but rather declare the presence of a carbuncle with a cautery.
But if you do not have this instrument at hand, then take a cane and place a hive end on the tip of it, so that the mouth of the patient opens, for the hive end prevents the vapor from burning the mouth.
And this cure is good for health.
Chapter XXXVIII.
On the extraction of thorns and what adheres in the wound and other causes.
Spots or thorns adhering in the wound or from a thorny plant or some other cause.
Then carefully extract what is obvious from the wound or thorn, by which you can see it. After that, press the tongue with an instrument in front of the sun, so that you may be made aware of what is in the wound.
And what is not apparent and hidden in the wound, cause the patient to vomit before the food is digested in the stomach, because if a strong cause attached to the wound is vomited, it will be expelled; or have the patient swallow a piece of linen or a slice of radish, or a piece of dry bread; or take a piece of sponge well soaked in wine, tie it tightly with thread, and make the patient swallow that, because it will reach the place where the thorns are located and be expelled. And take an eel and bind it with honey, place it inside and gently extract it; or take a worm and gently insert it and then remove it gently.
And if none of these methods work as we have said, then use a lead instrument in the following form:
And let it be as thick as a small finger, and at the end of it, have a cavity that you insert into his throat with ease.
And apply his head upward, and hold it steady at his throat, so that the touch of his bone in the throat or the one wrapped around the bone or spinal column reaches him, or as the doctor places his hand.
And instead, if the patient can insert honey, by his knowledge of the location of the cause, wrap it around below, and pull his hand toward the instrument, all this according to the quantity which is prepared for him before it is applied.
Capitol.xxxix.
From the extraction of gouty humor related to the gout.
When treated with gouty humor as we have said in the division of the cure with medicines and you do not agree, consider at the side of the foot suffering from gout in the sun, after you have understood the language of the disease with the instrument which we have recommended.
Therefore, if you see the gouty humor, extract it either through a small needle or through fine and delicate instruments.
And if it is not possible to extract it through that, then take a concave cannula and insert it into the foot suffering from gout, and place in the concavity of the cannula a burning iron, and do this as many times (until the gouty humor is dead and remains in the foot) and keep the foot away from water for the entire day.
And then take a vessel full of cold water, open its mouth over the affected area, and wash the area with that; and do not swallow any of it, but pour the water again onto your hand for another hour, as soon as you feel the gouty humor beginning to soften.
If it has not been previously fumigated with what we have recommended, then subfumigate the groin with cypress or asafetida through the instrument we have mentioned in the uvula fumigation.
Do this, so that it may fall into place.
And another way of performing the fumigation is to take a brazier in which burning coals are placed, and cover the brazier with a cloth in the middle of which there is a hole, and place the end of the instrument in that hole; then proceed with the subfumigation; and hold the groin at the end of the cannula, and seal its mouth so that the subfumigation is not forgotten until you see that the fumigation has reached the uvula, for the uvula will soon fall.
And if it does not fall, then repeat the subfumigation several times, and make the groin abstain from drinking, eating salty or similar foods, and not drink water. Thus, this regimen must be forgotten.
And this is the form of the instrument used to treat gout when it is seen; and it is similar to forceps as you see, except that there is some curvature in it. And it is placed on the gout, and the extremity of it is similar to the beak of a stork, which is curved, and it is filed with a file, so that when any cause is caught, it does not leak.
Capitol.xl.
In which the main discourse on carbuncles and their sections is presented.
The carbuncles are special nodes, of various types, according to the memory of them, for each one in this treatise.
And they are diverse in their perforation and section by two methods. Of which one is according to the type of carbuncles themselves; and through this, we address the humors.
And the second method is for the places where bodily accidents occur, for a carbuncle that occurs on the head is different from one that occurs on the foot; and a carbuncle in a fleshier location is different from one at a joint; and for each of them, their judgment is made through operation.
And more of abscesses some of which cover that they not be pierced but at maturity of the health in those or complement of their.
And other abscesses some of which cover that they be lanced when crossed, and are not matured according to their complement, thus as abscesses that are near the joints, for an abscess which is near a joint, its nature is extended into what is in the circuit of it, and greatly corrupts the ligaments or nerves of that joint, making a cause of contraction of that member; or is an abscess near a principal member, and if you delay the lancing of it until it is matured it will affect the principal member; or is near the anus, therefore lance what is not mature; and do not lance crudely, for lack of digestion, but one near the anus, so that it does not cause prolapse and be extended to the internal parts of the anus, making a fistula, or done in the term where it is not healed. And you must know the time for lancing the abscess, and this is when it is matured.
And know that it is ripe when there is a decrease in pain and fever, and the reduction in swelling and pulse, and the acuteness of the head of the abscess, and other signs.
And know that when you can perceive the perforation cauterized in the location just below the abscess and from pus coming from the cure of the prominence.
And the perforation should be made along the length of the flesh or body, if the abscesses are in the thigh or feet, and at the location of the lacert, the cords of the nerves, the arteries; and, finally, in all locations where there is no reflection; for in those that are reflective, use perforation according to that member.
When the abscess is in a fleshly location, it is better to delay the perforation until the digestion of the pus is confirmed according to our saying; for if you perforate it before that, it will prolong the course of the pus and increase the hardness and depth of the lesion.
More abscesses are perforated according to the width of the flesh or body as the need dictates, or according to that from which the member suffers.
And ensure that for small abscesses, you perform a small perforation, and for large abscesses, a large and wide or multiple sections according to the diversity of the size of the abscesses.
And in other abscesses, ensure that the cord is returned to its cavity and cut, when this is done, do so quickly, as you would do in cases of tumors and buboes.
And of those that are cut with three angles in sections; and of those in which the incision is made as a figure of a mulberry leaf, as with abscesses of boils.
And of these, those in which circular and crescent-shaped sections are administered, and resemble those.
More for those in which none is done as such, where the abscesses are superficial, ensure that you perform them with a superficial perforation, or flat one only.
And when the abscess is large and has already gathered some healthy pus, that you perforate it and do not cut so as to drain all the poison at that time; having extracted a part, then raise the abscess on another day, and extract a larger part, and proceed to make punctures regularly according to degree until it is fully discharged.
And especially if the patient is a young man with virile virtue, or a woman in labor, or a small child, or an old person in decrepitude, for the animal spirit resolves into the exit of the healthy pus, and greatly weakens the disease, and you openly manage it.
Take great care with this chapter, and in your perforation where you perforate these abscesses, ensure that you cleanse the wounds and consider whether the wound of the abscess is small, or a flat section, then administer only a portion of li or coto antic; and if the abscess is large, and the fissures of the perforation are deep, then you should place your hand in each tract until they heal together.
And if in the abscess you have divided a part of the cord or have concaved it in the circuit, then you should complete it with linen cloth or thread made of li fabric, just as when you have drawn out pieces or roots, considering their moisture; strengthen it on the third day; and proceed with it and cure it according to what is appropriate from the ointments until it is healed.
And if you happen to experience bleeding during the time of your operation, then administer water mixed with wine in which you soak a cloth, and place that over the location of the blood flow for several minutes.
And if the bleeding persists, then you must administer treatment and cure with powders which I have recommended in many places of this our book and division.
And if it is in the time of winter, and the location of the abscess is near many nerves, then you must apply powders in wine and oil with a cautery, and place those over the areas.
And if it is in the summer, and the areas are fleshy, then you must place powders soaked in water and oil or in wine and oil, all of which be mixed thoroughly by the third day, as we have said, and then you must incise the abscess and cleanse that area, and administer to its cure what is suitable for it until it heals.
And this is what is necessary concerning the knowledge of the cure of abscesses generally, but according to the way of distinction, I have already said everything about the abscess regarding the method of its cure specifically.
Chapter XL.
Of the section on abscesses in the vein of the head.
In the vein of the head, small abscesses, and their species of knots which contain tunics that are made thus; and the species of these are spots.
And they are pimples, and those that contain moisture resembling lime. And those that contain moisture resembling dust, similar to it; and those that are hardened, hard.
And in the section of all, and in the extraction of those, there is no fear, just as you should perform the extraction without causing any arterial obstruction.
And the operation for the section of these is that you express them with an instrument in the form of which see below, which is called a lancet, until you know it contains.
And if what it contains is moisture, then section it along its length for a superficial section in this manner:
And begin at the section of the line B between the line G. As the humidity is evacuated, then you scrape that skin which contains that humidity, and leave no cause of all, for too many times returns if there remains any cause of all.
And then immerse it in Egyptian ointment, if present, and otherwise in water and salt; then fill it and leave it for another day, for with this it dissolves all that is rotten of that skin.
And then repeatedly treat that part with Egyptian ointment gently if you need it, until you are confident that there is no rotten cause of that skin; then cure the wound with ointment once it is healed.
And if there is an abscess containing fatty nodes, then you incise it according to this form: In the section having a cross-like form, and make an incision between the two halves of the section, and thoroughly excise it from all parts, and exert your virtue in the extraction of the tunica which contains it.
But if your artery resists, then do what I recounted to you first.
And similarly treat the abscess that has been incised and is in the process of healing according to what we have said; the incision for an abscess that has been incised should be lighter, as it involves little bleeding and little moisture.
And sometimes the abscesses in the head of some people have no moisture at all; the cause is that I could not incise the abscess on a old woman's head and rubbed it with a hard, rough, white stone which could not be rubbed away, and if any did percuss it, it would be harmful.
But in other abscesses in the head, this is not covered in this chapter. As for the abscesses that come to the heads of children, you should drain the ears, but the incision for all these should be a superficial one.
And place the incision for those in the lower parts below, so that the healthy body fluid reaches the lower parts.
And then attend to those things that are necessary for the cure.
Chapter XLII.
Of the section on scrofulas which occur in the neck.
Swellings appear in these abscesses in the neck, in the armpits, and in the groin; and sometimes they occur in other parts of the body.
And those that occur in the neck, and the swellings that are generated within them, and all scrofula of these is drained from its own membrane. Just as with nodes and abscesses in the head, as we have recounted.
The species of these scrofulas are swellings. Some are lumpy, some contain moisture, and some are malignant, which do not respond to treatment.
Therefore, in that one which you perceive to be of good disposition according to the Touchstone, where the color that is manifest is similar to the color of the codenail, and is diffused throughout the body, and is not attached to the nerves of the neck, nor to the veins, nor to the arteries, and is not painful, you should incise it with a superficial dry cut from above the part down to the opposite side of the body along the line of G. to the line of B., and scrape it entirely, and extend the edges of the codenail with one cut, or with several small cuts if needed, just as we have said in the case of abscesses in the head, and extract it little by little.
And it is better caution that the vein or nerve not be cut.
Let the incision not be too deep, so that it does not reach the point where you cannot easily withdraw your hand without cutting something or relieving pain, and cut only what is necessary to cut; for if you cut a vein or artery and then stop your operation, then apply a vitriol trioxide or other powders which are fluxes of salt, strengthen the wound, and leave it so that the apostema is relieved and the wound becomes softened and begins to suppurate. When the blood is cut off.
Then return to your operation until it is completed.
And then inquire if there is any other cause for the small scrofulous swellings, and if so, cut those and cleanse them.
And if it is near the vein of the scrofulous swelling, avoid cutting that scrofulous swelling near the vein. Before you place a strong fold there, let that one fall by itself if it can.
And then fill the wound with old cloth which you have already soaked in Egyptian ointment, and then cure it.
And if you incise that scrofula completely, then you must adjust the two lips of the wound and cauterize them frequently enough to prevent any superfluous discharge.
But if you see that there is excessive discharge due to the size of the scrofula, then you must incise the edge of it, extract it, and administer stitches as described.
And for those scrofulas containing moisture, make a superficial perforation at the place where it appears, and perform the perforation of what dries the pus beneath the body, as we have said.
And then administer the perforation, apply ointments and similar substances to it, so that it dissolves what is腐化 of the scrofula. And when you see that the wound is already clean, then treat it with a dressing of flesh-generating ointment until it heals.
Capitol XLIII.
From the section of the incision of the abscess in the groin area.
The ancients performed this section in the circumcision, and no one in our land has ever seen it done.
And this is the inscription of the speech of those.
More in men with foreskin, a cut that should be avoided during the circumcision, for if it is not done properly all the veins and major arteries of the groin are at risk.
More in those who have abscesses cauterized in the mouth, groin, or ears, when the illness is not in the brain, it is advisable to use the circumcision incision to avoid the danger caused by perforation.
Then cut when we want that, for the paronychia, leave three or four small sections of the epilhoric tissue between two circles, so that the section is circular, not in the cartilage, and this place is suitable for the section, as it is devoid of flesh and its blood vessels are lacking.
And if the doctor fears this, cut when he extends the thread of the forceps wide open, and then cut the thread before it reaches the channel, but more avoid the blood vessels if you see any cause.
And then incise the cicatrix as we have recounted; and it is indicated on the section of the channel by the flame which is from that excised part and by the absence of voice.
And leave the wound open for some time.
And when the time is delayed in which the perforation is feared, add two more loops of the thread of the wound, and sew that one to the cartilage.
And then administer medicines that cause flesh to grow where it is needed.
And Albucasis says that the main point of the speech we have recounted is simply that you see some of those abscesses have already opened the wound in the thigh, and the thigh has come into death, and its artery has been cut. Some go on to incise the epiglottis so that the thigh can breathe over the place of the wound through some respiration, and thus be saved from death.
And for this command that the wound remain open until the malignity of the illness is consumed; and the malignity of it lasts for three days; and then when that time comes, I command thus the wound, and cure that where it is healed.
And what I have seen with my own eyes is that a servant took a knife and placed it in the thigh and incised there a part of the root of the lung, and I was called to the cure of her, and covered the wound as it gapes from the dead, and uncovered the wound and applied the sponge which was soaked like those used on the dead.
Therefore I must confess that there was no vein or artery cut, the wound is from the plague, and cured her with what was then considered a holy remedy.
And she did not suffer any injury at all, not even hoarseness in her voice, and soon recovered from her illnesses.
And now I say that in the section of the circumcision there is no fear.
Capitol. XLIV.
On the section about the abscess that occurs on the shoulder and is called a shoulder hernia.
This abscess, named shoulder hernia, is a large abscess according to the color of the body, and it often occurs in women.
And it can occur in two ways: either naturally or accidentally.
And in the natural case, it is not easy to cure.
And the accidental can occur in two ways: one is similar to fatty lumps, and the other way is similar to an abscess caused by the obstruction of an artery, and in this case, there is fear. And do not allow the patient to make assumptions as if they were a physician only in matters concerning the small. And you probe that part and examine it as he is spoken of, and if you find a nodular mass, and it is not suspended by any of the veins, then you incise that part as you would for nodes, and extract it from the skin and bursicle it; and if not, then thoroughly examine his entire being, and place the area to be treated in such a way that it can heal.
Capitol. xlv.
On the section of types of nodules.
Of nodules there are various types, and I have already described all the types of these in the division.
And ensure that you recount this difference between a nodule and an abscess so there is no doubt.
Therefore, I say that in an abscess there is a quality of heat and fever and violent pains until the boiling of the superfluity is subdued; and when the putrefaction is complete, then the fever, pain, and heat cease.
But if there is no heat nor fever nor pain, and concerning that cold lion which is in the back pocket.
And it is according to the color of the body, and the beginning of it is like a bruise and is made thus, whether larger or smaller, and they are according to two species, either fatty and contain humidity, and the colors of the humidity are spots, as I said in the division.
Therefore, when you arrive at the cure of the node, express it and inquire about it at the beginning of the swelling which is called intromes, according to its form that will come in the chapter which is nearby.
And this is the method of inquiry for abscesses and all nodes, and it is that you take this swelling and insert that into the location most humid which you find in the abscess, and you will turn the tissues little by little into that until you know that the swelling has penetrated the core.
Then place your hand according to the measure of the size of the abscess, and then extract the intromes and consider what is situated in the residue.
And if the running moisture of any color is neglected, then you incise according to a superficial section as I have said in other apothecary cases.
And if there is no moisture from the intruding vestige, then you know it is fat.
And it is dry on the surface having the form of a cross according to this form: As I have taught you, suspend it with threads, and completely remove the cord from all parts with ease, and keep the skin or sac above it, if possible, and extract that flesh at the knot.
But if it breaks during the operation, it is not possible to extract that flesh. Instead, tie it off several times, and then extract it piece by piece to ensure it does not rupture for any reason.
But if it ruptures for any reason, either little or much, the knot should return according to the best method.
And if you see that it ruptures any small part, then fill the wound with some sharp and strong corrosive powders, strengthen the wound, place your hand over the area where the abscess is to be incised, and cure the rest according to the other treatment until it is healed.
And if it is not great, then you close the two lips of it and cure that which is within.
And if the vein is pulsatile on the opposite side, or non-pulsatile, then you incise and fill the area with a third part of vitriol and leave it open for two days or three until the swelling subsides and the boiling of the blood ceases; and then return to suture what is ruptured from the node.
Capitol. XLVI.
Of the forms of instruments necessary for section and perforation.
Of those, these are the forms of the instruments, and they are of three species: some are large, and others are medium, and others are small.
The form of the large instrument is this:
The form of the small instrument is this:
Make them of iron, of aluminum, of fallen extremities properly, so that the instrument penetrates into the abscess.
These are the forms of the experienced ones, and they are named Albed, and one of them is called Berid.
And of these three spices, one is major, half minor, and a little.
The form of the experienced one, great, is as follows:
The form of the experienced minor, its form is as follows:
The form of the experienced little, its form is as follows:
It should be applied to those abscesses, ulcers, fistulas, and buboes so that it is between them and the bones or other causes.
And make them round, large, like lions, as well as large needles to which the threads are attached. They can be made of iron, or steel, or silver, and they are best when made of steel citron.
And they make experiences with black feathers, which are said to be effective when the fistulas in their cavities are opened and the reflections are reflected back due to their lightness.
And so there are three species: some are long, and others are medium, and others are short, according to the width of the fistula and its stricture.
Form of the experiment with great lead:
Form of the medium-sized lead experiment:
Form of the small lead experiment:
The forms of the needles are of three species. Some are simple and have only one curvature, and they are of three species: large, few, and medium.
And their bodies are needles, and they are of three species.
And those that have two curvatures are needles, and they are of three species.
And from them they have three curves, and are of three species.
And all these are necessary in their place.
Shape of single slight curve, its shape:
Shape of great single curve having two curves: Shape of moderate single curve having two curves: Shape of slight single curve having two curves:
Shape of great single curve having three curves:
Forma of a woman having three curves:
And these are the forms of the scalpel blades which are incised with nodes and apothecas, and they are of three species: one is large, woman, and few.
Forma of the large scalpel:
Forma of the woman scalpel:
Forma of the small scalpel:
The tips of those which are incised are sharp, while the other tips are not sharp, and they are not used in such a manner, but rather so that it may be done justly in the incision of the nodes to avoid cutting of veins or nerves, and for these purposes, the healing is good and there is some tranquility due to the heating which results from the excoriation of the apothecas.
And these are the forms of amigdalas, and they are of three species: large, woman, and small, as you will see.
If they are caused by wind and resemble a ray from which alcohol is made.
And if in the outer side it is punctured with a blade and inside it flows to the inner and outer parts, when you want, thus as you see.
The forms of spatis, which are hidden between the fingers and do not cause pain in the patients, and are of three species: great, female, and weak. And these are the forms of those:
The forms of windy ones, in which the flow of wind is cut off, and they are of three species: great, female, and weak; the forms of it:
If they are caused by citrine wind, round of some length, and are subtle.
And ensure that these cups you use are large, medium, and few, so that through those incisions the flow of blood is rapid when needed, and when first made, they are not painful.
But do not use them to bleed the entire body, and use them only on fleshy areas, such as on the inner thighs and hips, on the breasts, the abdomen, the armpits, and similar fleshy crevices.
And sometimes small cups are made using those instruments, resembling scoops according to this form; through which blood is drawn when performed by phlebotomy, or from an incision in a vein or artery.
And sometimes they are made round according to this form:
Capitol. liv.
Of the treatment of the breasts of men which are similar to those of women.
Sometimes the breasts of some men swell when they begin to be engorged, and at times the breasts of women swell and gather together, let us wager on them.
And for those who have this, cut out the affected area according to this form, from the line of B to the line of G, then excise all the tumor, fill the wound with red medicine, suture the two edges of the wound together, and cure it until it is healed.
More so, if the breast sags to the sides and becomes softened due to its size, as it often does in women, then cut it into two parts such that each part is contained within the other. According to this form, let the line of B contain the line of G. Then excise the tumor which lies between the two edges of the wound, remove the swelling, and administer what we have said about suturing and powdering as necessary for the cure until it is healed.
And if you do not complete the incision that needs to be made due to the discomfort of the patient and the flow of blood, then you must fill the wound with cloth submerged in corrosive ointment and leave it there until it eats away the roots of the grease, and then cure what is left until it is healed.
Capitol. xlviii.
Of the perforation of carbuncles where the vein lets it tremble.
Such carbuncles where the vein lets it tremble are of the kinds of scrophula, hard swellings, which contain a pus that is drawn out.
And of those that contain moisture, they must be incised at the lunar phase of seccio; according to this figure: from the line of G to the line of B. And when all that is in the carbuncle of pus has been evacuated, then you complete it with new incisions and leave it for another day.
And then the cloth be left on and treated with suitable ointment until it is healed.
And if the abscess of the glands or scrofula is, then you incise there in the same manner as we have said in the section about scrofula.
And if the wound is extended to the point of becoming putrefactive, then apply a cautery to it according to what we have previously said.
Capitol XLIX.
Section on abscesses that occur due to an arrow or a vein.
When an arrow strikes and the chain is consolidated over that area, then dark spots will develop into an abscess. The signs by which one can recognize inflammation or an abscess due to an artery or a vein are as follows: when an abscess from an arrow is present, it extends lengthwise along the front of the body; and when you press on the abscess with hot objects, you feel a stridor within it.
And that which is due to a vein is round in appearance on the surface of the body.
And the extraction of this abscess is an error, especially in those that are left under the armpits, in the groin, on the neck, and in other parts of the body; and if it is large, then one must ensure that its cure is not delayed, and that which is in the extremities or near the head should be avoided.
More about that which is due to the inflammation of the orifice of the artery, make the longitudinal section in the cord; and place the section with clips close to the artery, and free the tunics where it will be exposed.
And place the needle nearby and make it penetrate into the other side, and strengthen the artery with double thread in two places — which cause you to sew them carefully during the extraction of two arteries, which are located in the temples.
And place the point where it is between two threads with forceps so that it seals the wound completely, and dissolve the abscess.
And administer care in which oil is applied until the threads dissolve; and cure it with suitable ointments until it heals.
And if it is an abscess due to the dryness of a vein, then you should have your hand where you can grasp the abscess with your hand, and then insert the needle in the place you have grasped with your hand, making it penetrate; and take that from one side of the thread into the other, and tie the abscess well with good lint as I have said to you in the grapevine knot at both ends of the thread.
And if you fear that you will extract the thread, then insert the wax on the needle and thoroughly pierce the abscess in four places.
Then dry the abscess in its middle part so that when you sit on it, you incise the excess of the cord, and leave what is soaked.
And then place yourself over the powder which you have submerged in wine and oil, and administer the cure which is made with cloths and ointments until it is healed.
Capitalize the abscess which has occurred due to a twisted nerve.
Thus, an abscess can occur in arteries and veins, and similarly, an abscess can occur in nerves when there is a percussion or excessive work on them.
And it is most frequent in the areas of the joints or the thigh, or in any location where the joints are lax.
And it is a severe abscess, and its color resembles that of the rest of the body. It is located in the larger parts of his body. When stretched by inflammation, it feels like the patient is experiencing a stupor.
And it is not an abscess aggregated in the front of the body, and therefore, the chain is left off, and he is lax in all parts and does not go to the front or back parts.
Therefore, what occurs in the joints is not caused by iron infiltration, for strong weight can induce contraction.
More so, that which occurs in the head or in the forehead causes the chain to rust due to sweat. But if it is a small abscess, then apply heat and cut it open with forceps.
And if it is large, then suspend it with a hook, and incise it, and stitch that part; and dress the wound until it heals.
Capitol.li.
Of the section on abscesses that occur in the cheek, which affects the abdomen.
Often in some individuals, swellings are observed in their abdomens and in other parts of their bodies. These swellings are called funguals due to their similarity to fungi; the root of these swellings is subtle, but the head of the swelling is large. Moreover, the borders of these swellings are indistinct, and they can be either small or magnified.
And I have seen one myself, in the abdomen of which there were two swellings that resembled fungi, and there was no difference between those white areas, with their subtle root.
And already those lips were turned inside out and splitting, and moisture ran from there constantly.
Then incise those and puncture in the one foot at the eighteenth inch and the other at the sixth inch.
And in the operation of their incision, consider whether the gout is humid, and the color of the tissue is white, humid, with fine particles; then incise at the space large enough, and have it in your presence cauterized in the fire, so that the section of the area should be expelled clean without pus; if you encounter pus, cauterize that.
And if you find the gout painful and terrifying, avoid incising with iron; instead, consider using fresh lead filings, strengthen that tissue, and the method of which we have said; leave it for two days.
Then adjust in the constriction of the lead wire; therefore, continue strengthening the lead gradually within the tissue until it is incised and falls out on its own.
But if the thigh is of great thickness, when making the incision in it there is some cause for fear and anxiety, especially in that which is in the belly.
But it is possible that you incise the thickness of it, and then cauterize it so that it does not return.
And then cure what is inside for the wound to heal.
And beware that you do not presume to incise a thigh which is of dark color, with little sensation, and looks bad, for such a one is cancer.
And I will come to remember the disease nearby.
Capitol. lii.
On the cure of an umbilical hernia.
An umbilical hernia is caused by various reasons; or by fissures in the cicatrix which is above the belly, and through it the membrane or intestine protrudes according to where it ends in other ruptures; or by a wound which flows from a vein or an artery as previously mentioned, or by congestion constricted within it.
If it is due to a tear in the tissue and an exudate, then the color of the abscess resembles the color of the body; and the pain is severe, and often appears in various positions. And if it is due to the protrusion of the intestine, then the position of that area differs more significantly from what we have described. When you press on that area with your thumb, it becomes less obvious, and soon returns; it feels heavy in that place, and you should apply a strong bandage and vigorous work.
And if it is due to moisture, then the pain is severe and does not become less obvious when you press on it with your hand; it is neither constricted nor relieved.
And if it is due to a wound, then in this case the abscess appears blackish in color.
And if it is due to nothing but flesh, then the abscess is severe, large, and hard, and is situated according to a certain quantity.
And if it is due to windiness, then the touch of it is severe.
And in the operation, you consider whether the prominence of the navel is due to an artery, a vein, or congestion; and you must be careful about treating it, for there is fear and danger as you have been taught in the Capitol where I said about abscesses from arteries and veins.
And if the prominence of the navel is due to the intestine or the hernia, then you must command the patient to lie on his side; and then pass a needle around the circumference of the navel, and command him to lie between your hands over his loins; and then circumscribe with soapstone all around the area you have marked with the needle; and extend the majority of the abscess upwards in one place; and put either a strong bandage or a cloth in that circuit in a proper manner.
And then extend the majority of the abscess over the bandage and insert your finger into that opening to feel for the intestine; and if you have already grasped it or secured it with the bandage, then you extract it quickly and push the intestine into the interior parts of the abdomen.
And if you have found the fabric [of the hernia], then take it with forceps; and incise the superfluous parts of it.
But if it is contrary to your artery or vein, then circumvent that knot, and soon return to your operation; and take two needles and put them into those two strong threads, and insert two needles into the circuit you have made around the abscess in the manner of a cross, making them penetrate; and soon strengthen the abscess in four parts over the needles.
And if you wish, hold the needles and let the area between them dry and fall by itself; or incise that which has become thin and can drain, and soon cure that with what oozes from the ointments as it heals.
And if the prominence of the navel is from flesh neither in it nor by humidity, then drain what your cavity contains abscess as we have said and drain the pus or humidity which you find in it, and soon cure that with what oozes from the ointments to solidify the area.
Capitol liiii.
Of the cure of pain.
We have already said, in the division, of types of pain and in what manner they are treated with medicines, and that the cure is effective when the pain is not ulcerated; and we have said how pain is generated and cured.
And the ancients said that some pains are in places where it is possible to completely eradicate them, such as headaches which are in the mammary glands or in the thighs and similar parts of the body, from which one should extract all of it, especially when they start small.
But when it is ancient and severe, I cannot say that it has proper properties, for I have not seen another like it nor one that can be treated in this way.
And the operation for this is when it is located as we have said, that you first remove the disease and purge of black bile several times, and then drain it, if an obvious full accumulation is found.
And then prepare the patient for the operation in which the incisions are made, and place probes in those places; and properly make a concave incision with the spoon so as not to damage any vital part of the body. Let the blood flow, and do not stop it lightly, and squeeze the areas, and wipe away the thick blood with your hand or an instrument you have at hand.
But if you find it necessary to make an incision for thick blood from a vein or artery, then cauterize that area once the flow of blood has ceased, and treat it with another treatment until it heals.
Capitol. liv.
Of the cure for dropsy.
We have already discussed, in the division, the species of dropsy from water, and the signs of each species, and the cure for it using medicines.
And that which is cured with iron is nothing but the species of algitis alone, and it is not approximated to the species of tympanites nor to the species of hypospadias, for this is mortal.
And when you have medicated this species of tympanic hydroptic condition with medicines and do not find your treatment effective, then consider whether if the patient has already achieved sufficient strength, or is at risk of another illness such as hydroptic disease, similar to those in their lungs or abdominal organs, then refrain from further intervention, for fear of harm.
And if you find the patient has an excess of vital virtue, and in him there is no other illness except hydroptic condition solely, neither child nor old man, then the way of the operation for him is that you elevate the patient between your hands, and place your hand near his abdomen to express the fluid from him, push the water towards the lower part of the body, and then take a spinal tap according to this method:
it should be of two sharp parts, long like a spinal needle; however, it should have some slight shortness gradually, so that in the operation you do not pierce into the intestine, and to avoid damaging it.
And consider accordingly if the generation of hydroptic condition is from the intestines, for then you must separate from the navel by the length of three fingers to the lower parts, along the spine above the pelvis.
If the generation of hydroptic conditions is due to illness of the liver, when your section is on the left side of the navel for three digits.
And if the generation of it is due to fever, when your section is on the right side.
And ensure that your section is not over the side where the illness is located, so that the superfluities do not flow to that area.
Then return the instrument along the entire length of the canal, and insert it into that section, elevate your hand above the spasm between the canal and the siphon, and you expel it; if the quantity is about one inch or so.
Then pierce the siphon so that the spasm reaches the desired location, which is where the water is. Then extract it and insert an instrument of which this is the form: And it is similar to a thin silver cannula; it is made of silver or brass, on the lower part of which there is a small hole, and on its sides are three holes: two from one side and one from the other side; the end is incised in the manner of a feather, as you can see:
And at the extremity of the patient, an overcoat is placed, for when the instrument reaches the water, then they often cry out on the instrument, so evacuate from the water in the half-hour quantity, for if you evacuate from there more than can fit in the hour, the patient will quickly die from resolution of his animal spirit, or accidents approach him that are near death.
Evacuate from there according to the quantity of the virtue of the patient and according to how you interpret the disposition of the patient's virtue from his pulse and his overall condition.
And then extract the instrument, retain the water which causes it, for soon it is retained by the cord which pulls it from above. You are instructed to perforate there according to that manner.
And then reinsert the instrument on another day if you find the patient tolerating this, and extract a small quantity of water, and do this for several days with caution, and beware not to become inflamed from the water but only slightly.
If you fear for the patient, and let a large quantity of water remain, then cure that with burial in sandy earth, and washing in bath water, and under the sun wait for long time; and cure that with desiccative medicines until it is healed.
Cauterize on the stomach, and the spleen near the extraction of the water, according to what I have recounted in what preceded.
Capitol.
For the treatment of children whose passages for urine are not perforated.
Sometimes some of the children are born with the abdomen of their mother not perforated (or it is opened straight or not in its proper place).
Therefore, immediately after birth, perform the cauterization for the perforation of the child's abdomen using fine bath water according to this method:
Then place a fine lead pin on it and bind it, and let it be for three days or for four.
And when he wishes to urinate he strains and does so; then return that.
And if you do not place the lead, it is possible that the urine which falls on the area will not heal this.
More importantly, that which is drawn out should be treated with a lead wick, as we have said, for many days before it is enlarged.
More importantly, those in which it is drawn out not from its place, the cause is known. That which is natural and caused by the wound should be treated at the end of the shaft of the penis so that he cannot urinate in the inner parts; while elevating the penis with his hand above the upper parts; this is not a generation issue, because the sperm cannot reach the uterus according to its correct path, and it is a chronic malady.
And the method of the operation for him is that the patient be placed on his back, then extend the shaft of the penis with your left hand with strong traction, and incise the head of the shaft at the site of the perforation with a sharp blade, like cutting a feather, or any part you deem necessary, so that the middle of the wound resembles the head of the penis and the drawn-out substance falls into the middle location.
And keep watch that in your operation for the flow of pus, whenever you see this occur; then place yourself at this point where you incise the pus, and treat the wound thoroughly until it is healed.
Capitol.lix.
Of the abscess which occurs in the prepuce and head of the penis, and of corruption, blackening, and adherence of the prepuce to the head of the penis.
Spots appear in this abscess on the penis and on the lagging flesh prominence.
And of those, one is malignant and the other is non-malignant.
Non-malignant: suspend it with a thin thread and incise it thoroughly until you cleanse it entirely; then place it over the area submerged in Egyptian ointment; subsequently, treat it with diafinicon ointment until it is healed.
And if the abscess is malignant, of a reddish color, then you should apply a cautery near its incision and around it.
If the abscess is in the foreskin of an uncircumcised penis, and one part of it is inside the foreskin and another part is outside, then you should open the abscess that is inside at its beginning where it has formed; and afterwards treat the part that is outside, for when you treat the inside together with the foreskin, it is not assured that it will not be torn.
And we have already spoken of accidents in the testicles and in the blackening and corruption of the foreskin; then you should cover all that which is degenerated and about to腐化或腐败；然后你应该覆盖所有已经退化或将要退化或已经腐败的部分，并在上面画一条线，使用一种含有陈紫草粉和细筛过的粉末的麻油。
And then treat the other part while it is healing.
But if there is a flow of pus, then apply a lunar cautery in this manner:
But the lunar cautery is applied in two positions together, either when there is a flow of pus and during an outbreak when it has become corrupted.
And if the head of the urethra is corroded and destroyed entirely in an hour, then you should introduce a lead cannula into the meat of the prepuce so that the disease urinates through it.
In the adhesion of the prepuce, at its head (and this adhesion occurs only in that part from which the prepuce comes off, and upon which circumcision is not required; and when adhesion occurs due to inflammation or abscess), you should excoriate with a blunt instrument until the adhesive is dissolved and the head of the penis is delivered entirely.
And if it is difficult to excoriate them thoroughly, then you should excoriate with a blunt instrument some part of the head of the penis and the prepuce, and this is where the prepuce, when thin and light, is perforated slightly by its subtlety.
Then separate between the prepuce and the head of the penis with a thin probe, which has already been moistened in the fomenting liquid to prevent them from adhering again.
And it should be treated by applying astringents after it has consolidated.
Capitol. lvii.
On the purification of children and the treatment of what occurs to those who have been circumcised.
Circumcision is not a solution for continuity as are other wounds: nevertheless, since it is of our operation and our will, and those of the others are properly in the children, it is necessary that we assign to that the better operation and the lighter way, losing none to health.
Therefore, it is said that the ancients did not speak of circumcision among any of the free peoples, for they do not use it in their laws, and it is only because we have acquired this knowledge through experience. The reason is that I have examined the majority of craftsmen and barbers who practice circumcision and purification with a knife and with torches; and they use lint with honey and incisions with oil.
And I have already examined all these methods and found that the best purification is with flax, with lint with honey, rather than in purification with oil. For you often find the chain breaking above, for the chain of the prepuce has two tunics, and the inner tunic remains loose, and it is forced to another incision and certain pain. And for the cleansing which is done by scrubbing, and is digital, of which cobblers use it, it is not secure for the insertion of the extremity of the male member, because strong it enters into the wound.
In the operation, may I have strength, firmly use iron and corrupt your operation. And the cord of the child is short by nature, and is often handled in such a manner that it does not require cleansing, and I have seen this.
May the cleansing that is done with scissors and threads of hemp, be good, as experience has described to me, for the scissors have proportional insertion, thus the acuity that is above is such as the acuity that is left; and therefore, when you press your hand so proportionally on two acuities, and incise according to a comparison in one time; and it is made compression of the hemp juice in a figure containing the cord of the virginal organ from all parts, upon which there is no error at all.
And the manner of the first operation is that you make the child lie still, especially if it is one that can understand a little, and do not let him move at all. You should hold the hemp juice on his virginal organ only, and leave it there for another day.
And then make that person feel better in all that manner that is within your capability for what receives its intelligence. And then place that person among your knees preparedly, and do not be more than a hundred steps away; hide the scissors in your hand or let them hold your arm, so that the child does not see those nor any other of the instruments.
And then place your hand on the genitals and blow into the scrotum, and insert that which will lift the head of the penis, and then modify that which is attached to it due to deafness.
The shape of the pincers after modification, this is the shape:
If the fingers are uncut and the others are cut, then place the branch of the key, and let the length of the two acuitats be as long as the length of two equal-sized handles.
More importantly, in the modification, if you let the intrinsic chain escape entirely or partially, you must make an incision.
So make sure that you stretch that one with your thumb in front of the incision site and make the incision according to equality.
And if you cannot hold it with your thumb, then grasp it with the tip of your finger and make the incision.
More importantly, if more than three days have passed, and the swelling remains with the sore apstematized, then you let it be until the abscess is drained, and extract that with ease, and make the incision according to your preparation.
And guard the opening of the vagina, for that would not be good for her.
And therefore cure that which the plague of the powders consolidates, as we have recommended in the treatise on powders.
And if it incides from the chain beyond measure, and you obey the articles above, this will not harm her.
And cure that which we have said must be cured first.
Capitol. lviii.
On the treatment of retained urine in the bladder.
Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by an accumulation due to a stone, or a sore ulcerated wound, or pus or flesh. It resembles those we have mentioned in our treatise on the methods of treatment.
And if it is not dissolved as we have said before, strongly make the cause known to the patient, then cut open the stone with a surgical instrument which is called a forceps, of which this is the form: It should be made of silver and should be slender like a long ray similar in length to half a palm, at whose head it should have a fine point.
And the manner of urinary evacuation through it is that you take the string doubled and tie it at the end with good knots; and insert the ends of the string into the opening where the forceps were, and cut with scissors if any part of the wool is superfluous. Then strongly insert it into the canula, and closely close the forceps with wax.
And make a cut in the patient's side, and apply oil and olive oil to the bladder and groin.
And then introduce the probe to facilitate its passage to the opening of the groin; and then fold the groin upwards at the point of insertion; and then push the probe inside; and then push that inside so it reaches the bladder, and that towards the patient's side being guided to the source of the problem, and if this is not done in this order, but the meat where it is twisted.
And then slowly pull out the wool, for urine will soak the wool.
And then extract that and apply a cure for urine, use the probe, continue doing this until the bladder and patient are fully relieved.
Capitol.lix.
Of the quality of cleansing the bladder with probes and using similar instruments that are appropriate for this.
When an ulcer or abscess occurs in the bladder, or there is a burning sore there, or it is constricted by swelling, and you wish to distill water and medicines into that area, then make an instrument which is called a clampcedra, and this is its form:
so that in the extremity of it there is no sensation, it is closed. And in that there are three incisions: two from one side, thus many times.
At the beginning, it is concave, in which that which is pushed in is located, and according to the quantity that fills it, its addition, within which when any cause is drawn by the humidities, it is drawn, and when it is expelled, what remains is also drawn, and when it is expelled long, according to how it forms the clampcedra, on which naphta is placed in the battlements of the sea.
So, when you want to prevent humidities in the bladder, insert the extremity of the clampcedra into the humidity, and draw out what is pushed to the upper parts; for the humidity is drawn into the cavity of the clampcedra.
And then insert the end part of the cedar stick into the urethra as we have advised in surgery; and then push the moisture out as you push, for that moisture will quickly reach the bladder, and the disease will center there.
The form of the subtle catheter through which the bladder is catheterized, and that is the form:
And it should be made of silver or copper, with its head resembling a small feather, and insert the thread inside cotton.
And then take a bladder and place the moisture that you want to catheterize in the bladder. Then tie it tightly with a double thread of linen, and heat that moisture over the fire.
And then insert the end of the catheter into the urethra.
And then strengthen your hand on the bladder as you push the moisture downwards, so that the disease centers where that moisture has reached the bladder.
But if you do not have a bladder, then take a piece of parchment and make a circle from it; and perforate that circle completely round; then insert strong thread through all those stitches as they are turned; then place the circle in such a way as it is placed alsofatur, after which you place what you want from the humidities, smell, and waters.
And then you attach that to the instrument and do so with it as you did with the bladder, and place your hand there so that the humidity reaches the bladder.
Capitol.lx.
Of the extraction of gallstones.
We have already discussed in the division the species of gallstone and its treatment with medicines, and the difference between a gallstone formed in the gallbladder and one formed in the bladder, as well as the signs of it.
And we have discussed the gallstone for which major operation and sectioning are performed.
And the stone generated in the bladder properly is that which is inserted in the bladder.
And I now narrate that matter in the exposition and abbreviation.
Therefore, I say that the stone generated in the bladder mostly affects children; and the signs of it are that the urine voided from the bladder resembles water in its subtlety, and appears with that sand; and gout rubs its joint, motley veined pain, and is often dressed; and for this the buttocks are affected among those.
And the recovery of children occurs within about four years; and the cure is difficult in old age. More in young people, it heals through that which is between them, namely the kidney.
And of that which is greater in the stone and the cure is easier; and if it is small, it is contrary to that.
Therefore, when we arrive at the cure of that, begin with the modification of gout by applying a plaster which exerts all its force on the hole which is in their intestines; for that hole sometimes prohibits the formation of the stone by investigating it.
And then place the patient's feet and make them stretch and flex their legs so that the foot descends to the neck of the bladder, or so that they urinate several times.
And then place those cushions you have prepared under your hands, while the other servants keep their positions, so that the bladder is made to slope towards the sides.
And then apply it to that and all that region.
So if you feel the stone in the space, then quickly apply pressure to the area.
And if the stone does not pass completely with your touch, then rub your little finger of your left hand with oil, if the patient is a child, or your middle finger if the patient is an adult, and insert it into their anus. And apply pressure to the stone with your finger. And gradually move it towards the neck of the bladder.
And then press upon that area as you have said, and expel that to the outer parts. Look for the location from which it comes.
And command the minister to press the bladder with his hand; and command another minister to with his right hand extend the genitals to the upper parts, and with his other hand retract the codena which is placed under the genitals, at the location where the section is made.
And then insert a spatium; this is the form of it: And cut in it what is between the anus and the genitals, not in the middle location, before the lateral part of the left thigh; and let the section be on that bone which you said is in the anus, and let the section be transverse, so that the section outside is wide and inside narrow according to the quantity that flowed from the bone be as possible, and no more. For when the bone is in the anus, you should make the section, and it is a perforated wound with its capacity.
And be aware that from the foot there is some angle and margins, because the movement of it is made difficult by this.
And of that which seems like a lion's claw, and is round, and is made of it easy movement.
And if that which has angles and margins, adjust in the crack.
And if it is not thus cut out, then you must probe it or strengthen it with caution, ensuring that the extremity of which is like a file over which you strengthen the foot, and does not slip from it; or you must insert a thin, curved instrument under it.
But if you cannot do this, then you enlarge the wound a little, and if you see a flow of blood, cut into it with a strong instrument using vitriol triphasate.
But if the foot has more than one, then at the beginning you push your hand to the mouth of the bladder, and then cut around it; and then push a little there; similarly do if its marks are more than two.
And if the stone is very large, then ignorance would have you cut out that great section, for which happens to the patient one of two causes: either it dies or manages to cause a continuous urinary discharge, for which reason the area is not fully consolidated.
Administer the expulsion of the stone when it is outside, or use forceps in the fracture of the limb to extract it from the pus.
Then, after you have completed your operation, fill the wound with slices of aloe and dragon's blood, and strengthen it. And place the soaked cloth over that area with oil and wine, or with diluted oil and vinegar, to ensure that the abscess yields.
Then lift the patient's leg above their heart, and do not apply the bandage on the seventh day.
And when you have removed it, soak the area in water and much oil, and then cure it with ointment containing diafinicon and ointment containing diabazicon until it is healed.
If in the wound you find an abscess, adjust and corrode it, and it appears as if the blood is in the bladder congealed, and through it urine is prohibited (and this is known by the excretion of blood with the urine), then introduce your said instrument into the wound and extract that blood, for if Roman corrosive causes corruption of the bladder and its putrefaction.
Then clean the wound with vinegar, water, and salt, and oppose all kinds of herbs, using what is suitable for its cure until it heals.
And attend to the hours of the entire cure that you have prepared between the thighs and apply the medicines which are placed over the area.
And if the stone is small and is in the meat of the penis, and urine discharge is prohibited, then treat it by applying what I have recommended before reaching the stage of desiccation; for too many applications of this treatment are accused of causing desiccation. Now I will describe this, which is that you use a metal probe, the shape of which is as follows:
of triangular shape, sharp, inserted in the foot.
And then take honey, and tie it around the swelling, let the leg rest so that it does not return to the bladder.
And then insert the needle into the swelling, piercing easily where the puncturer will reach that leg. And turn the puncturer with your hand in that leg little by little, and you complete the puncture where you have started; so that urine is quickly released.
And then press your hand on what is broken from the leg near the swelling, for that is cracked, and the hole is filled with urine; thus the patient is healed.
But if this cure is not applied to your apparatus for any reason that prohibits it, then tie honey around the leg, and another piece of honey above the leg. And then place something warm over the leg in that swelling between two bandages. And then extract that. And then untie the bandage and modify the wet dressing, which is done on the wound.
And you do not need to use silk bandage on the heel, but only to prevent it from returning to the bladder. Instead, place another bandage above, for when the bile is released near the edge of the heel, the cord returns to its place and heals the wound.
And for this reason, when you apply the bile above, you must raise the cord to the parts above, or it will return and heal the wound as we have said.
Capitol.lxi.
On the extraction of heel warts in women.
Wart in women is less commonly generated.
Yet if a wart does appear on any of them, the cure is difficult, and it is prohibited by too many methods.
One of them is that the woman who is carried is a virgin.
And the second is that you cannot find a woman well versed who will tell whether she has been with the doctor when she is chaste, or if she has been with other women.
The third is that you cannot find a woman well versed in this art, especially in major operations.
And the fourth is that the location of the section near the heel in women is far from the actual heel, so you need a wide incision, and there is danger in that area.
But if necessity prompts you to do this, then you must seek out an experienced pregnant woman, and few are found who fit the bill.
But if you are lacking in that, then seek out an experienced and subtle doctor, or present an elderly woman skilled in women's affairs, or a woman who is part of this art.
Therefore, have her present and command her to do everything you will tell her, from the examination of the heel to the beginning; for this reason, she should check if the woman is a virgin, and then put her finger into the woman's vagina to feel the heel.
Then if you find it, cut it out and leave his said part, and then command him to lie on it.
But if it is not a vein, then command the midwife to insert his said part into the wound of the patient and inquire about the stone, while placing his left hand on the bladder, and compress that area with good compression.
Then if you find it, gradually moisten that from the orifice of the bladder to the parts, leaving some of its virtue so that it reaches the root of the thigh.
And then lie on that application of the strength of the wound. Place the root of the thigh from any part where it is stopped and center the stone in that part, so that his said part is not moistened by the stone, cut him off.
And the section should be small at the beginning; then insert the probe into that section, and if the stone is felt, adjust the section according to the quantity he knows the stone will be removed from there.
And know that the seeds of the pear are grains: some are small and large, lion and bitter, long and round, and having points.
And know how many seeds the pear has so that you can signify about what you want.
And if you want a flow of blood, apply vitriol trioxide to the area for one hour until the blood is absorbed, and then return to your operation once the pear has been removed.
And make sure to prepare among your instruments those you mentioned in the extraction of pears from men, so that you can be helped by them during your operation.
And if you want a flow of blood, and you know that the expulsion of the blood comes from the artery that is incised, then sprinkle powder over the area and strengthen it with powders to cause a downward contraction, and do not repeat this; leave the pear and do not remove it, for a strong ligature will kill the patient. And then treat the wound.
When the sharpness of the pain in the foot subsides after several days, and the place has healed, then you return to your operation while the stone is forgotten.
Chapter LXII.
On the section about inguinal hernia.
Hernia aquoea is nothing but the accumulation of moisture in the white fiber which is the channel of the genital veins containing the blood. It is called a phyma.
And sometimes it occurs in the very fabric itself, which nature prepares in the part of the blood, before it is cooked and another blood is present; and this is the channel of the genital vein, which we have said, and it is not this but a tumor.
The generation of this hernia is due to weakness which affects the genital veins, because this material infiltrates into them. Sometimes it occurs due to a strike applied to the genital area.
And this moisture having various colors, its color may be yellowish, or bloody, or red, or black and floury, or watery white, and it is this that is most common.
And the signs by which one knows where this water addition is located are these: if it is in the white cell as we have said, then the abscess is round, slightly tapering in length like an ovary, and the genus becomes apparent, for the moisture contained from all parts.
And if the moisture is in the proper flesh, then the abscess is round, departing from the ovary, and for this reason one estimates that it is another ovary.
And if the moisture is between the region of the genus and the white cell, then cut away the centiment.
And to know the color of the moisture, you should probe the color of the moisture in the abscess through a medium cut from which its form is preceded; and according to what happens in the trace of the medium, judge what is inside it.
Then when we come to the cure of it, you should command the patient to bleed if this is within your capability, and often empty his body.
And then he is laid face up on some bed for a short time, and place his body under the coverings.
And then seat yourself on the left side of him, and command the minister to stand on his right side, who extends his cloth over one of the sides at the base of the thighs and the part of the miracle of the abdomen.
And then take a spatula and split the base of the thighs in the middle location along the length near the pelvis.
And the section should be made according to the correct distance from the line where you divide the skin of the thighs, until it reaches the white muscle layer.
And excise that, and observe it, and keep it for this: you must not go inside that; your excision of which you have excised by part should be suspended on the finest hook and examine it carefully according to the quantity you can manage.
And then puncture the muscle full of water with a wide hole, and extract all the water.
And then separate between the two lips of the section with forceps, and extend the incision upwards; and do not touch the chain of the genitalia, and incise the incision in that manner as is possible for you. And incise that completely or in parts, especially its thin layer, for if you do not carefully examine the incision, there is no guarantee that the water will not return.
But if you proceed with that from the outside of its chain during the time of your operation, when you have completed the section of the incision, return inside that, and properly adjust the two lips of the genitalia's chain with sutures, and properly care for that as with the other wounds until it is healed.
And if you find the vein corrupted by another illness, then ligate the vessels which are over the suspensory, extract the vein, and properly care for that as we have said.
But if the water is present in two parts, then you know that there are two hernias; therefore incise that part according to how you have done in the other equally; and if it is clear to you that it is an operation, then you perform it.
And then you clean the blood, interlaying in sections wool submerged in oil or rubbed oil; and place another wool over which you have submerged it in wine and oil, spreading that over two genitals and the marvel of the belly; and place over cloths folded and powders, and lay those over bran which is according to this form:
And then place two cloths and fill them with well-carded wool according to this likeness; and make the ends which are pressed with a clot or wet wool, and attach them to the structure in the garter of the trousers, one end grasping the buttocks between the two, and the other grasp at the crotch part, and two ends leave for the thighs, and two other ends on the ankles, and all the structure be tied in the garter of the trousers.
And sometimes this hernia is treated artificially with a cautery at the section instead of iron; and you grasp a subtle surgical cautery and incise there at the cord of the genitals, and it is ignited as we have advised until the white chorde containing the water is revealed, and then you take the cautery in this form: and it resembles Greek letters.
And then puncture that blister, and ignite within it to expel all the moisture.
And then lance the blister with needles, and excoriate it with needles, and cauterize it with a细针点燃的火 BRAND; and incise that part according as it is possible, so as to eradicate all of it; and guard the oil from which the fire does not touch it.
And know that this operation is safer and more distant from the flow of blood, and better than an operation with sections.
But if you find any contrary condition, apply a blister either at the time of sectioning or at the time of cauterization, or during the flow of blood. Then treat that contrary condition as you would any other, applying the appropriate cure as described.
But if the patient is fearful and does not expect the second operation due to its horror, then administer a puncture as I shall recommend. And when you are certified by what we have said about the meanings, that that hernia is dangerous.
When you must sit the patient on some elevated cushion, then puncture the abscess at the lower part of it with a lancet, and pause the puncturing according to the length of the body.
And let the opening be wide enough to drain all the water.
And place your hand over the area carefully, press there and then release, to allow the water to flow out. And place something over the area where the wound is to be healed.
But if contrary to the discharge of the water at that time you puncture there: and this is not done except because the white lint causes a contrary effect and prohibits the emission of water. When you must put into the wound a pledget or instrument from which water is drawn from the dropsy, the form of which precedes; or apply a small ligature to the wound.
And you know that the water returns, and is agueguada (purged) for about six months or until it is gone; and when it is purged, then puncture according to that method, so that the gout thus passes its days.
Chapter LXIII.
On the section about fleshly hernia and its cure.
Know that in the section about this hernia, there is fear of harm to the major organs; for I have seen its relief and been saved by the better method.
And I recall the operation in that case and the types of abscesses.
Therefore, I say that abscesses natzi (a type of localized infection) in the tissues where the glands are composed occur for these reasons: either due to acute superfluous heat, which is infused into the glands, or due to percussion.
And the color of the abscess depends on the color of the tissue, and pain is not prominent in it; this is a severe abscess.
And the abscess that has formed is dark in color, and there is no throbbing pain in it.
And sometimes it is caused by the obstruction of the arteries, and by inflammation of those vessels, as the memory of which is already perceived, or by inflammation of veins.
More than that, which is due to the inflation of arteries, it is known by the dispersion of the aposteme when you compress those ties said; and note that you should not touch.
More than that, which is caused by the inflation of veins, does not disperse it for any reason you should compress with your fingers.
And it is possible that a section may be made on this kind and on other meats; for you must incise the cord of the testicles, then extend the scrotum upwards, extract the one from the white cyst, and deliver the suspensory ligament of the veins, ligate them, and incise the suspensory ligament after you have delivered that from all parts of the scrotum.
Therefore, if the scrotum has already adhered to the surrounding tissues and consolidated, then you must extract the scrotum and incise it.
And if there is an adhesion due to some cause in the cyst, or between what is between the veins, then you must deliver all that adhesion and incise it with a round incision.
But if there is native flesh at the place of adhesion which is behind, then scrape out all that belongs to it, and remove the pus as we have said.
Then when your operation is complete, fill the wound with wool soaked in rubbed oil and wine; and place it over the other dressing until it heals.
Capitol. lxiv.
Of the cure of hernia that is external.
It is an apostema enveloped by some envelope resembling a sprout due to the softening of the testicles, and it makes physical exercise, exertion, and movement difficult.
And in the cure of this illness, there is fear of what preceded it and caused it to occur.
However, let us say that an operation should be performed there according to how we described the first ones.
And I say that you should cut out the illness on an elevated piece of cloth; and place the suspensory ligament of the testicles over the parts left; and have the codena of the inguinal region on your thumbs, which are tried by the forceps; and have another minister with you, and extend those with a strong pull.
And then incise the tough membrane longitudinally by transverse section in the middle between the vessels that are now exposed.
And then excise from all parts thus as we have said in the extraction of arteries which are in the temples.
And then place a needle in which is thread double, and tie that at the first location where you make your cut, and tie the other end at the last of them. And then incise those in the middle location by a longitudinal section according to the length of the body, and extract what is added from the foul and corrupted humors.
And then cure the wound by the treatment of other wounds in which you want healing to be generated so that the vessels which are not affected by either genius are left intact, for this is not harmful.
But if you make your cut in all the vessels, then ensure that the testicles are extracted or that they atrophy due to the incision of the vessels, so that it is deprived of all nutrition due to the cutting of the vessels, and that they become established, or that they wither away on their own.
Chapter LXV.
Of the cure for intestinal hernia.
The occurrence of this hernia is due to a separation that extends over the diaphragm covering the abdomen from the pelvic bones. Because of this rupture in the membrane, some of the intestines protrude.
And this rupture is either of the diaphragm or of its excision. This happens to these two species due to various causes: perhaps a blow, or by jumping, or by shouting, or by lifting some heavy cause, or by a similar action.
And the sign of this, when it is due to extension of the diaphragm, is that it occurs gradually over a long period of time and does not happen suddenly. It is an abscess that enters the chest through the membrane because the diaphragm contains the intestine.
And the sign of this is when it is due to separation of the diaphragm, for at the beginning it causes sudden and intense pain; it is an abscess that appears different from the surrounding area. This is due to the protrusion of the intestine, and the body's reaction in the parts outside the diaphragm.
And sometimes the intestine or the tissue is pushed out through the fabric, and this hernia is called intestinal carbuncle.
And sometimes it is caused by distension, and sometimes a hole forms in the intestine, where it gets stuck, and this causes great discomfort to the patient, and sometimes it leads to severe pain, especially when pressed.
And in the treatment of the symptoms of this illness there is fear, because it is suspected that the cure should avoid the spread to that area.
And the method of the operation is that you command the patient to push the intestine back into its cavity with their hand at the internal parts of their cavity if it obeys on its return, and then fix them over their shoulder between your hands, and lift their legs.
And then stretch the cord which connects the cord of the testicles upwards, and incise the cord of the testicles entirely along its length; and then place two fingers at the cleft section according to where you need to open the section with those.
And if the section according to the quantity that it is possible for you to let of the humor should be evacuated.
And then strip the thigh where you have left the cord of the testicles, while the white hard part of each section is uncovered.
And then insert your thumb in what is seared of the testicle, in what is between the white cord, which has the cord of the humor, and between the cord later, and release any adhesion that is in the part behind the humor.
And then hold the cord of the testicles in the forward parts, and by this stretch the white cord with your left hand, and elevate the humor towards the cord to the part of the section; and command the minister to extend the humor upwards while you dissolve the adhesion that is behind with complete solution.
And seek around the thumbs that they know that there is no cause for the intestine enveloped in the white cord. But if you find any cause for it, then peel that away and leave it on the abdomen.
And then incise in the part below the scrotum along a section from which fluid and pus flow as we have recounted in what we have said.
And then apply wool submerged in oil, and place it on the wound; apply the lint we have mentioned (and several times the white chalk is seared, which we have already said near the incision of their fear of a flow of blood, because often this happens) and leave the lint inside so that it may fall by itself.
And if the application is delayed, then pour cold water on it, and place it there until it falls as we have said.
And then heal the wound with another treatment for wounds as it heals.
Capitol. lxvi.
Of hernia ventosa.
In this hernia, nothing has been seen that was burned during the treatment of it.
And the first ones said that it should be done as we have mentioned in the hernia that is open; which is that you tie the vessels near the section over which there is a facilitation of it; and after tying, dry thoroughly in the middle area by applying an apostema with what I am doing there, until the vessels fall.
And cure the wound as we have said until it is healed.
Chapter LXVII.
Of the disorder that occurs in the ankles.
Sometimes there is a rupture in the ankles as we have said, and apply ointment to the area.
And the surgeons do not attribute any cause of the ruptures to the intestines; and if they do, it is rare; and return them in all hours.
But if the time is prolonged, there is an appropriate crack in the cavity where we place the intestine; and this accident occurs due to the extension of the cavity, which is in the ankles as we have said, the cause being that the cavity is stretched, and then softened, and the area becomes suppurated, and apply ointment.
And the treatment of it is with a cautery as described in the preceding account.
And sometimes it is cured by applying iron according to this manner: and that the patient lies on his side between your legs, and then the place of the rupture of the pustules dries up and exudes fluid according to the width as per the quantity of three fingers.
And then strengthen the white ointment that is at the wound once it is uncovered.
And then take the wick and place it over the area where the ointment is exuding, and press it against the front of the abdomen.
And then tie the two exuding areas over the end of the wick of the ointment, and adjust one to another with the缝合线。
And then extract the end of the wick, and do not go beyond the ointment pouch entirely, nor extend the thread, nor any other cause such as I have faith in for the treatment of intestinal hernia.
And then cure that in the treatment of wounds, and as you incise the edges, clean it and restore the wound before it is consolidated; for the ointment contracts and does not adjust the exuding edge of the rupture.
And cautery is better in this place, for it is more closely related to health.
Chapter LXXXVIII.
On the mollification of the scrotal skin.
When spots appear on the scrotal skin in some men, the skin is mollified because the flesh between there is also mollified, and attention should be paid to this.
Then it is necessary for the one who is in charge of the treatment to ensure that the patient lies in such a way as to facilitate the healing, and completely expose the scrotal area that is mollified over the natural scrotum; and then carefully bring the two lips together at the suture.
And if you wish, make three or four initial stitches in the excess of the mollified scrotal area and then perform a firm suture.
And then cut between the stitches; and after curing other wounds, allow the threads to dissolve.
Capitol lxix.
Of castration.
Know that castration in our law is excommunicated, but by cause it is told to me that I should remember it in this book; and the recall of this is not necessary for two reasons, one of which is that when a doctor is questioned about it, he knows the cure for whom it happens. The other reason is that we must sometimes have castration of other beasts for our cattle, such as bulls, boars, and pigs, and similar to beasts.
And thus say that castration is done in two ways: either by atrisssion or by a sectional incision.
But in that which is done by atrisssion, the way of the operation is that we cut the beast in water so that the genitals of the beast are softened and relaxed while they hang. And then take those with your hand so that they are relaxed and no marks appear upon touch.
In castration performed due to fissure and secution, ensure that you have the beast and press the cord of the testicles with your left hand.
Then lift the suspensory, and incise over each groove between two testicles.
Then incise those pus that you have from each excoriation. And do not leave on those of the scrotum any cause, but the fine incision which is over the veins.
And this method of castration is better which is performed by traction, for traction strongly leaves no cause of the testicles because the beast desires copulation.
Then cure the wound while it is healing.
Capitulum LX.
On the cure of hermaphroditism.
Hermaphroditism in males occurs according to two methods: one where a gap appears in the cord of the testicles, in which there is a figure resembling a female between the two testicles.
And sometimes a flow of urine comes from that cord in the scrotum.
In women, it is special: and the woman's mons pubis is like two testicles of a man slightly swollen on the outer part like the scrotum of a man with its two testicles.
And the treatment is of three kinds: two for men and one for women. And you should incise those tight muscles where the fluid escapes from that area, and then treat those with the cure for other wounds.
And in the second kind for men from which urine comes from the cord of the testicles, neither treatment nor operation is needed.
Chapter 21.
On lymph nodes and swellings in women.
Lymph nodes that are firm and tight are due to natural causes where they are compressed and appear noticeable; sometimes in women, they are enlarged to such an extent that they expand like in men, and can be felt during intercourse.
Then hold the superfluous phlegm in your hand or cupped hand and insert it.
And do not insert it too deeply, especially in the region of the rectum, so that no flux of sand occurs.
And then attend to that for the cure of the wounds until they are healed.
More hidden flesh is flesh that does not appear in the horror of the womb until it fills that space; and a large cyst is situated near the parts external according to the likeness of a cocoon (and for this some first called it "caudate illness"); therefore, handle it as we would cut phlegm, and cure it until it is healed.
Capitol.lix.
On the cure of hernia.
Hernia is when the wall of the woman's womb is perforated, or is torn slightly. And it can be natural or accidental.
An accident occurs due to a malfunctioning condition that has preceded, and that is caused by meat not fitting well or by a subtle or thick chip.
It is caused in the region of the uterus, or in its sides, or in the upper part of it, or in the lower part of it, and you prohibit coitus and impregnation and childbirth, and strongly you prohibit menstruation.
The knowledge of that is made through the examination of the midwife, if the obstruction is obvious, promptly; but if it is not obvious, then you seek that area with your fingers or with a probe.
But if the obstruction is due to a subtle chip, and is near the two lips, then you probe and dislodge that.
And you place powders on the two lips, and then place your fingers indicating both hands in front of them.
And the woman is on her back, her thighs extended, and then spread the two lips with force while that subtle chip is broken and the obstruction is opened.
And then take wool and soak it in oil, place it over the area, and keep someone there to prevent the incised area from becoming consolidated.
If the ulcer is large and deep, then you must incise it with a spatula or a leaf of mint.
If the ulcer is superficial, then suspend it with a wick, and incise it.
And use those medicines that stop the flow of venom from a bite, such as vervain, dragon's blood, and garlic, prepared with honey.
And then administer a wide lead cannula to prevent the wound from becoming only slightly consolidated.
And keep it for a few days and administer weak wine.
And then use the other consolidation remedy while it is healing.
And sometimes accidents occur in the predominant state of other tissues, then you must incise according to this manner. If this is due to a chronic abscess, in the chronic abscess which is in the major part do not make any counter-irritation in any manner.
Capitol LXXIII.
For the cure of hemorrhoids and prolapse and of red boil that occurs in the vagina of women.
Hemorrhoids are appreciated as the result of small veins around which constantly circulate drops of blood; and as for ancient hemorrhoids, they are formed into cords.
And I have already said in the division the species of those and the signs of those, and to say likewise which receive cure and which do not receive cure.
Therefore, say that hemorrhoids and cords when in the prolapse of the major part and do not appear in sensation, then in those do not make any cure.
But those that are in the opening of the major part on which there is sensation, are those that are cured.
And make sure you place the woman in a lying position and extend her thighs, either with scissors or a rough cloth, and incise there where the roots are.
And then sprinkle over those incisions the flux of the juice from one of the inscissive powders several times with a mouth, as if you were speaking or looking at those.
And then foment the soles of his feet for an hour, and then cool that with cold water.
And if the bleeding persists, then make that incision in a decoction of sumac and of scours of millet grains and of ginger and of appearance.
And then take flour of ochre and mix it with honey and wine, and make an ointment with this over his back.
And if the bleeding is stopped, that is good; otherwise, apply it with two vetches, and make six incisions on the breasts.
And then take wool and submerge it in the juice of caraway or in the juice of agrimony or in the juice of horehound with fermented wine, and apply it to the area; and then cure the area with ointments until it is healed.
And cure that which is within and let it be healed.
Chapter 74.
On the perforation of the vein in the thigh.
Various specific forms of apothem (a type of abscess) occur in the thigh, such as carbuncle, apothema lapident, ulcer, adhubelat, erpetromens, fistulas emoryas, raguarrias, thyly, and other apothemas. And I have already mentioned these diseases and their specific forms, as well as the signs of these conditions, and their treatments in the division.
And ensure that I mention in this treatise on apothem to cut the one that appears in the thigh among those apothems that heal well, and if you want to know how the operation is performed, I will tell you in what manner.
Then consider whether the pain in the abscess at its beginning is acute upon percussion and flux and fever, and sometimes that it turns red and if it feels like a perforation inside, and treat it with what helps towards maturity until the acuity of the accidents ceases.
Then you should place the woman on a bench that has two benches; recline her on her side and adjust her feet to the part behind her abdomen, and spread her thighs apart, and place her arms beneath her armpits, with her hands resting on her sides.
Then the midwife should follow the vein straight and administer the instrument through the openings of the uterus, the form of which will come in the cases that will be discussed soon.
When you want to administer this instrument, place it along the length of the uterus, and what part of the instrument enters the uterus should not exceed the length of the uterus and expel the disease. But if the instrument is larger than the size of the sore, then cover it with powder over the sore's size so that no part of the instrument enters the sore.
And cover it so that the fluid that flows in the needle passes above and that the minister holds the needle and rotates the fluid within until the openings of the sore are open.
And when the excitation appears, and it is touched with the hand and is hot and moist, then cover that part by cooling its head with spittle.
And when the pus is evacuated, then cover the wound with a cloth submerged in slightly pressed oil or green oil in which there is some astringency; and place the paste in the area around the sore.
And cover the sore and over the foot with clean wool submerged in water in which vervain is boiled.
And it should be cured in about two days by applying ointment which suits the wound until it is healed.
And sometimes the liver and wound are washed and tried with chrismated water and honey, then with water in which is stirred rye or barley flour, and then returned to ointment.
And if the wound is inside the liver softened, then covet that you be prohibited from treating it with iron, but take care that you do as we have said in the division.
Capitol.lix.
To teach midwives how to treat false labors according to an unnatural figure or condition.
Necessary cause is that the midwife know at the beginning the figure of a natural birth by signs. When you see the female strain at the openings and desire to smell the air, and because of this she is flushed with what is over her during labor, and hastens the onset of false labor, then you know that this part is according to a natural figure, and it is the onset of the child upon her head. The second one is either above or suspended or pendant from the navel.
When you see those signs, then cover the abdomen so that the fetus descends gently; when it is on its head, turn it to the second position, and this is cleansed of those superfluities by good purification.
That which is another to this part is unnatural and unacceptable, for when the fetus lies on its feet, the body of the fetus is before the head of the fetus and its feet, and one of its hands, or at its side, or the head of the fetus, and one of its hands, or at its belly, and strongly it is turned over its own back, and resembling the figures of such things is unacceptable.
For necessary cause the midwife must be wise and subtle in all those causes, and she must guard against error and deception.
And I show all the figures of those, and what engine is in those so that it is signified by this and is placed upon this.
When the fetus lies on its head by natural position, and it is strong upon the woman and made into a difficult part, and sometimes the virtue of labor has already weakened, then do that section, or what women have for labor, and evaporate the pain with fenugreek seed and olive oil.
And then insert the needle between his so-called small spines and split it at that second one, or dry out that one with its nail through which flows what is in it of humidity. And press the woman's abdomen so that it descends the fetus.
But if it does not descend, then cause the woman to be anointed with almond oil and fennel oil.
And then command her, the cristaria, to be wrapped and make her sneeze by her condition; and keep her mouth and her nose closed for one hour, until the fetus comes out.
And if both parts of the fetus have come out at the beginning, then cause her to deliver them gradually with facilitation. But if she does not obey the instrument, then place the woman on a cushion and lift her feet off it, and hold the cushion over the ground; and the woman should be held so that she does not fall due to the concussion.
And if the hands are not turned inside and the cut is deep, then incise there and extract the fragment of the cut or hold the body with a cloth and extract it equally, for that will be thoroughly cleaned.
When the cut is over its feet, then push those parts into it, and soon make the cut smaller, and soon take one foot and extend those parts little by little.
More when it is sewn between the thighs, then command him to express it, and make that drain by condition, for that will be thoroughly cleaned if God wills.
And if it is not thoroughly cleaned by what we have recommended, then return the cut little by little into place as you pause it according to the natural figure, for that will be thoroughly cleaned by a slight stitch.
And if it is forbidden by all that we have recommended, then take of fine alum and dissolved gum, and pound them together in the mortar for good pounding, and then mix with it the urine of a woman, below the navel. And then make that cut in clear water, when you can reach the hypochondria.
And when you see that the parts around him are numbed, then perform a fumigation with myrtle on him and place your hand over it. And when you have performed the fumigation for an hour, then make a cut on it, and expose the mouth of the wound, and lift it, and apply a gentle compression to the part below the abdomen, which will soon become firm.
Suture the wound longitudinally with one of their hands. Gently reduce the hand back into place, but if you cannot reduce it, then lift the woman and make her urinate.
And if she cannot urinate, then apply a jalaz on the lyte, and shake the patient's thighs with a violent concussion, and then administer liniments which you prepare from mucilages.
And if the childbirth has come, then apply a cerclage with sutures, and then study the reduction of the hand, and close the wound according to its natural figure, and make the woman cough and command her to bear it as the wound heals.
Lift the leg over the neck and spread the patient's hands while stretching the foot. Have the midwife hold the foot and gently rotate it little by little, so that it becomes more comfortable.
And when it is equalized and comfortable, then place there oil and ointments as we have recommended.
And then command that it be gently moistened little by little, and when you have done this, place the cloth on a basin and command that it be inclined over the right side, and then command that it be warm. Make the cloth steamy with heat. The fetus has exited and is prepared on the side.
When the mother experiences severe pain in this manner, consider it, and then incise the second layer with your knife so that it is evacuated of moisture.
And if the foot is suspended over the face and neck of the patient, then incise the third layer, so that it is not retained and causes harm.
And then push the fetus into the parts inside where you have placed that one according to what fits, and order the woman to strain herself several times, and the rest be softly expelled by effusion, if God wills.
The exit of two infants or many fetuses. Know that twin spots of many births are natural, and sometimes they give birth to three or four at once, but this is strange and hard to determine. Yet these causes are from nature, not from illness.
And count those, whether they are multiple or a single second birth, and they are separated by cipha (a type of bandage). They distinguish between the ligament at the navel of each. Sometimes they are softly expelled in several births as if it were a fetus by natural effusion, and some remain for several births as if by an unyielding effusion, as we have reported.
And if they are difficult, some of them you should deliver the fetus and proceed to what we have said about unnatural figures, then you treat those as we have recounted.
And if the midwife is skilled and does what she does with facility and subtlety, and with delay, and be ingenious according to all form as prepared by her leading to health.
Recollection of that which is formed in the matrix from embryos and are aborted.
Some pregnancies are formed in the womb one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and more up to ten. You must verify that a female who aborts has carried one, another with six entirely formed, the cause of which is made by the measurement of the glorious sages.
And all this covers what is in the science of the midwife that she must know well about it, and therefore place her hand upon it so that it is proper.
Chapter LXXVI.
On the extraction of the fetus when it is dead.
When you treat the dead fetus as we have said in the division of medicine and it is not outside the body, then you must use surgery if necessary. You should consider whether the woman is in good health and not affected by any of the conditions for which her life is feared to be in danger.
When the woman is laid on her back with her head inclined sideways and her thighs elevated.
The minister should hold that [part] with two hands or tied on the bed so that the body does not extend during the extraction.
Then apply to the mouth of the patient some sweet-smelling oil and oil of almond and fenugreek and sesame.
Then the midwife should anoint her hand with those oils and ointments, and place her hand with ease in the patient's mouth, and seek with her hand the location where the fingers should be placed on the fetus.
Place the fingers accordingly: then consider if the fetus is ready to be born by placing your fingers at its temples, or on its neck, or in its mouth, or palate, or leave the beard area, or on the furrow of the chest, or on the proper locations of the ribs, or leave the hypochondria.
And if the discharge is from his feet, at the ankle, or in the middle of the back.
And hold the thumb with your right hand, curve it at that location which is between the fingers of your left hand, insert your hand easily and place the thumb in one of those locations which we have mentioned, until you reach the root cause.
And place and hold the other thumb, or the third if necessary, so that it is in equal opposition, and not extension according to its straightness solely.
And gently move it in all directions, so that the tension of the tooth is relieved as is done in dental extraction.
And hold it in such a way that the extension is softened; and if any part of it is retained, then have the midwife apply some of her fingers with oil and insert them expertly and rotate around the part that is retained.
So if the part of the flesh is forgotten, then the nails may grow into that place; and do this while all the flesh is retracted.
But if the hand is placed in front of the other, and it is not possible to reduce it due to the constriction, then cover that part with a cloth; and then extract it while all of it is retracted, and incise it either at the joint of the hand or in its side.
And do the same with the other hand and both feet.
But if the head of the flesh is large, or you encounter constriction during incision, or it is in the head with accumulated water, then you must insert sponge-tipped forceps between the fingers and cut open the head to drain the water, or use a scoop-like instrument called "alundat," the shape of which will be shown in the forms of other instruments in the chapter that follows this.
And do the same if the flesh has a large head by nature: then you must incise it with a hooked knife, or use an alundat as we have said; and then extract the bones with forceps.
And if the head is swollen and constricted, you should lift the sternum, then cut where the humidity which is in the feet has infiltrated.
And if it is not complicated, nor obstructed by swelling, then you should incise the head as soon as possible according to what is convenient for you.
And if the swelling of the abdomen is suppurated or in edema, then you should perforate it where the humidity that is in it flows.
And if the abscess is on their feet, then the draw of it is light and its direction to the mouth of the vein is light.
And if it is constricted, you should incise the abdomen and feet, then you should extract that with a cloth which you have wrapped around your hand, and incise the abdomen and feet where what is within flows out.
And if the other members are swollen and return to normal, then the surgeon should insert her left hand; and if the mouth of the vein is opened, then she should insert her hand in the prehensor of layre, and seek for the head, and pull that with the fingers into the mouth of the vein, and quickly insert one or two uncia, and pull them with those.
And if the mouth of the main vein is narrowed by an abscess, when it happens to someone, then ensure it is not twisted; first, ensure that you administer effusion of fatty humid causes. And administer poultices; and follow the patient with waters that soften and moisten.
And if the wound is on the side, then if possible, punctuate it: and administer what we have said about the living wound.
And if that is not possible, then incise it in pieces, and extract it.
And ensure that you do not leave any cause inside the wound.
And when you have completed your operation, then administer what we have said about the treatment of abscesses caused by an abscess in the main vein.
And if there is a flow of blood, then apply compresses with astringent waters and administer the other treatment.
And I have already seen a woman in her womb where one child was dead, and nearby another pregnancy began, and the dead child is no longer present. It happens that after a long time an abscess in the inguinal region; and when opened, it is filled with pus, and begins to discharge blood.
And I was called to treat it, and treated it for a long time, and the wound did not heal completely.
Then I applied plaster with strong adhesive properties over it, and set one splint, and after some days, set another splint; and I was greatly amazed, for in the thigh there is no bone.
And then I realized that they were the bones of the dead child.
Then I dressed the wound, and extracted bones from it, the child existing in her uterine conditions, and having witnessed such a manner for a long time, I corrected part of the arm.
And I do not consider it strange, but rather that in this there is science and aid to what the physician uses his hand for in treatment.
Of the forms of the instruments that are necessary to extract the stone.
Form of vertigo at which the liver is opened:
This is the form of strengthener in which you equalize the ligaments, at which equalization there are two vertigines at the ends of two fuci. But let this vertigine be hollow and more delicate in structure, and made of hemp or of young fuci.
And let the width of each fust be as wide as two fingers, and the edge on both sides as wide as one finger. The length of each is a palm and a half; in the middle location of two fuci, there are two joints of that same type of fust, which are already firmly set, with each having a length of about a palm and a little more, and a width as wide as two fingers, or a little more.
And these two additional items be inserted into the mouth of the womb so that they be open when you revolve the two prescribed virtues.
Form another one similar to that, both subtle and light:
Make it of wood or bone according to the likeness of forceps. Moreover, at the extremity of each, there are two additional pieces as you see, and the length of those pieces is about one palm, and the width of each is two fingers.
And when you want to open the womb, then place the woman on her side with her feet hanging down, opening what is between her thighs. And then open your hand with the instrument as you would with scissors equally according to the quantity you want of the size of the womb before the midwife does what you want.
The form of the virtue which the ancients would say:
Form of pressing which is applied to the fist:
Form of support in which the large head is contained
And it is assembled to forceps which have teeth at the extremity, as you see. Sometimes it is made long like forceps according to this form, as you see, with teeth like extraction forceps from which it is inserted and contained. Form of support simple:
Form of hook having one spine:
Form of hook having two spines:
Form of spatula having two extremities such that the head is incised:
Form of two flat spatulas:
All these instruments are exercised, and when more species of such are multiplied, the craftsman should prepare them, making their operation lighter and providing more of them due to their quantity.
And do not delay in preparing those instruments, for the necessity of them is not excusable.
For the extraction of the second child.
When the second child is retained, you must induce labor, then wait until you command the patient to bear down, and then perform that maneuver with caution, and strengthen your hand over her mouth and nostrils. If by this it comes forth, well done.
And if not, then take a probe and perforate in the covering a tract and place it over the burning herbs to cover the mouth of the uterus, as with calamus, rue, anethum, camomile, scikatsis Arabic, and cinnamon. All these herbs or some of them may be submerged in water in the probe, and place that over the fire.
And then place a cane tube in the mouth of the uterus, and hold that there so that the vapor comes to the cavity of the uterus.
And then perform that sneezing exercise as we have said before, and the second one should be done quickly.
If this remedy is not effective, then command the midwife to submerge her left hand in sesame oil or poppyseed oil, and then insert that into the wound and seek out the second one, as you have found it, and take it out gradually. If it adheres to the mother's hand, then insert her hand according to what we have recommended, and when you have found the second one, extract it little by little according to correctness so that the mother does not fall due to the force. Place the wound on the back and front with ease.
And if the mouth of the mother is constricted, we have already recommended the treatment with sneezing and application of a paste with herbs.
If not all the causes which we have recounted are outside your mind in a state of abstraction, then guard yourself that you do not fatigue it repeatedly. Rather, apply ointment and tetra-pharmaka to the area near the opening of the large intestine in the woman's thigh, and consecrate it with oil; for this will cause the affected area to dissolve and be expelled within a few days.
When it flows out, it rises to the head and to the stomach, and this leads to the illness; then you should administer fumigations and appropriate remedies for this.
Then some of the Ancients prescribed fumigations with nettles and dry figs.
Forma of the instrument with which the woman is fumigated, you should retain her menstruation and the second one:
It should be made of iron or earthenware.
And place the thin end in the cohere and the wide end over the fire, and position the fumigation over the embers of the fire.
And hold that there while the sub-fumigation is consumed and they repeat another.
For the treatment of an unperforated child's anus.
When the child cries and its anus is not perforated, which have already been treated with a fine and rolled bandage. Then have the midwife perforate with her own said bandage; and if not, perforate it with a sharp instrument, and take care that it does not touch the membrane.
Then place it over the area infused with wine and oil; and cure that with ointment until it heals.
If you fear it is constricted, then place a cannula for several days; and wait until the child wants to defecate.
And if constriction of the anus occurs due to the consolidation of a boil or abscess; then have that consolidation incised, and cure it with what we have said about the treatment and the lancet.
For the treatment of fistulas that occasion openings.
The fistulas that occasion openings proceed from a decay and coarseness of those parts, which occur near the buttocks or in the space of one side.
And it is either a fistula or a ulcer.
And when that decay is old and comes from watery white moisture or subtle corruption, sometimes these fistulas penetrate.
And those that penetrate are known by what occurs from them through the outflow and through windiness; sometimes the patient suffers from the outflow, and strongly is affected by those worms.
And of these fistulas, sometimes in the space they penetrate into the bladder, and into the meat of the vagina; and of those that penetrate into the joint of the thigh and into the base of the foot.
And to know whether a fistula penetrates into the buttocks or does not penetrate, you should insert your finger into the buttock and gently probe with a thin reed or iron in the fistula when there is no pus.
But if there is a tumor, then insert into that fine cavity either lead or horse skin, which you feel in your hand.
And if you do not feel that at all and proceed from no cause of passage or worm or tumor, as we have said, then know that it is non-penetrant, and then apply a cure.
And when the fistula is penetrant into the bladder or into the flesh of the groin, then its significance is dysuria from that side and prohibition thereof until the area has been medically consolidated.
But if it is penetrant into the junction of the thigh or into the bone and causes pain in the circumference, then its sign is that the tumor pervades here if there is no tumor in the bone, and pain in the circumference of the affected area; and that from it there is constant swelling; and that it does not respond to that medical treatment, nor is it consolidated by ointment.
And in all those penetrant fistulas, there is not a complete cure, and the cure of these is hard work and the diligence of the medical leaves upon which they rely.
In those that are not penetrating and not ancient, heal with iron as I will recount to you later, and what is already healed and protracted.
And it is that the patient lies on his side with his knees bent, the thighs inclined toward the abdomen, and a lead or iron catheter inserted into the fistula if it is tortuous, so that you can feel where the catheter passes.
And if the patient feels pain around the throat, then you should insert the thumb on this side into the throat.
And if you feel the catheter already by itself clearly penetrating in your thumb, or something between your thumb and the sore or flesh, then you can be certain that it is penetrating; and then do not work on that, for healing is not there, as we have said.
But some say that it is healed in some men after a while.
And for the treatment in which healing is hoped for, you should heat a fine cautery according to the size of the fistula, as previously described, and insert that heated instrument into the fistula until it reaches around the throat; and then repeatedly do this two or three times until you can feel that all those diseased tissues around the fistula are firmly adhered, resembling the feathers of a bird.
And then cure that which is full of veins wrapped around where all those muscles adhere, and then cure that which is with medicines the flesh generating and consolidating, and if it is healed, well; and otherwise, when not healed in some time by another cure.
And if the cord enters but does not penetrate inside, you have said which is in the buttock, and between that and the cord which is a veil of flesh or cicatrix, and cauterize the fistula in what dries the surface of the wound, then dry the wound from the beginning of the fistula, and you should cauterize the cord, and let it be inside the fistula where the drying reaches the place where the end of the cord passes, and through the cord it is released and cut.
And then cleanse those fistulated wounds which are similar to the canal of an eagle's penis and do not drain from any other cause.
But if a flux of pus comes between you and the operation when examining those muscles, then let that which is worse be cauterized with fire or with sharp medicine. For cauterization with fire adjusts well to two habitual uses: it is the adjustment of those muscles, and the removal of pus by the drying effect of the heat.
And then cure that which is with cold veins wrapped in bandages or cut through inside the area getting warm, and then cure the wound with ointment of hard flesh generated and consolidated.
And in medicines in which there is stiffness and excoriation; when restored, it is cured, and you fear no recurrence.
And if the fistula already penetrates to the depth of the buttock and is long from the surface of the body, then insert your finger into the buttock and inquire with it.
And if the wound is touched and between you and her there is a membrane of cicatriz or of flesh, and is close to the penetration, then it is not an operation in it but rather according to the way of faith and hope.
That cause is to administer in it one of three ways: either cauterize that as we have said; or excise that until you achieve the cavity of it so that it is possible for you to insert and cure it properly; and do not proceed with a severe excision so that you do not penetrate the muscle containing the channel, and act according to the will of the patient; then cure it as we have said which will surely be healed; or lengthen that membrane and clean that until you make it dry near the buttock, as we have said, or by touch or by another pointed instrument, and then modify those fistula-curved flesh sections which are in the region where you can apply cauterization; and then strive to complete the restoration of the entire wound by excision, and if the opening above is not consolidated, and open the fistula at the part of the buttock, it will be easier for the patient. And sometimes the fistula is closed according to this manner: when you insert the probe into the fistula, and place it in the cleft of the buttocks near the surface of the body with the codena and at the margin of the buttocks, then take hold of a perforated extremity, as if piercing needles are prepared according to this form.
And insert it there, wrapping it in several threads or around them; and then insert the probe with thread into the fistula until you achieve its cavity.
But if it penetrates to the margin of the buttocks inside, then you extract the thread from that, holding it as you insert your hand into the buttock; then extract the end of the thread and adjust both ends equally, strengthening each one, and leave it for a day or two. When more of the tissue can be cut, strengthen well that part where the tissues between the two ends of the thread are cut.
And then cure the wound once it is consolidated and healed.
If the fistula openings are not penetrable, make them penetrable in any way prepared, but ensure it is moist on the inside so that you do not injure the tissue; then place something within to promote healing.
The shape of the pointed probe for which the fistula is punctured: one part is curved sharply while the other part is not sharp, so as not to injure what is unnecessary, just as you see.
For the suturing of hemorrhoids where there is pain at the site of those hemorrhoids.
Hemorrhoids can be classified into two ways: one where they appear like coals in the anus, or those that resemble raisin seeds. And of these, they can be small and large, with pain occurring at different times and being constant, with marks, and outside the anus, in the extremities.
However, those that are external to the anus are according to the degree of less humidity, from which yellow urine or a little of constant bloody discharge occurs, and are according to the color of the body.
And the cure for that which is inside the abdomen is to command the patient to lie down and express himself while the abdomen swells and the hemorrhoids appear. Then you sit down and place your hands under his arms, and quickly apply those that you have at your disposal.
But if the hands are not at your disposal because of their moisture and softness, then take those made of rough cloth or hard or woolen flax, and apply them to the thighs called tibias, and quickly incise them and sprinkle some powdered snake root over them, so that they serve as a cauterization; or cauterize them as previously described in the chapter on cauterization. And then treat those with the other method until they are healed.
And if the anus does not respond to evacuation, then insert a probe into the patient's rectum and have it dipped in the liquid that is in the abdomen and which will gently pass out when the patient strains.
If the hemorrhoids are outside the anus and the cause is slight, then you should grasp them with your finger or with forceps, introduce them, and afterwards cure them with what we have said until they are healed.
And if you have an incision, ensure that you suture it according to this manner: take thread wrapped around a needle and extract the hemorrhoids from the parts above, then make the thread penetrate through the edge of the other part, and wrap both ends of the thread in the remaining part below the needle, securing it laterally; and strengthen the hemorrhoid with strong structure, then knot the thread and remove the needle.
And do this to all of them, leaving one unsewn, so that the excess blood flows from there.
And place a soaked cloth in oil or ointment over the anus; place it there and command the patient to rest. And then let that which is inside remain; when it is cured, treat those with ointment or other cure until it is healed.
And since these are old and not effective in medicine, you should scratch them with the point of a needle or with your fingernail until they become moist, and then cover them with a piece of cloth from the other side, which prevents their healing; and then treat those that have healed.
And when you scrape them with a sharp blade more vigorously than the first time while they are bleeding and are excoriated; and then treat those that have healed.
Know that an abscess, this is key, and it is not something else but a round swelling resembling the head of a nail, and it occurs throughout the body but especially in the areas around the feet and fingers, and because of these pains you should remove it.
And then ensure that what is in the circuit of the key is cut out, and held with forceps or tongs, and eradicated from its root; and then cure that.
And if you wish, cauterize what follows as described in its chapter.
More often than warts, which are small rough rounded fistulas protruding on the surface of the body, and veins visible in most children.
And the treatment for it is to extend and cut out that part, or to narrow it with a needle or with thread that fits. And if you wish, cauterize it as we have said, with fire or with sharp medicine.
More often a formica (likely referring to a pimple or small boil) is a small fibrous or fistulated prominence on the surface of the body, preceded by pain in the area. When you touch it, it feels like a bite from an ant, and it forms around the body.
And the cure for this is that you take a strong awl or cautery needle and place it over the blister between which you contain the circle of the needle from the parts of the patient; then turn your hand around the needle as you insert what is within the circuit of the blister, and leave it in the projection of the flesh, and eradicate the blister by its root.
And if you wish, do this with an awl or iron needle according to this form:
Draw the upper part of the needle taut, slightly dull (i.e., non-perforated), wrapped so that above it the learning of the hand is blinded and the revolution of that [needle] is hidden.
And if you wish, cauterize the blister as described in the cauterization of athylos at the top of the cautery.
In the manner of the instruments you use to give cristari.
Sometimes cristari is made of silver or tin or forged iron or hammered iron; sometimes it is made of those instruments small and large according to those you use, for the one used in the cure of small children should be small; and for those whose buttocks are swollen or painful, the cristari of those should be small.
The form of pressing great and few:
The top of the catheter in which the bag is tied should be wide according to this manner; and there should be a distinct place where the bag is tied as you can see.
And the bottom end of it, which is inserted into the anus, should be closed (i.e., not open) like a lion's mouth, becoming finer towards the tip; and on one side of the tube there are two openings, and on the other side one opening, with the width of the opening according to the size of the rays and larger ones slightly smaller.
And the bag in which the medicines for the beast's bladder or sheepskin are placed should be about a palm in length.
And it should be perforated with several openings as it is twisted; and the spacing between the openings should be about the width of a finger.
Then insert strong raw honey into those openings, using ten pieces of honeycomb or surrounding them; adjust the bag to that. When the bag is placed in it, make the catheter straight at the top between two distinct points with firm constriction, and then press each opening: More importantly, the quality of pressing each opening should be such that you fill the bag with medicine, which should be warmed according to the quantity of tolerance of the patient; and ensure that it is neither too hot nor too cold.
And the patient is resupined on their back, elevates their legs, and places them on a cushion; then applies oil or honey or fenugreek or similar to the tip of the cautery; introduces it into the anus with ease, and the minister takes the bag and expresses it twice with vigor so that everything in the crista is evacuated into the intestine; then removes the crista and the patient lifts their legs to the wall.
And if the medicine forces it to evacuate, have it as much as it can; and if one sleeps all through the night, it is better for recovery.
And if you perform an incision on the abdomen for the solution of the stomach and the evacuation of the wound, then repeatedly apply the cautery until it is healed.
And if in the anus there are hemorrhoids or abscesses, then use a fine and sharp incision, among the incisions that children are accustomed to.
Of the treatment of wounds.
And I have already said in the division of the treatment of wounds what pertains to the free and with medicines according to the need.
Therefore, it is said that wounds are diverse according to where they are caused and according to the area on which they fall.
And the causes why wounds are made are thus: by a stone impact, or a sword cut or a dagger, or a lance strike, or a rod, or an arrow, or similar to those caused by such impacts.
More specifically, the wounds in the parts of the body are thus: like a wound that falls on the head, or the neck, or the foot, or the abdomen, or the thigh, or similar to those of the limbs.
And I am recommending the treatment of some wounds because you apply that reasoning and rule to other wounds.
And I will start with simple head ailments, for the recall of compound cases will come at the beginning of the third book.
So say that when an injury occurs in the head with a simple wound and it is not a fracture, consider: if it is due to a stone or similar object, and has already shattered the skull slightly only and is a large wound and you fear an evil development into an abscess, then you should probe and bleed the cephalic vein immediately, without delay; and extract from there as much blood as the power of the wound allows, provided no other reason prevents bleeding, especially if the blood that issues from the wound is little.
And the bleeding is from the opposite side of the injured wound; and one must guard against filling, and eating, and heavy foods.
But if some cause forbids reduction, then lessen the food but do not approach meat or drink.
And place your hand over the wound, if an abscess develops, apply heat with olive oil or with wine in which astringents are dissolved.
But if it is certain that an abscess has formed, then place yourself over the wound, if it is fresh with its own blood and the air has not changed that place, apply the powder which I will describe shortly.
But if the air has already changed that place, then place yourself over some ointments until it is healed.
But if the wound is large or due to a cut and the edges do not close properly with stitches, then adjust those with sutures according to the method of suturing that I will describe.
But if the wound is exposed to bone and skin, and it is not retention but only a small suspensory ligament, then incise that area and cure the wound with medicines, restore the flesh nearby in its proper place, and command the patient to eat foods in which they are accustomed: bread and those that resemble them, until it is healed.
And if you find putrefaction in the flesh and it does not adhere to the bone, then incise all of that area and let it drain, and cure it accordingly.
If in these swellings the artery or vein through which flows blood cannot be avoided, and it is not cut by medicines, then you inquire about the artery, and if you find that uncut one, you incise it with a knife or ligate it; and if necessity prompts you that what we have said does not apply, then you cauterize where the blood will be cut off.
If these swellings are simple and small, the cause of them is light; sprinkle this powder over them, for before the air changes, it will solidify there.
The manner of the powder is this: take one part olive oil of turpentine, two parts blood from a dragon, and three parts cauterized fat; mix them all well and sift them, fill the swelling with it, confine it properly within a good seal, and let it coagulate with the blood.
Then strengthen it above with powder and leave it, and do not disturb it while it is not absorbed, for the medicine will not take effect until it is healed.
And sometimes they do this solely with cautery, when in your presence there is none of dragon's blood.
And this surgical operation is performed in large abscesses when you judge it should be paused over those and be straightened, and for recent abscesses close to their surface, which the air has not yet altered.
And if the air has altered them, and especially when it is in the summer season, then I do not understand its position. But then cure those as we have said, try to place yourself over those abscesses with hot ointments, or place yourself over those powders of flour from bread in water and honey that produce heat; and place your hand over the other cure while they are healing.
And if a fracture occurs in the bone of the abscess and it is small, then you extract that with forceps.
And I will describe the treatment for fractures of the head in what follows.
Of the abscesses of the neck.
If the injury occurs in the neck, there is no difference in treatment, and between head injuries when they are simple.
But if the nerve of the neck is incised or an artery, when it is a nerve, there is no need for any surgical intervention but to avoid treatment that causes strong constriction, as has been said by Ziniar and Zegi who describe it like vitriol and similar substances that damage the nerves and counteract them. And do not place any cause of cold on the injury at all, for the substance of the nerves is cold and their continuity is with the brain, which is the seat of all the members.
And if it is to be treated with light medicines, such as a wash with lukewarm water, some times infused in olive oil (roasted or unroasted), and thyme when washed with lukewarm water and the other pears mingling according to this manner, and apply a moist ointment.
But if the injury is large, then perform缝合，或收缩其边缘，然后在愈合时用粉末进行治疗。
If there is depth to the wound or accidents in the lower part near the anus, then perforate it at the most compressed location.
If the wound has already cut an artery and there is a flow of blood, then separate or dry it out, or tie it with a ligature if necessity demands it.
If the spine of the shoulder has already been cut and all are saved except the veins of the neck, then you adjust the ligaments of the joint and suture over the bone of the shoulder without touching that; keep it in place and return it to its natural figure, and strengthen it with proper structure for a few days; then care for it with ointments that have stipticity and excitancy until it is healed.
If the wound has already reached the bone, then probe it, and if there are fragments of bone in it, extract all that you can from there; what is not accessible to you, leave it until the wound becomes purulent, and the swelling around it subsides.
And if the wound is recent, then dust it with the powder that was recommended. And if in the wound a fistula is formed, then cure it as described, of which the recall will come soon in its chapter.
If it is a wound from a spear or an axe, and you percuss its depth, then consider more if the wound has flatus or wind when the patient groans; then you know that the wound is fatal.
And if it has no depth and the wound is recent with its bleeding, then you apply powder for the first hour, and do not press it so that the blood does not remain in the depth of the wound and return to the heart, which could worsen the patient; instead, anoint it with attractive ointment, and remove it after two days.
And if the ointment is not present, then you apply to the wound like a wick so that it exudes what has of humidity; and make the patient sleep on the wound so that what is in the wound drains out.
If, however, more than three days have passed since the onset of the plague and no spasms or heart tremors occur nor constriction of the lungs, and if other good dispositions persist, then you may conclude that the plague has subsided; then treat both with calx and another form of treatment until it is healed.
If the healing of the wound is impossible, and the space has been opened for a long time, you may conclude that a fistula has formed; treat it accordingly according to its own capitulum.
And if the plague is due to a cut by a sword or dagger, and it is simple on the surface of the foot or toe, then treat it according to what is preceded by suturing, if it is large, or with powder, if it is small.
If it has already pierced the bone, and you are now cutting out pieces from it, then twist the wound and probe to extract those pieces, if they are separate. If they are not separate, then leave them in place until the wound heals, as their extraction is alleviated.
And for other accidents of pain in other members, the cure is the treatment we have said.
Of the pains in the abdomen.
The discomfort that occurs in the abdomen is either great, little, or intermediate.
And a small disruption is made difficult by another method. I understand that the reduction of it is more difficult if you do not prevent the introduction of air to its place promptly, as it opens and becomes swollen, making the instrument difficult to use.
And therefore the best disruption is intermediate, for in that case the reduction of the intestine is not difficult, unlike in the two species mentioned before.
And note that the suturing of the abdomen is according to four methods, but two common sutures are used similarly to the sutures of other body wounds.
And two other specific wounds communicate to the other wounds, more importantly, they are more specifically in the wound of the abdomen.
And I advise you concerning each exposure and declaration.
Therefore, say that when the wound is small and some cause of the intestine penetrates through it, making it difficult to reduce it back, this is in one of two ways: either due to the smallness of the disruption as we have said, or when inflammation comes to the intestine due to the coldness of the air.
And when this is so, then know that you should moisten that attempt by submerging a sponge or a wet cloth in clear water alone, or by using squinancy, spic, and embrocations to place the intestine inside as the inflammation resolves.
And sometimes in those cases where there is stiffness, it is better to use water alone in resolving the inflammation.
And when you see the inflammation being resolved, then moisten the intestine with water in which althea and mallows are steeped, for by this the instrument within it is alleviated due to little cause.
If the instrument near this cure is to be omitted, then split the disruption a little with an instrument where the veins are embedded.
The primary cure is better when it is proper and not a sectioning, and should not be left to dry out unnecessarily or due to deficiency.
Of the instrument, let its form be such:
One part of the blade sharp, and the other part blunt, with the tip subtle, but not too fine like a needle's point; rather slightly rounded.
And since the wound is enlarged and the intestine has been pushed out, then ensure that its reduction follows the natural form, in its proper place. If possible, do it over the exact spot, for this is better.
If the disruption is large and located in the lower part of the abdomen, then place the patient face down and position their limbs such that their head is further back than their body; if it is in the upper part of the abdomen, then place the patient on their back with their legs further back than their trunk.
And if the rupture is in one of the two parts of the abdomen, then pause your understanding and consideration for some time so that the part where the injury is may be higher than the other.
And thus you should administer this in large wounds and in wounds of moderate size.
And in small wounds, pause the preparation you have made, and place it between your most skilled fingers, which hold the rupture with one hand and adjust the edges of the wound with the other. Then uncover that area to the one who will suture for any reason nearby.
And this is the common method of suturing: take the needle, or count the holes according to the width of the wound; then leave a portion of the end of the disruption from the ring finger, and strongly pass the needle once, or ensure that you do not put a thread in both ends of the codena (a type of instrument), but instead pass two ends of the ciphac (thread) from the inner parts, so that you may make that part penetrate from one side; and now you have added two ends of the codena and two ends of the ciphac, and thus four orders are made.
And then strengthen the double thread in the circuit of the needle, and several times on both sides together, and then join the two edges and the flap by decent joining; and then leave the thickness of the digit and put another needle there, and then that one with thread as you did with the first needle; and do not cease to do this if necessary between the needles until you complete all the contraction of the flap.
And the needles should be of medium thickness between coarseness and subtlety, for the subtle ones penetrate the flesh lightly; and the coarse ones are difficult to handle in the seam, therefore it is advisable that they be of medium thickness in both subtlety and coarseness.
And it should not be that the needle is placed at both ends of the seam closely, for then the flesh might be penetrated lightly and the flap might heal before its proper consolidation.
And they should not be excessively elongated in suturing so that the flap is not prohibited from proper consolidation.
And then incise the tips of the needles so that they do not pull out of position while sewing; and place powder extracts from all parts over the suturing area, which cover the tips of the needles; and leave them until you can see that the flap is already consolidated.
These kinds of stitches with needles are more convenient in small wounds, for only one or two needles suffice for their suture.
The second suture is performed as follows: and you should stitch the four ends, from the thread and two ends of the needle, in one go, with a needle wrapped evenly in subtlety and thickness.
And when you have the needle penetrated these four ends, withdraw the needle from that thread from which it started, so that the thread retracts and comes up from the other side to the wound, so that the suture resembles a stitch in cloth where the threads are tightly secured.
And pause between each suture the thickness of a small finger.
And this suture I know for men.
And with this suture, I healed the wound that was inflicted upon a man in his belly, which had been cut by a刀割，伤口主要部分宽约一掌，位于腹部中部两侧各约半掌处，是肢体中部的破裂；然后我在伤口经过二十四个小时后愈合后进行了修复。
And the swelling is consolidated in the space of fifteen days or so, and cure that and it is healed; then that viscous fluid through natural means, and it is converted into its proper state.
And other doctors had judged that it was not healed; by miracle fire, for I did not cure that with ointment, for it was in a place where ointment could not reach nor any medicine, but I placed over the swelling as an old woman two times a day and applied frequent washing with honey water until the fire healed.
And I will say two species of suturing properly according to the narration of Paraula.
And you should begin with the chain stitch, and insert the needle from one side through to the inside part.
And thus, as the needle penetrates through the chain and follows the straight and lengthwise direction of the entire body, you leave the end of the thread on which you have inserted the needle; then pass the needle from the inside part through to the outside part in the other end of the wound.
And when you have made the penetration, then make another penetration in that member at the extremity of the part from outside to inside; leave the end of the catheter in this position, and insert the needle through the other internal extremity to the external side.
And make the penetration with your penetration which you make penetrate in the catheter at the extremity of the member which is on the inside until all of it penetrates.
And then begin from this side and fix the catheter at the extremity that is on the catheter in this position, and withdraw the needle from the sheath which you penetrated, and return it to the sheath with the extremity of the catheter that is on the other side; and withdraw the one from the sheath which belongs to it.
And do this one time and again, and do it another time or two more as you cook the entire part according to that example.
And the sum of this method of suturing is that you stitch with a skin needle on which you sew the skins, making sure that you stitch one half of the part from the extremity of the penis, and leave the other half inside until the suture is complete.
And the second species of suture which Gualia often teaches is that you stitch with a semilunar needle on which a skilled surgeon stitches. Make sure that you join every part to its corresponding part according to nature; and apply one end of another to the other end, doing this as I have taught you.
And you place the needle at your convenient side of the part from the outside, making it penetrate into that part from one side, leaving two ends of the needle; then you turn the needle and make it penetrate from the outside to the inside with the other two ends.
And you turn those ends, making some parts penetrate from inside to outside through the other side of the wound on the opposite side.
And this method of suturing is better than the common light suturing, and it is the suturing about which we have previously mentioned.
This is the speech of Gualia
And some would say that the suturing of the abdomen is corrected with two needles, so that you introduce into these a thread in various places, and begin with the introduction of the needle from where you should start, and make that one penetrate through the other layer according to the suture with which I join them equally.
And know that when the disruption is in the middle part of the abdomen, the suturing there is more difficult than in other parts of the abdomen.
And the judgment of medicinal treatment for plague is the judgment of other plagues.
And this cause is when you manage to obtain the recent plague from its own secretion before the air alters it, and you return the intestine and suture it properly, then place it over that carmine powder.
And if the air has already affected the wound, then place over it certain ointments which you have prepared so that they harden and fill the cavities, and be consolidated chymically and observed; and proceed to treat it as is done for other wounds until it heals.
And if you are not present at the medicines, then place over it frequently, until it begins to grow flesh, and change it twice a day as you have been taught, until it heals, for you will not need other medications in small dosages when the wounds are simple.
And if you fear that the wound might communicate injury to the main limbs, then soak a lion's wool in well-refined oil or in olive oil, and place it over the area between the joints, leaving the axillae uncovered.
And if there is pain or putrefaction in their bowels, then apply this several times, soak that in vinegar stiptic black terebinth, especially if the swelling has affected the bowel and caused an exitura penetrating into the cavity of the bowel.
And know that which is from the large intestine is more slightly healing than that which is in the fine intestines.
And it is difficult to heal because the intestine called "gunny" does not receive healing from plague that falls into it; this is due to the great number of veins in it and its large size, and because of the subtlety of that part and its proximity to the nature of nerves.
But if what you are treating from the plague is the skin, and you succeed in obtaining the recent raw material, reduce it according to your discretion and with which you reduce the intestines equally.
But if it has passed to the muscle and is already red or black, when you strengthen that with astringent on the area that is darkened, so that there may be a flow of pus, for in the skin there are veins and arteries.
And then incise what is another in that ligament, and place two ends of the astringent hanging from the cut-off part of the plague, so that above you may be alleviated the attraction of it by closing the opening of the skin and emission of the arm of the plague.
Remembrance of the plagues when they occur in the intestine.
When a disruption occurs in the intestine and is small, it is possible that it can be reduced in some individuals. This is why I saw one who had been wounded in his belly by the impact of a lance; the wound was old, causing a fistula due to its dryness and distension.
Then I sought to heal him, even though the wound was not fully cleansed in its healing process, but succeeded in subtlely integrating that which was diseased into what was healthy and ensuring the area became consolidated.
And when I saw the area already consolidated, I treated the patient who had suffered an injury in his belly; and no one was found to have been affected by this bad accident, but they maintained their usual habits of eating and drinking, and also bathed and exercised as before.
And some experienced individuals have said that when a small wound occurs in the intestine, it is necessary to bind it in this manner: and that you should take large pieces of bread; then tightly close the two edges of the wound, placing one piece of bread with its surface open over the two edges of the wound; therefore, when it adheres by closing its mouth, cut off the head of the piece, for it does not dissolve.
And then place another cauterization near the first one, and continue to make cauterizations one after another according to the size of the entire lesion.
And then reduce that and around the lesion; and remove those attached heads from within the intestine once it is healed; and do not harm the patient in any way.
And it is possible that the intestine is tied with fine twine made from the intestine of an animal, which is finer than a needle; and you should take the end of this twine from the intestine, making sure it is bare, then place the end in the fine twine and wrap it around, and then insert those needles and thread into the intestine and tie it in place.
And this method of suturing with cauterizations is merely by way of trust and hope.
But if the lesion is large and extensive, especially in one of the finer intestines, where there is no visible damage, it will not heal completely.
Of the treatment of abscesses and fistulas.
Know that any plague or apostema when it encloses and becomes ancient, and forms a ulcer, and is not consolidated and grows a branch constantly and is not incised, then in whatever member it is, universally it is named fistula and we call it an abscess.
And according to truth, fistula is a fleshy node, hard, white at which there is no pain and at which the cavity is such as it is by the bird's wound; and for this reason, it is called that ulcer root, that is, pain.
And in that ulcer there is moisture, which grows a branch; and the strong moisture is incised within a few hours. And sometimes this moisture is thick, small, and fine.
All those causes have been shown, and the signs of them and the cure for them by medicine in this division.
And thus I will show you how to know the cure for a fistula which is caused by surgical operation with the hand.
And know that fistulas can occur in all parts of the body; some of these fistulas lead to the large veins and arteries, or to the nerves, or to the liver, or to the intestine, or to the bladder, or to some of the ribs, or to one of the vertebrae, or to some joint composed thus like those of the hand and foot; and these are those that are near the main part and similar.
And thus of these fistulas that proceed in this manner they are among the maladies of difficult cure, and do not receive a cure or occupation; for such is work and ignorance.
And if any of these fistulas is so deep that it does not reach the locations mentioned, and you hope for its cure and wish to gain knowledge of it, then try with a finger or a needle. If the fistula goes straight, inquire about it from there.
If the fistula is tortuous, then investigate that with a fine lead probe, for lead has the lightness of its body and is bent to alleviate and straighten the tortuosity.
If the fistula has horrible movements, it is not possible for you to signify about it with a probe.
Then cristelize the orifices with those orifices, for the humidity by which you cristelize that will also affect other orifices and flow from them.
And then inquire exactly, according to the manner by which you can know if here are or nerves, and whether the fistula's cavity is distant or nearby, or whether it is a fistula of which only orifices move and this is all with the sum of your strength, with your examination, with which you examine the patient, and with your compression on the area with your hand, and the appearance of the significations and the causes of the swelling.
And when you have stood over all those causes at a true station, then go to the cure according to confidence: and it is that you consider now if it is a nearby apparent fistula or in a local place, distant from a joint, or from a nerve, or from an artery, or from a vein, or from one of the places which we and you name.
When you dry the fistula as previously described in its narration, and stop what is in that filtration and of corrupted flesh, and what is born in the orifice of the flesh, or thread and similar, cure it within until it is healed.
If the fistula is of great depth and straight, then delve into the wound until it is as deep as possible, and thoroughly remove all corrupted flesh; and administer sharp medicines wrapped in cloths, and insert those into the cavity of the fistula, which you have understood with a iron.
And do this with the medicine several times until the sharp medicine corrodes all that is rotten in the cavity of the fistula.
And then restore it by applying ointments that generate healthy flesh until it is healed.
If it is not healed by this, then cauterize it as we have recommended.
If the cause of the fistula is bone and you must certify this, then inquire about that dry and that wet one according to what we have recommended, if you do not prohibit any cause of vein or of nerve or of main limb as we have said.
But if the bone is exposed and there is some corruption and blackness in it, then you must excise that part where the corruption is completely halted; and then cure that with what fills the flesh where it has healed.
And if it is not yet healthy and you graft another piece of flesh as you do, then you must know that you have not completely eradicated the corruption; then you expose it again, and thoroughly explain and purify it with your final fortification, and then restore that area.
And so if it is healthy, that is good; but if not, then you must know that the corruption is deep within the body, which you have not reached, and then in that case, you should simply leave it alone.
And if the corrupt bone is small, or if it is possible to extract it with forceps, then you extract it with fine forceps that are suitable for this.
And if it is a matter of bones, then you must extract all of them, and from them, you do not leave any cause for your strength.
And if it is due to some cause of the humidity, and in their incision there is no fear or error, then make the incisions in those membranes or flesh if they are here, and deliver the bones.
And if the preparation to extract the bones is not at your discretion, then pause over the area that you can allow it to heal naturally, and leave it in a position near those bones of flesh and membranes, and guard the area that is not yet consolidated, and ensure that the section you have incised remains constricted in your operation.
Having done this, if you fear infection, pause over the wound submerged in a hot balsam of oil, or submerge it in Egyptian ointment, or in some of the green ointments. When these can be applied, and the bones are sufficiently separated from the flesh, then the swelling is alleviated.
If it is a large bone such as the hip or thigh bone or similar, and what is corrupted in it is only the surface, then rush that area only behind where the blackness and corruption are obstructed, and place it to restore the wound.
If what is corrupted in it is a large part, and the corruption has already reached the bone marrow, then it is necessary to close that area and excise it thoroughly at the place where the corruption has spread, and cure that until it is consolidated.
And I advise you when dealing with a patient in the thigh, to place that example and helper over your operation.
Let there be a young man around xxx years of age, who experiences pain in his thigh. The pain within the parts is over the matter inside the body where the matter has spread to the thigh, and the matter is that of an abscess, a large abscess, and it is not due to an external cause.
And then the abscess extended over time due to the error of the doctors where the abscess became mature, and the matter began to rupture. The cure was nearly paused when the thigh fistulated, and made openings in the lump through which pus and bodily fluids flowed.
And then the doctor cares for a full two years, and does not apply fire to those knowing more in the art, while I was called.
And there you see the leg and the fluids that flowed from it through those openings; and by then, the condition of that man was entirely stiffened and his color was yellowish.
And then I inserted the probe into one of those openings and guided the probe to the bone.
And then I examined all the openings closely and found those that could be reached from all parts of the leg.
And then I positioned myself and incised over one of the openings where I could describe a part of the bone, and found the corrupted vessel, which was already terrible, corrupted, and discolored; and a part of the leg had already become corrupted where it had penetrated into the marrow.
And then I clamped what was revealed to me and prepared the exposed bone.
And I conjecture that it is not in the bone but that corruption which abscides and constricts, and I had already razored it.
And then pause the restoration of the lesion with long-term consolidative medicines, and it is not consolidated.
And then you iterate and discover over the bone according to the first discovery, and find continuous corruption in the bone.
And constrict what appears to be that corruption, and then you must perform the cure and restoration, but it is not restored.
And then you discover over the other side and do not cease to incise the bone little by little particularly and perform the restoration of it, but it is not restored until you incise around a palm's breadth of it, and he extracts its marrow, and then restore it with medicines, and it is lightly consolidated and healed.
And there is no need for iteration in the operation of the section of it, but rather due to the position of the fracture and the scarcity of its tolerance and fear of death, for it suffers continuously due to excessive evacuation leading to poor circulation.
And therefore health is through complete healing, and nothing in place of healthy flesh endures; and it is well made the disposition of him in his body and return the virtue of him; and it is changed in his dispositions and not forced upon him contrary movements nor damage in any cause.
If the bone is prominent in the affected area of the body, then you must reduce it according to this manner: take firm and strong hold of it at the extremity of the prominent bone, and command someone to extend it. Place a larger woolen pad over the flesh that is left behind by the bone; extend the end of the pad so that it draws the flesh towards the space left. You should uncover the flesh in the area you wish to cut through so that the saw does not damage the flesh.
And place a stick or table properly under the bone, for when you do this, it is not forbidden to saw through the damaged flesh without disturbing it.
And you must ensure that the sawing is over the damaged area little by little, for if the corruption is within the bone's cavity and does not appear in its appearance through sensation, you may have to make another pass with the saw.
And if the bone is corrupted and not prominent, there is one continuous part joined to the other, and the corruption is in the middle of it or part of it, then you uncover the flesh from all parts; then place fusts there, and make the incision at the place where the corruption is inside, ensuring that the closure of the other part remains continuous.
And the closure should be small according to the location of the corruption, as we have said.
And if the corruption is at the joint, incise that corrupted joint, and cut the bone where it continues from the other part.
And if the corruption is at the continuation of two joints, then it is not in its proper place but is displaced.
And if the corruption is in the armpit of the arm or chest, it is very difficult; however, you must inquire how the corruption appears to you, and incise and dress that area according to any disposition which is within your ability. And whatever displacement should be corrected by you, as long as it does not contravene veins or nerves.
And know which are the incisors and the saws to cut these bones are made of according to the position of the bones, and the preparation of those, and their size, and their subtlety and greatness and smallness, and their hardness and rarity; so that you prepare for every kind of operation an instrument convenient for that operation.
And know that that operation means to you concerning the type of instrument of which you need; when you have great study and long knowledge of the ways of this art, and experience of the ways of ailments, for when you have them through your practice, you will do what is convenient for it with the instruments for all ailments.
And you shall know at the end of this chapter the number of the instruments which you will use as simples from which you will proceed to your prohibition which you will experience with the others. Form of the saw:
Form of another saw:
Forma of another will be great:
Forma of the ray: Let the head of this ray be according to the shape of the head of a star key, and its points be according to the shape of the prongs of an astfelkey.
And do not convey any other treatment but that the heads of the joints be rubbed when they are corrupted, or that the large opening be wide.
Forma of the smaller razor:
Forma of the flat razor:
Forma of another saw properly made: let it be made with an arc above and the sharpness of it of iron, and the member of it of well-made knife points. Forma of it:
Forma of the razor which has a cavity:
Form of a razor blade:
Form of another razor with curved extremity:
Form of a small razor resembling a needle:
Form of another smaller surgical instrument:
Form of another surgical instrument; this resembles a ray, and its extremity is like a锋利的边缘，其在骨的比例位置处显现。
Form of a ray which conforms to the proportion of that which is drilled into the bones:
And its extremity is triangular and sharply pointed.
And it is made of steel from India, and similarly grooved like all the causes we have said about razors, incisors, and saws.
For the incision of extremities and the jointing of bones.
The extremities suffer pain either from an intrinsic cause or from an extrinsic one, or as you have medicated that corruption through the cure of those medicines and the cure did not bring relief, or sometimes the corruption goes to the member which you do not perceive by any cause, then you must enter that member into this so that it accedes the corruption, in order to expel the evil either through death or malice which is greater misfortune of the member.
The sign of him upon whom this occurs is that the member turns black before it is cauterized as if it were already burned, or you may notice the blackness in that area where the burn has entered that part and taken possession of the whole body; therefore, you must immediately intervene for that.
And similarly, if the cause of the corruption is a blow from some venomous causes such as from a scorpion, a viper, or a rattle snake, and similar to this.
And if the corruption or the blow is in the extremity of the finger, then you must cut the finger and do not give space to the corruption so that it enters the hand.
And when you approach the hand, then incise that of the elbow, and do not give space for corruption to enter within the arm.
And if you prefer that, then incise the arm between the knee and the joint.
And if corruption passes and surrounds the knee, then in that case it is the death of the patient; and to administer another cause other than this for cure is a measure of virtue.
And similarly do for the foot when corruption prefers the sole of the foot, then incise that between one of the toes.
And if it takes in the sole of the foot, then incise the entire foot. But if it enters the heel, then incise the leg between the joint of the heel.
And if corruption has already reached the heel, then there is nothing but dismissal, and leave the patient to death.
And the manner of incising the member or sewing it is that you hold the ligament in the part you want to incise, and leave another where you wish; extend a ligament to the parts left, and extend the minister another one there; you separate the flesh which is between two ligaments until all the flesh is completely exposed; then it should be incised or sewn.
And ensure that a cloth is placed from all sides over it so that it does not touch the affected area, and that the wound and abscess are properly aligned when coming to the patient.
And if you encounter a flow of blood while working, then cauterize the area frequently, or place some constricting powders on it to stop the blood; then return to your treatment until it is completed.
And then tie the injured member with a ligament as is convenient, and care for it until it is healed.
And I advise you that if someone finds a black spot on their foot, this accident which you and I have advised about, is caused by a burning that resembles the combustion of fire.
And that corruption accidently first occurs within the said intestine.
And then that person prepares himself to wait until the healing goes to the member with the urgency of his pain and from the intensity of his discomfort, and the inflammation in that part enters the joint, and the wound heals.
Long time that corruption accidently occurs in the hand indicated.
And then it comes to me, and I perform the task of reflecting on that excess to be administered where it is placed on the hand of the medicines; and the excess does not reflect but begins to go into another part where it began in the hand.
And they make me inflame the hand of the patient, and I do not want to do this fearing the reflection of that excess, more because I fear the inflammation of the hand of the patient, for the virtue of gout was potent.
And after he wakes from me, he returns to his land and tells me that that person prepared and inflamed his hand entirely, and he was healed.
And I have added this narrative only to serve as an aid regarding what is known about this illness, and as a guideline by which it may be treated.
On the care of the bowels and the quality of the enema with medicines.
When an abscess occurs in some fleshly members and the space of the abscess is prolonged, collecting pus, and then it breaks and perforates, and the pus is extracted, leaving the location void as if it were a vessel, and the cloth above it remains like a thin cover, and no further corruption is reached, nor does it imprint on bone or nerve or sinew, it is called a sinus, and is not named a fistula.
Otherwise, if the space is prolonged such that corruption presses into some member, then it is called a fistula.
And the treatment for it is to insert that cloth entirely as if it were stirred, especially when made thin and formed like a cloth, and ensure that it does not adhere to the area due to its corruption.
If you hope that the clog adheres and that the corruption has not succeeded by a later consequence, and on the clog it has passed through facing, then you cure that with a cleansing enema.
And you consider the sinus, and if it is large, and the hand that exudes has a foul odor, then treat it with an enema using a medicinal Egyptian remedy which consists of oil, wine, and honey, each part in equal quantities, placed in a vessel and heated over a fire until the medicine boils and reaches the desired temperature.
And then you take what is necessary from it and dissolve the medicine in water and honey; then treat the sinus with this, strengthen its orifices, and leave the medicine in it for about two hours.
And then extract that medicine completely; do this for several days until the sinus is purified and the swelling subsides.
And sometimes an enema is performed with water from ashes when this medicine is not available; you take the ashes of vitriol, pour them into water; and then extract that and treat the sinus until you are sure the sinus has been sufficiently treated.
And if the patient does not tolerate the Egyptian medicine nor the water of the ash, then prepare that mixture with water and honey mixed with a third part of myrrh, and prepare that mixture with wine and honey mixed, for it is the property of honey to modify and wash, and wine makes the sinus adhere, especially when there is an excess ofstringiness and dryness in the wine.
And when you have applied it several times and you are sure that the sinus is sufficiently cleansed, then use a mixture that promotes flesh growth in it.
And you take ointment of dyafinicon, dissolve that mixture with diluted oil and stringy wine; or you use a mixture for clistering with some medicines and other ointments that have the properties which I have already written in the treatise on ointments.
And if the sinus开口较大，不能容纳导管，那么你逐渐用小铁棒扩大那个开口，并在扩大的过程中，在开口处放置包裹着埃及药膏或百里香膏的湿敷布。
And if the opening is wide, then you should suture the lips of it and leave in it a quantity in which the enema can be added.
And if the opening from which the stream flows is elevated above the parts above, then dry that at the lower place where it is located so that the stream can flow into it; when the stream is contained in the curvature of the sinus, the flesh will be generated in it.
And if it is not possible to dry the sinus in the area of the lower part as you wish, then you should perforate and prepare the member for the preparation by which the stream flows through it slightly according to what is at your disposal and so that no cause of the stream is retained.
May he who is over the aperture of the sinus, whom you warm at all times so that it does not come out what is inserted in it from the arm. And so that you may know if what flows from it is much or little, or is digestible, or is non-digestible.
And so you consider the location of that sinus, if in it the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess.
And as your medication is prolonged in this manner, and you see the matter that is discharged over the aperture of the sinus has adhered, or is approaching adherence, then hold it loose or for a day, and when you remove the bandage, then change the cloth and renew the ointment.
May it be that from the sinus there is a subtle virus spreading, then do not worry about its adherence, for the healing of it progresses, for in some people the generation of flesh in their wounds takes longer, and in those, the opposite occurs.
And if from the sinus for nearly days it is situated in indigestion, then you perceive that the sinus does not adhere; and if the adherence of the sinus is delayed and the cause is prolonged, then you adjust in drying of the medicines, and if the medicines are moist in their substance and in their virtue, they are dried thus like an ointment dauphinycon when there is excessive addition of resin.
And for the one that is most recent and needs treatment, you should take an ointment dauphinycon and dissolve it in sweet oil, and apply it well on the wound, and use this.
And make it seem in that action, when there is no hand, use dauphinycon ointment, and when myrrh and aloes and saffron are present, mix them all and powder them over the honey while it is on fire, and then lay this over cloth and strengthen it on the sinus; and lay this on the honey which you have mixed and made thick, and strengthen that with cloth.
And sometimes it is administered to her with long artery juice and root of celestial lily (and this is the celestial lily) and powder of ergot and centaury, and use those simples or adjusted, press them and sift over honey which I have recommended; and apply it.
And if the sinus is prolonged and does not heal with this treatment, then you should know that the corruption is in the root of it, and make an inquiry into the bones or other hard members or ligaments; then you cure it with a fistula cure, as was said above.
For the treatment of tumors, nail attrition, and incision of the digit with sectioning.
Panarici is an abscess which leaves the nail of the finger or toe, and is hard in other fingers, and as it is prolonged and its cure is less prized, or is corrupted from a carbuncle, or is corrupted, and a branch enters where you corrode the root of the nail, and thoroughly corrupts that part entirely, and thoroughly allows its corruption to penetrate into the bone within which there is an offensive smell, and the extremity of the finger is cut off, and the color of it becomes jaundiced.
And when you have done that as we said in the division and do not connect your cure, then proceed to remove all the fluid that is released from the joint and place a cautery on it, for a cautery motion is beneficial in this.
But if the bone is sound and the joint is healthy, and the additions of the joint are drawn to compress the flesh towards the inner parts, and begin to pierce and lead them, then you should pause a fine needle at the angle of the joint that pierces the flesh, push it out and incise that flesh with ease, and place your hand over what remains of the flesh as the medicines corrosive burn in between until it is thoroughly treated; then cure that with ointment once it is healed.
But if the corruption has already reached the bone, then you must incise the bone there and extract it, for nothing is healed that remains in the corrupted bone.
And if you see the corrosion and the corruption spread to the same area, then incise there in one of the sinuses according to where its location is remembered, and cure that once it is healed.
If at the joint upon percussion or friction there is intense pain, then at the beginning lanced the patient, and quickly draw out the fluid from the joint with a sharp needle by transverse sectioning above in juice, and guard that the section does not reach into the flesh left in the joint, for you will thereby cause the patient intense pain, which is due to the nature of excess adjusted flesh in that place; and cure that area with what alleviates pain.
Moreover, by "adjusted," which is inherent in many people, the flesh is very heavy, and the bones are very light, or the joint is very heavy.
And some of it is located in the region of the joint, or the nature of it is situated in certain nodules of the fingers. Moreover, that which is located in certain nodules of the fingers is not severe, while that which is located in the joints is more painful.
And for those that are fleshy, the section is light, and you should incise it with a broad needle.
More difficult for one born near the joint, the cure is; therefore, guard yourself from its removal.
More difficult for one born near the kneecap, cut into the beginning of the flesh around in a round incision into the bone, and nearby will be one of those suitable grooves for this, and cure that within until it is healed.
More difficult the consolidation which occurs to the fingers between their knuckles due to observed spots or by nature of the person who is born with them, or by consolidation from plague or by burning, then you must cure that consolidation until the fingers return to their natural form.
And place your hand between his sheets where you have infused oil to ensure they do not consolidate lightly, and separate between them, or place a thin sheet of lead between them until they are properly consolidated.
And similarly, if consolidation occurs in some fingers on the palm, then you must cure that consolidation according to preparation and restore them to the figure of the member.
Of varicose veins, so they are.
Varicose veins are such, and they are thickened veins full of melancholic superfluities that occur in the parts of the body, and their greatest appearance is in the groins, especially in the groins of those who travel much, work much, and carry things.
Then you should administer a purge of the body from black bile several times with strong expulsion, and subsequently bleed the patient from the internal jugular vein.
More importantly, the treatment for them is according to two methods: one is to incise and extract that black blood, and the other method is to elevate the vein and extract it entirely.
The sectioning is done in this manner: wet the groin area with hot water until the thick blood is resolved, which is due to the heat of the groin. Then strengthen the area around the patient's thigh just below the inner part of the knee with a bandage on the outer side of the thigh. Next, dry the vein in one, two, or three places with a wide drying technique. Meanwhile, lift the black blood with your hand from the lower part of the groin up to its center and beyond, until the desired quantity of blood has drained out, which is sufficient to diminish the power of the malady.
And then raise her up, and command her to abstain from foods generating black bile.
And continue the cure through phlebotomy when the veins are full and this is noted by the patient.
Raise the limb in this manner: you should pull the thigh of the patient, if there are hairs on it, and then immerse the leg in warm water and rub the thigh with wet cloths until it becomes red and the veins are prominent; or exercise it with strong exertion if hot water is not available, until the limb is flushed.
And then dry the leg along the vein by sectioning it or in its lower part you should cut it off.
And then cut the leg with scissors and scrape the vein from all sides until you notice it, and observe carefully as that rope-like structure begins to turn black.
And then, as you cut the leg, you should see that white thing which is like a rope.
And then you place that leg elevated and bent at the knee, and suspend it on an cushion or lion skin.
And then heat another part near that section for three days, and then scrape the knee from above the vein as it appears.
And then elevate that and incise the rear section of the leg, and then extract and elevate it as it is inserted through the second section, and then extract it from the section above that.
And do this as you extract it from the section that is higher up or above all sections, once everything is inserted; then incise that.
And if you do not follow this to extract and elevate, then insert a strong double-threaded needle and tie that thread, extracting it. Or insert a rod and rotate your hand in all directions until it is inserted. And make sure it is not incised; for if it is broken, it will be difficult to elevate that part and will have come down due to the damage.
And when you have thoroughly washed it out, then place over the wound lamb's wool soaked in wine and olive oil, either well-filtered or not, and dress it so that it heals.
And if the vein is contracted having tortuosity in which there is an envelopment at the parts, and it does not follow straightness as we have said, then cut over that entirely from the part of the tortuosity and at the locations of the envelopment, and place it suspended by ties so that you raise that entirely.
And guard yourself in your section so that you do not cut the vein and that you do not damage it, for it will be difficult to raise that; use your prudence there.
Form of the incident where the vein is dried up:
It is not to be as with other ties (uncis) nor of sharp extremity so that it does not damage the vein; and it is of great flexibility like a lion, for if it were subtle, it would cut the vein due to its subtlety; having this in its superfluous thickness as we have said.
From the extraction of the leg vein.
This vein is generated in the legs in lands of calves as Al-Ategi describes in the land of Arabs and in the lands of India, in dry and barren lands with little endurance where no grass or trees grow.
And elsewhere in the body, this vein is generated other than in the calves.
And its generation is from putrefaction that breaks the chain as venom inside the body becomes serpents, vermin, and worms that generate between the chain and the flesh.
And the sign of the susceptibility to the onset of this is when you encounter inflammation in the calf; then, nearby, the area becomes swollen; and soon after, the vein starts to protrude from the site of that swelling, seeming like a plant growing out.
And then, when the extremity appears, cover that area with a piece of lead weighing as much as one dragon. Two dragons' worth, and note it, leaving the lead suspended from the calf.
And as often as some cause affects the parts outside, wrap this in lead and apply it. And if the wound is prolonged, then you incise a part of it and wrap up the remainder; and do not incise that which is inside while something is outside, for if you incise that, it will contract and enter the flesh, causing an abscess, inflammation, and a bad ulcer.
Because the abscess should be treated thoroughly and extracted little by little, until it is expelled from the anus, and no cause should be left in the body.
And from this vein, some men have been stretched to the length of five or six palms and I have already been informed that one was stretched to twenty palms.
And if it is incised during the time of its medication, then insert the needle into the vein and puncture that part along the length of the body, until all that is in the matter is evacuated. Then administer putrefaction to the area for several days with medicines; and cure that by the treatment of abscesses.
And this vein sometimes has roots, and more especially when it appears at the joint of the foot or in the foot, and water flows into it through many openings, and is derived from each opening.
And therefore treat it thus as we have said in the division and what was said above.
Of the section on worms generated under the skin and it is called the cattle disease.
This illness is named in some lands as the cattle disease because many times it affects cows and there is a worm that is native between the bone and the flesh, and goes throughout the body up and down, and is shown by its own movement from member to member breaking through the bone and coming out.
And its generation is through the putrefaction of some humors, just as worms, snakes, worms, and ascarids are generated in the belly.
And it is feared because of its malice, for when it goes through the body and rises to the head, and reaches the vein, then greatly inflames it and enters and destroys the vein, and this happens many times.
And when you want to cure that and extract it, then do not fail to observe its circulation and appearance through sensation, then check what is on it and what is left it in firm compression and construction, and dry it thoroughly and extract that.
And if it is palpated in the flesh and you do not find it, then place a cautery on fire over the area where it resides, and the main fear is corruption of it, which corrupts the area as we have said.
And if you find that it has reached near the heart, then apply strong strictures over the supraclavicular area, and dry it thoroughly, and extract it; and observe that the illness uses modification of its body through medicines that evacuate corrupt bad humors, and avoid foods causing putrefaction.
Of the section on the illness of gout.
This illness is called gout in our land, and it is a pain that occurs in some limbs, and often is displaced from limb to limb.
And now I have seen that which I shall recount to you. I was called to a sick woman at a village, and examined her arm and found a small swelling in the vein of the arm, and after being pressed for about an hour, I saw that this swelling rose up like a worm rising from below, albeit less urgently than feared, like greenish silver moving from place to place.
And then I applied myself to the pain in that area and pressed it into the muscle, and placed my hand there for about an hour.
And then I corrected the other side of the body near where I treated the other arm.
And then I was asked to move herself all over her body as you could see; and it was too marvelous to observe the change in her and the speed of member to member. And I had already seen this before in my hands according to that manner, but I have seen movements where it is evident that the pain is being permuted from member to member. But not all have such heels as in the female.
And I do not consider it to be so, but rather that it is due to the fact that the female had a thin body and exposed veins, and in this case the sensation of that fullness has changed.
And it is necessary that there be no appearance of this backward curvature in those who are delicate and have soft, engorged veins.
And since you want the cure for it, and the patient feels that pain, if it does not appear as we have said regarding the heel, then strengthen that area and gently and thoroughly apply pressure to it until the constricted fullness is inserted, and cauterize the area.
But if you do not see it in the heel, then cure that by discharging from the body and what you expel of fullness, and purge those with stinky pills and pills of sesame and similar.
From the extraction of arrows.
Arrows are diverse according to species, and according to the locations of the body in which they lodge, for their diversity is that some have large points, small, concave, and silent, being solid; and some have three angles, and of those to which belong tongues; and of those to which belong feathers.
And of the signs of poisoning are when the arrow lodges in it, passes through the bone, and is situated above the brain, which is on top of the skull, for it happens due to the strong poison, scotoma, vertigo, redness in the pupils, inflammation and redness of the tongue, spasms and confusion of understanding, and vomiting of bile. The patient feels a heavy head, with the speech cut off and the voice destroyed, and is situated at the site of the wound white moisture resembling powder, and from it appearing like an excess of fleshiness.
And therefore if you see these signs, then abstain from the cure and extraction of the arrow, unless it is outside.
And the signs of the arrow when it is in the heart are that it is near the left nipple, and you feel a hard lump there which is not visible; and strong movement of the arrow seems like the pulse, and the flow of the dark bloody wound, and the coldness at the extremities, pallor of the face, and syncope; and therefore you would know that death descends totally hopeless.
And the signs when the arrow has wounded the lung are spitting of bloody foam from the wound, and the vessels near the throat are engorged, and the color of the patient is changed, and he exhales a great spirit or sighs for air with difficulty.
And if the arrow is in the periosteum which is in the foot, and the pain then is near the small bones, and causes a great and violent pain with much sighing, and not all the members' muscles are affected.
And if you press on the arrow in the stomach, then strongly raise the part of the wound containing some undigested food.
And if you press on the arrow in the belly, and it is embedded there, raise some opening of the wound, or the flesh, or intestine which is disrupted, and there is no hope for its cure by extracting the arrow.
And if the arrow presses on the bladder, and urine flows out, and its process is due to some cause at the parts outside, and strong pain occurs in the wound, then know that it is fatal.
Moreover, the other limbs such as the face, neck, shoulder, arm, helper muscle, spinal column, furcula, coxa, and the like parts resembling the limbs, are saved according to major dispositions when the arrow does not find vein nor artery, and is not a venomous arrow.
And I will recount to you what I have seen of the nature of these arrows, so that you may understand from this about their treatment.
The cause is that an arrow struck the eye of a man in one eye at the corner of his eyelid near the nose, and I extracted it from the other side, leaving the bone of his ear with him, and he recovered, and was not injured in his eye.
And I extracted another arrow from a Jew which struck him in the bone of his eye, leaving the eyelid, but the arrow was hidden and could not be removed except for a small extremity which adhered to its shaft, and it was a large arrow among the sharp arrows of the Turks, with a lion made of iron on which there were no ears.
And the Jew recovered, and was not injured in his eye, which would have been badly injured.
And I extracted another arrow from a Christian man which was struck in the shoulder, and it was an Arab arrow, and that one with its ears; then I incised over it between two muscles, and it was submerged in his shoulder; then I dissected around it, and soon extracted it, and the Christian recovered.
And another arrow was extracted from a man which was embedded in his stomach, and I observed that he died from that; therefore, after passing thirty days and no change occurring due to his disposition, incised over the arrow and ligated thereon, and he recovered, and was not harmed by this accident.
And there was a man in whom an arrow pierced his back, and the wound had healed over it, and after approaching seven years, incised the arrow in the region of the thigh.
And there was a woman to whom an arrow pierced her stomach, and the wound had healed inside it, and no change occurred in any of her natural operations, and the woman did not experience any harm from her operations.
And there was another man to whom an arrow pierced his face, and the wound had healed, but the arrow remained broken, not experiencing much pain, and appeared similar to this.
And I extracted the arrow from the king's principal advisor, which was embedded in the middle of his nose and had slightly declined to the right side, with the entire arrow hidden.
And I was called for the cure of him near the wound within three days.
And then you will find the wound of the arrow stretched out; and then you will inquire about the one that feels subtle and does not feel it; but he felt the puncture and put his right ear there, and then suspected that this puncture was at the tip of the arrow.
And apply the place to be applied with an attractive and digestive paste, believing that by placing it there, I will appear the location of the arrow, so that it dries on that.
And do not miss the significant location where the arrow hit; and continue applying the paste over it for several days without missing any spot; and meanwhile, the wound consolidates, and treat the damage from its extraction for a period of several days until one day I feel the arrow within its sheath and tell me this.
And then place a sharp corrosive medicine on the wound for several days until it opens up, and over the swelling, I will touch it, and find the tip of the arrow, which adheres to the shaft.
And then you adjust in the incision of the wound with that sharp medicine until I visibly see the tip of the arrow, and pass to my time within four months.
And then, when the wound is sufficiently enlarged, and it is possible for me to insert the forceps into it, I manipulate that, and without hesitation, I do not cease to refine and invent various methods of this art until one day by chance I managed to grasp the arrow with descending forceps, according to which the shape will be described at the end of this chapter; after which I extracted it; and then I restored the wound.
And some doctors judged that the cartilage of the nose is not restored, but I restored it and the wound healed, and the patient was entirely cured without any defect in him.
And I recount to you the quality of extracting some arrows, so that you pause and consider this rule and significance of what I have not said, for the parts of this art and the definitions of those are not understood in the narration nor do they comprehend them freely.
And the wise craftsmen compare a little about motion; and what is present about what is absent; and find new operation and new instrument for the descent of foreign causes when they occur.
And therefore I say that arrows are not removed from the members in which they are inserted but according to two manners: either by attraction of the place where they entered; or by the contrary part.
And that which is removed by the place where it entered, or the arrow penetrates into a fleshly location and is then thrust in and out.
And if it does not obey to the sensation of the hour in which it was injected, then you must leave it for a few days until the flesh around it can heal, and reduce the attraction to it and its exit.
And similarly, if it is inserted into bone and does not obey to your sensation, then leave it for a few days and repeatedly apply attraction and motion on any given day, and it will be removed.
And if you do not obey your attempt for some days, then know that you perforate in the circuit of the arrow at that place of the bone from which subtle travel subsists into the area where the arrow is magnified.
But if the arrow is already hidden in the place of the body and hidden from sensation, then you inquire about that area, and if you feel it, then remove that with some instruments which are suitable for its extraction.
And if you cannot reach it due to the depth of the wound and the length of the arrow, and here there are neither nerves nor veins, then you cut into the wound to enlarge it and make it possible to extract the arrow.
And if it is in the ear where it is lodged, then you expose the flesh in which it is embedded by cutting away all parts as much as you can; and use your ingenuity, if you cannot reach the evacuation of the flesh in the fracture of the ears and in the torsion of those areas where it must yield.
And when you administer the extraction of the arrow in any location, then you use your hand or forceps at all parts where it can make it yield; and with subtle skill, ensure that the arrow is not broken and that it is made easy for its extraction and that of the wound.
And if you cannot treat that in your hour, then you leave it for some days until the parts that are in the circuit of him heal, and then repeat that which is alleviated. But if it makes the patient's blood flow more, then you administer what we have said about cure in its chapter.
And preserve your virtue in the incision of veins or nerves, or cords, and administer engen in every manner for the avoidance of the arrow; and do this with facilitation, tranquility, tardiness, and firmness as you have advised.
And therefore make the arrow contract by itself so that the patient is according to the figure according to which you should place the tip of the arrow in him, for this is more advantageous. But if this is not possible for you, then administer what is possible for you according to the figures.
But the arrows that are counter-thrown in the opposite direction of another part, or that have already acted on some part from within to the parts outside, or cause engorgement at the tip of the arrow due to pressure from the deeper part; then you extract it; and the extraction should be according to the quantity in which the forceps take hold; and then remove it, for it is made light by ejection.
If it is retained in the bone, then twist the knife according to the opposite direction so that the arrow presses into the bone, and enlarge it by inserting, and then extract it.
If not, leave it for a few days, and then reinsert it where it is embedded.
If the shaft of the arrow is there, then push it into place.
If the shaft is embedded and you want to administer an impulse, then insert it there. If it resists, stir with a concave tool so that its concavity enters the arrow's groove, and then push it into place.
If the arrow is concave, then push it with a strong stirrup entering it, so that the arrow expands due to this.
If the arrow is poisoned, then make sure you concave all the flesh where it is located, if possible, and then treat it with what is appropriate.
And if the arrow hits the foot, or the abdomen, or the bladder, or the side, and is nearby such that you can touch it with your hand, and it is possible to extract it from there, then extract it and carefully close the wound, and cure that area until it heals.
The form of forceps to which arrows are attached:
If the ends are like the beak of an eagle, made such that they grasp the arrow so as not to let it slip.
And these are made in special sizes, large, few, and medium, according to the size of the arrow and its smallness, and the width of the wound, and its depth.
thus, in order that the instrument may be eased into the concave arrow and pressed towards it.
Of phlebotomy of the veins.
Of phlebotomy of the veins: Of which veins it is customary to perform phlebotomy, they are in chapter XVI, and there are two pulsating veins near the ears, which Alhacen calls auricular; two herbs that are prominently visible on the temples; two veins near the inner corners of the eyes, which are called angular; one vein in the middle of the forehead; one vein at the extremity of the nose; two guide veins at the neck; two veins on the upper lip; two veins on the lower lip; — these are the veins called algelic; and there are two veins behind the tongue. But the veins that are phlebotomized in the arms are five; of which one is cephalic, and it is derived from the wild grapevine; the people call it “the vein of the head,” and it is a mixed vein composed of one branch of the basilic vein and another branch of the cephalic vein; they name that one "the vein of all the body," while the basilic vein, which is derived from the domestic grapevine, is called "citillary," and the common people call it "the vein of the abdomen"; one is the funicular, and it is placed over the elbow, and this is the one on which phlebotomy is performed, and it is the one that appears on the arm by a clear manifestation; and saphena, which is the vein between the said auricular and the small one mentioned, and it is in those two branches.
And in the foot and thigh there are three veins; one of them is that which gives curvature to the curve of the wild deer's leg; the second is sophena, and its place is at the thigh of the domestic deer; the sciatic vein, and its place is at the thigh of the wild deer; and in the thigh there are other veins similar to those.
The condition of the veins near the ears is cataris ancient, emigranea, sahafati, and ulceracios of the bad ancient headaches.
And the quality of sagnating those is according to what I will recount to you: it should be placed at the top of the patient's head, and the patient's head should be rubbed at the occipital region where both veins are near the ears with a wide cloth for good friction; then tightly tie the patient's own hair with a band in which the two appear, and their locations are close to the ears in two pressed areas of the head; and you should feel those at your right hand, and if you sense the pulse of those at your right hand here, test it by this method.
Then you take the surgical lancet, and that which is incised, and then you introduce it there into the groin between where the phlebotomy will reach the bone. Then lift your hand above the vein and the groin towards the upper parts and incise the vein with an incising lancet. And the length of the incision should be about two digits' width or around that; and let the blood flow out as much as you desire.
Then strengthen with powders and leave that there until it is healed.
And already it was mentioned at the beginning of this book regarding the incision and their cautery.
More than the two arteries that supply the temples with vitality, this condition is associated with ancient and malicious migraines, frequent eye strain, and a body burdened with acute internal inflammations.
And the quality of phlebotomizing those is according to what I will recount to you: constrict the patient's neck with your hand until the two veins appear clearly by palpation, and show the pulse at their location with your finger; then you can proceed.
And then you elevate the codena above the vein at the parts superior to what you have just indicated, and insert the fleubotomi incidentally, and elevate the vein in them; and incise that likewise as you have done in the two other veins; and let the blood flow according to the quantity of your necessity.
And then release the constriction of the malaise, and place your hand over the vein for an hour, and then place there powders and strengthen that above with a strong constriction, and leave it until it is healed.
And now the recollection of them has been preceded, and then the incision, and the extraction at the beginning of the libra.
And therefore the relief of the bloodletting from the vein of the forehead is similar to the cephalic bloodletting for ancient illnesses of the face and migraine, as well as swelling and foul ulcers.
And the quality of the bloodletting from it is as I will recount to you; so, let the malaise strengthen its hold with a bandage through which the vein appears; and then take the instrument which is named the fossor, this is its form:
Pause the puncture at the point where it is at the top of the drain over that vein and strike it either with your hand inclined or for some other cause in the manner of it, and let the blood flow according to the quantity you wish; then remove the perforation in the patient and strengthen it so that it may heal.
Sometimes it is opened by lateral phlebotomy, but I do not know if the lateral phlebotomy is of such acute extremity as other phlebotomies, and instead is of subtil extremity, and phlebotomize there according to the transversal, for the bone is near and strong, so it would be broken by the phlebotomy when it is too thin.
More the juvenile of the two veins that are at the lacrimal glands of both eyes through the hair of the eye by redness and pus in the eyes, and for facial illnesses.
The quality of the phlebotomy is that the patient strengthens his color with a bandage, and then phlebotomize those veins, and you stand over the head of the patient.
And perform the incision for bloodletting according to the transversal length a little, making a few small incisions, for in that place there is no flesh; and if the incision is subtle, strengthen its extremity so it does not break.
And let the blood run until it is necessary, place your hand over those points, strengthen them for one night, and then remove them.
More so the incision of the vein in the nose is appropriate for acute fever and intense thirst, as well as facial maladies, migraines, and rash that occurs on the face, especially when it is chronic.
And the quality of the incision for it is that the patient holds his neck and almost presses his nose with his left hand, holding the subtle long incision tool in your right hand and placing it in the middle location of the nasal cavity according to the proper direction, because the vein does not appear here through sensation, and so blood begins to flow quickly.
Gently withdraw your hand from the incision little by little and let the blood flow according to your need; then place it there for one night, because that area is restored rather quickly.
May the youth of the femoral incision lead to constriction of the veins and to the beginning of leprosy and various ill health conditions and bad, corroding ulcers similarly as in phlebotomy.
And the quality of the femoral incision is that the patient feels each cut in his thigh; and the surgeons are over the head of the patient, and the patient lies on a bench.
And gradually incise the vein along its length for a femoral incision, making it progressively smaller; and extract blood according to the season's quantity or according to what is necessary; and make a similar incision on the other vein.
And then remove the flesh and firm the two veins with a middle string so that the patient is not overheated, and leaves in the wound until the plague is healed.
And the benefit of the femoral incision for the algirich veins, apply to small abscesses and pustules in the mouth, corruption of the gums, bad ulcers, and fissures, as well as bad ulcers that are in the nose and around it.
And the quality of the femoral incision is that you make a cut in front of the malade, strengthen its neck with a bandage, and then revolve the labia and look at two veins, of which one is on the right side of the labium and the second on the left; the demonstration of each is by the blackness of each of both, and this more is found in the circuit of those small dark veins; then incise each by an incisive incision.
And if doubt exists, you, and you do not know which is of those, then understand the incision of the larger one of those, and of the more obvious one.
And make the appearance of the two veins that are in the labia above.
And of the two veins that are left, the treatment is near the femoral incision in preparations that are in the inguinal region, for the disease of the uvula, and diseases of the mouth.
And the quality of performing a femoral puncture is to follow the patient's thigh in front of the groin, elevate the artery within it, and observe its tongue, from one side of the vein and the other side of the vein, and the color of each is gradually turning black.
And then perform a femoral puncture on each side; and beware that you do not complete the puncture on those, as they are arteries.
And your veins that are punctured in the groin are those in which blood flows commonly in all men, and the puncture of them is made according to two methods: either place a small round metal probe or an olive stick subtilizing; or make a surgical puncture with a lancet, which they call a needel; and this is the form of it:
Let the wound be like this you see, and you need to open the concave veins full of apparent large vessels, and at those that contain thick turbid blood.
And this fistula operation is of lesser width and has a finer extremity, and it suits the fistula of fine veins containing subtle citrine pus.
May the operation of the basilic vein, which is one of three veins: from which we extract the pus from the illnesses that affect the arm, the elbow, and the foot and leg.
And it suits the fistula operator, when performing that fistulotomy, to guard well and be overly careful there, for if he misses or misaligns in the puncture of the fistulotomy, he will cut the artery and cause flows of pus, so that one must not perform a fistulotomy with a pointed puncture before cutting as with a lancet.
And if the basilic vein does not appear by a clear manifestation, then you should leave it and change to the other, or seek some of its branches; or perform the fistulotomy at the end of the arm where it is manifest, and dry out the other with a lancet as we have said.
If you want the femoral incision, then cut in front of the stricture of the thigh where you feel the location of the pulse, and immediately clamp it with forceps; then hold the thigh and dry the vein by making a concave section for the incision as we have said before; and be careful that the percussion does not occur over some space of the artery's location.
When you press with the ligature, inflation occurs in the place you clamped with forceps, and this inflation is due to the artery. Therefore, avoid that area.
And if the wound flows like that of a child's incision, and the blood is thin and rosy, then you know it is arterial blood; then close and pause your hand over that for a long space; and hold near that, and if the flow is stopped, or if several drops are stopped, then strengthen the thigh and leave that.
And keep the patient from the moccio of the foot, and fear too much for it, and do not wet that for a few days until it is healed.
If the bleeding is not stopped, and sometimes you must not be present medicine for this, when you incise the artery if it appears to you; for the extremity will be constricted, and the blood is cut off; or that you take fresh from a fistula, do that, and take half of it and strengthen that on the place of the vein at strictura descent with liament and powders the next day.
And if the bleeding is stopped, that is good; and if not, then cure it with that of which it is preceded in the memory of the place of the powder-like substances stopping the flow of blood.
And the stopping of the bleeding from it is difficult due to the small location of the wound and the possibility of using a splint on the arm.
But for the dark vein, phlebotomy is beneficial that extracts the blood from the part subirana of the head and from the part dejos of the body; therefore, it is composed of a branch of the basilica vein and a branch of the cephalic vein, as we have said.
And cover the incision during the bloodletting where it is above the knee in the bloodletting of the leg, for that is a nerve; and then if you adjust at the puncture of the bloodletting and find the nerve, it will happen to you a stupor, and the healing is difficult, and not strong is healed completely. This nerve motas veigadas appears in sensation; and if it is hidden among some men and is subtle and is not shown, then cover the bloodletting with a section of alnessil, and avoid the nerve with your strength.
And if the vein is between two nerves, then cut the vein lengthwise.
The purpose of bloodletting from the cephalic vein is to draw blood from the head and relieve symptoms of headaches.
And cover properly, if you want the bloodletting to puncture at an olive bloodletting or a myrtle bloodletting; for it is pure from all veins, for neither the artery nor the nerve is left.
Moreover, however, an abscess is present in some individuals, when it is not incised during the first percussion, then do not note it again.
The first of these is that you must know that an incision should be made only for preservation of health and with hope for its success and caution regarding the occurrence of illnesses, and that the incision be made on one of the veins in the groin: the cephalic, femoral, and basilic; and that the incision be performed at the beginning of spring, on an empty stomach in spring and autumn, and in winter shortly after eating, when signs of congestion appear.
And a femoral incision should be made and the third day or after the first day when three hours of the day have passed.
The more frequently a femoral incision is administered, the more it becomes necessary and convenient at that time, whether at night or during the day, in any hour and at all times.
And let a boy not be femoral incised until he has fourteen years, and a girl who is pregnant should not be femoral incised unless after the fourth month into the seventh month, and women should not be femoral incised which have passed fifty years.
And if anyone wishes to be femoral incised in any manner, let them modify their intestines before the femoral incision by using a leon clyster if there is a blocked fenda, so that the veins do not release superfluous fluids during the femoral incision of the intestines, which are purified and do not affect the principal members.
And let no patients who are nauseous, intoxicated, or recovering from illness or intoxication be femoral incised until they have fully recovered from these conditions. Nor should femoral incision be feared too closely following colic pain, vomiting, abdominal condition, frequent coitus, work, and exercise, fasting or vigil, or any cause that dissolves virtue, whether corporeal or animal.
And then consider in subtlety of humors before this if the wound is large, with food and drinks, and with medicines if this is possible to him.
And then enter the bath if any cause does not prohibit it, or exercise for some reason that the wound may be sublimated.
And place the bloodletting on the feet of the patient, so when it is around the hour of three, as we have said.
And I assure you that the feet of that patient should be guarded on that day from all evil accidents, as when there is anxiety, anger, fear, and from all bodily accidents, as when there is toil or superfluous pain, intercourse, and things similar to them.
And at her service, have ready the causes in the use of which custom among men is based on aroma and odor, and on balsams, according to the quantity and possibility.
And follow the bloodletter on a cushion that is higher than the cushion on which the patient is to be bloodletted.
And then extract his arm, rub that area with your hand using the flébotome two or three times; and tightly bind the limb with a belt and wrap it around twice.
And if the stricture is tempered, that is, when the stricture is not equal, or the stricture is due to excess, then prohibit the flow of blood; or if it is due to relaxation, then prohibit the body from flowing blood accordingly.
And when the stricture is present, have those who are to perform the bloodletting rub their hands together between them where the veins are swollen, and make sure they are clearly felt.
And the bloodletter should apply a little antiseptic oil to the bloodletting tool properly; then place his index finger on the vein with his left hand, positioning the location for the bloodletting so that the vein slightly opens up and the percussion is felt. This is done because the vein feels like a fleeing cord, indicating it is full of venosity. When you stop the bloodletting over this area, if the vein contracts, it shows the bloodletting was effective; otherwise, if no change occurs, the bloodletting did not work.
And therefore, for this cause, the phlebotomist should be fixed and solicit in all these causes.
And then place the phlebotomist, but if the vein is opened in one go, that is good; otherwise, you repeat this or another incision, leaving that area a little, or over it apply compression, if the area is not suppurating.
And if the area is suppurating, or the disease suppurates, then you leave it for a day or two, and do not apply strong poultices, for fear that the suppurating wound be irritated by the heat, nor enter the bath.
And then repeat the phlebotomy if necessary.
And if the perception is small and the wound heals subtly, and you fear that it will not heal the quantity you want, then repeat the phlebotomy in that area according to rectitude and adjust slightly for the perception. Do so with compression before the area suppurates, for the area suppurates more when you should use a smaller perception.
But if you find that it has already suppurated, then do not touch it, for it is unnecessary for any cause; and place yourself over a part of the wound's edge, for it alleviates the body's pain. And it is better in this place than oil and other oils.
And similarly, in all femoral surgery where the veins are cut off from the body's flow of blood, administer a part of the wound edge. They use tyriaca alfadoc and sagzenea when placed over one of those areas, for the blood becomes thin and is circulated when it is thick.
And if a large abscess is generated in the femoral surgery area, where major fevers occur, especially for those not yet drained but that fever, or near the appearance of the small vein, then you should apply and place a sponge infused in water and salt, slightly heated, and keep it there for an hour, for it dissolves.
And ensure that you do this near the bleeding from that vein with a complement of another vein.
And if there is any discoloration or greenishness in the area for some days, do not note this; and if you wish, place over that a cause of aloes and myrrh dissolved, or some cause of menthastre juice or calament or semblance of it.
And when black spots occur, you should perform a bloodletting at the basilica.
And place your hand over it, and if at that time you find it soft, apply a compress to that area, as such an eminence is bad and evil; and then be careful to place a cause of what we have said there, for strong pus will flow from the sanguine artery.
And apply a poultice where there is stiffness, to make the area tougher, and then treat it with another remedy until it is healed.
And ensure that you draw from the vein according to the quantity of its virtue and according to the dominant color over the blood according to how it appears.
When the blood is black, you let it flow until it becomes thinner; and similarly, if it appears thick, you let it flow until it becomes finer; and similarly, if it is thin, you let it flow until its thinness is moderated.
And for those who are full and strong and have the need for a single bloodletting, enlarge the incision in the vein and let the bleeding be abundant.
And for those who are weak, do the opposite, and ensure that the bloodletting is done in multiple sessions, and that it is conducted steadily.
And the best method for venous bloodletting is a transverse section, not a puncture.
And this method of bloodletting avoids the flow of blood and the incision of nerves, and is more useful and safer than bloodletting according to length and breadth.
And when this method is prone to causing syncope, perform the bloodletting and ensure that you treat it beforehand with a small dose of wine infused with milgrass or simple oxymel; then extract from the point of the bleeding in three or four sessions.
And if it is an infiltration of humor, then before phlebotomy, apply a liniment of myrrh essence or of aromatic honey essence with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and saffron, or of aromatic and fragrant essence.
And if you experience syncope during phlebotomy, and it is caused by the loss of vital spirits, then give to drink water with meat essence and subtle fragrant essence; use its aromaticity with allspice, and bind his feet with that.
And use the other causes that we have said in the division on syncope by evacuation.
And if one wishes to cool his arm and dissolve his blood for the second time, apply phlebotomy to him, which is by natural evacuation, and the virtue of it is cold, which evacuates the blood little by little, according to the quantity of the virtue over several days.
And if one wishes to cool his arm and draw his blood for the second time, and his body is strong, then do this about seven or nine hours after the first phlebotomy.
More who wish to draw the blood from the body or contrary to the part where it declines, let it be evacuated on the second day or the third.
More in that body where there is movement of blood already scalded and heated and causes fever, let it be evacuated from the blood in one day and let a large quantity be removed, and amplify the sensation before syncopal attack occurs; but you should have retained all the conditions for phlebotomy; and by placing your hand on the pulse of the patient, you will control the body's blood flow, so that it does not result in death instead of syncopal attack, when the phlebotomist is ignorant and negligent.
And do not let it be when you want to release the arm and evacuate the blood for a second time, as already the orifices of the vein are closed and it is difficult to expel the blood, that you press upon that area with great intensity and slightly extend it, for this is too harmful.
Let it remain until the phlebotomy is performed again; or keep this point at the heat of the phlebotomy where the blood coagulates in the orifices of the vein; or place your hand over the tyriaca alfarach, or sagenea, and apply a light compression until the blood has settled.
And if the vein is inflamed, then leave it alone and do not touch it until the inflammation subsides.
And if necessity compels you to evacuate the abscess according to the case, and there is no excuse, then drain it at that location or on the other arm in another vein.
And the vein called "funis del bras" is incised in place of the funica or basilica when they are not found or are hidden, for it is composed of those.
And the quality of incising this vein is that the patient inserts his hand into water when the vein becomes visible and noticeably swollen.
And then tightly bind it with lint to create a midline stricture; and then incise according to the small transverse vein, neither longitudinally nor along its length.
And let the incision be wide, and let your incision for this vein be a little above the joint of the hand.
And if you need to stop the flow of blood, then repeatedly dip your hand in the trailing water and let the blood run into the water until you achieve your necessity.
And if you are in the days of summer, then you are excused from repeatedly dipping your hand in the trailing water, and instead pause the flow of blood in cold water during winter.
And the phlebotomy of this vein is safer than that of all other veins, for it has no pulsating vein or nerve.
And the phlebotomy of the basilic vein in the right arm is related to ailments of the liver.
And the quality of phlebotomy from this vein is that you should firmly grasp it with your hand or with another, rather than keeping it more in trailing water, until the vein becomes swollen and clearly visible; then quickly perform the phlebotomy; and if you cut through it completely, no harm will come of this.
And conserve that you do not finish placing your hand at the femoral puncture, but leave it with the nerves of the fingers naked and devoid of flesh.
And then immerse your hand in the water basin and let the blood flow in it, for if you do not immerse that in the water basin, the blood will coagulate in the orifice of the vein, and this is prohibited from flowing.
And when the blood is extracted according to the necessary quantity, then pause over the vein with oil and salt, so that it will not be completely consolidated; similarly ensure that you do this for the entire length of the vein.
Moreover, the youth of the femoral puncture on that side of the hand is that it is applied to the diseases of the thigh.
And do similarly in the femoral puncture on the other side as you have done on the other.
And the youth of the femoral vein from the puncture is for diseases that are in the lower part of the body, such as diseases of the thigh, and retention of menses, and for diseases of rashes and ulcers of thighs and old sores, and for their similar diseases.
And the quality of the femoral incision is that the patient's foot enters into cauda and makes friction over which the veins appear; a cord is placed at the joint of the foot; the place of the vein should be clearly identified by the said touch, and from there its branches on the face of the foot are felt.
And thus make the femoral incision wider or place the cord at the site where you identify the vein, which is better and more secure.
And if you make the femoral incision on the face of the foot, then you must guard against the nerves that are left on the face of the foot, and place your incision over the area where you make the puncture, as if you were to incise it.
And let the femoral incisions be vertical.
But if the discharge of blood is prohibited; then you wet the foot in cauda water and let the blood flow in that area until it is evacuated.
And if the femoral incisor errs in the first attempt, then iterate with the femoral incision a little more, for the location is secure. And do not fear its malignity; rather, guard against the nerves as we have said.
And similarly make a cut on the other foot equally.
And for the sciatic vein, the place is as we have said; you should make the incision leaving the rib of the part intact.
And the indication for phlebotomy of the leg is pain in the hip when it is due to venous obstruction.
And the quality of the phlebotomy for the leg is that the patient enters bathed, exercises and strengthens the thigh with a bandage made of a thin cloth wrapped around from above the hip to just below four fingers, so that it is not noticeable.
And when it becomes apparent, then phlebotomize there according to whatever means are at your disposal and according to the transversum, which is better; or incise there for an incision, or evacuate it by suction, for the place is sound.
And it is often more easily found in men; and if you find it but do not notice it by touch, then phlebotomize some branch of it, and that is the one that appears on the back of the foot between the auricular and the annular toes.
And guard the nerves, and let the blood flow in the quantity you desire.
And then release the tension and place your hand over the area of the phlebotomy firmly, so that it heals easily.
For ventilation and the qualities of using those.
Ventilations are of corns, or of worms, or of fire.
And ventilation is done in two ways: one way involves incision and bloodletting, and the other is through ventilation without incision.
And this ventilation that involves incision is done in two ways, which can be either with fire or without fire.
And for the ventilations that are administered with incision and bloodletting, there are fourteen places of the body, of which one where ventilation is paused is almost always the last part of the head; and the middle place of the two parts of the neck together; ventilations of the chin leave the jaw below and the mouth above; ventilations of the cheeks leave the mandible below and the mouth above; ventilations of the armpits, which are on the side of the shoulder blade; ventilations of the lumbar region, which is over the end of the ribcage; ventilations of the iliac bones, which are two handbreadths long; ventilations of the tibiae; and ventilations of the thighs.
And do not extract the blood from the artery but from the small veins scattered in the flesh, and by this do not damage its virtue as with venesection; nor should you believe that phlebotomy is done by fire or several fires in any illness caused by congestion where the whole body must be evacuated.
But if necessity provokes to phlebotomy for illness or for continuity, administer it at the beginning of the month and at the end, and in the middle of the month and at any time.
And when times in any cause of those, and properly if it is in the third or fourth part of the moon, then command ventilation to be made rather after passing one or two hours.
And the purpose of ventilation of the neck is when you apply gravity to the head and what is embedded in the heels; more correctly that this should be close to the total evacuation of the body.
And this ventilation is in the place for phlebotomy of the cephalic vein.
And it is not recommended to use that which is inflamed or in which there is a cold, as it gives great harm.
And for this, it is not advisable to use those that are inflamed, in which there are gouty affections.
More for that which remains inflamed, it causes oblivion; and for this, you should command the ventillator to place his hand slightly on the ventosa at the affected parts, to prevent the generation of oblivion.
More ventilation of alkahel is in the place of femoral and basilica vein phlebotomy: and by this you contribute to asthma, and to the constriction of air and to the rupture of the windpipe, and to coughs, and to fullness.
And ensure that the alkahel ventoz is slightly inflated, for if it is paused, it engenders weakness in the body and stomach.
And the ventilation of alhagdahan contributes to headaches, ophthalmia, migraines, and toothaches; it is in the place of femoral phlebotomy.
And ensure that you command the ventozador not to press his hand at the scarification so as not to incise the artery and damage the flow of blood.
And if the ventilation is applied to the mento, it causes alcohol in the mouth, corruption of the gums, and a complexion like those of the illnesses that are in the mouth, located near the alheric veins under the lips.
May the ventilation that is made over the two spoons be conducted by capillarity, which is performed through the transfer of heat.
And the ventilation of the two openings inside the flasks contributes to the effect of the femoral, jugular, and cephalic bloodletting, for it draws the blood from all those veins that are in the flesh, and those fine veins among the larger ones through which the attraction reaches the three veins.
And command the ventillator not to proceed with incision, for the area is stripped of flesh, and leave only its nerves and arteries.
And it is a ventilation whereupon the wind is directed over the hocks and contributes to the hemorrhoids of the buttocks and the ulcers, and leave them so.
And make sure you command the ventillator to use a large ventilation, and of ear wax, for the area requires strong drying; and let the fine, light ventilations be performed only after incision.
More wind from the legs diminishes manifestly, which carry the sickness from the whole body, and alleviate ancient pains of the hips and the stomach; and they provoke menstruation, and alleviate bloat and acid; and are in place of a double femoral lancing, and hanged, and of two calves.
But they thicken the whole body and cause syncope in many people.
And from the winds they hanged the youth near the winds of two hips.
And the quality of the position of the winds is that you place the wind near the beginning view and suck out the air with a slightly moistened suction, and do not prolong the position of the winds, but rather pause them lightly, remain them continuously, and let the humors come to the area by chance equally. And do not cease to repeat this until you see the area already turn red and swell, and the sign of the sickness appear.
And then you incise and gradually increase the suction, and place the body in a suitable position.
And for a man who has tender skin, incise him only once and not further, so that the wound does not become ulcerated.
And command the fan to increase the incision and slightly enlarge it, and adjust the suction to facilitate it.
And if the wound becomes infected, then incise twice; in the first incision, open the way for fluid drainage from the wound and its pus. But in the second incision, perform a thorough examination before draining the infected pus.
And if the wound is mixed with feces, then make the third incision to ensure it drains properly.
And finally, when we want to extract the pus little by little or just a small amount, suffice with one incision.
And if we want extraction of bad blood, we make a cut with a scarifying incision; and if we know that the blood is thick, then we must scarify by scraping.
And the term of scarification in which only the depth of the incision is used.
And if the part where the incision is thick, hard, dark, and its pores are straight, then the places for the suction cups should be gently anointed with open resolving oils; if it is in summer, such as olive oil of aloes or olive oil of violets, or balsam oil, or myrrh oil; and if it is in winter, then use narcissus oil, or lavender oil, or chamomile oil, or blood oil, and to those similar.
And if the excess is thick and hard, then apply yellowish oil, or balsam oil, or aloeswood oil, or nutmeg oil, and to those similar.
Moreover, if the suction cup is on flesh with wide pores, then it should be prohibited from oil, and instead, the areas near the suction should be washed with cold water or fresh sweat water, or vinegar water, or grape leaf water, and similar to those.
And for that of which the pain is due to a humid nature, wash his bowels with warm wine, or with water of myrtle and sumac and similar.
And for that of which the superfluities are large, wash his bowels with old wine, or with water of santewort, which is marjoram, or of decoction of dill, or of chamomile, and similar to them.
And ensure that the bowels are taken care of before bathing; have them administered shortly after bathing for about an hour or two, and make sure he sleeps near the bowel area.
What must be done for the patient to be regulated before and after purging or bloodletting.
Ensure that you consider the beginning: when the purger or the one who is to be bloodletted is choleric and has acute pain and inflammation, ensure that he takes cooling causes, such as sour milgrains, endive in warm wine, laytigues, secanabin, and julep, and similar remedies.
And feed them thus like pears, chicken livers, and spiced game meats, and foods seasoned with herbs, in their likeness.
And for that one whose complexion is pale, give him to drink essence of mint, or essence of alecost with seeds, sumac, and wine mixed with both old and new; and let him be advised to use moderation in drinking and eating, and consume foods like pears, cantaloupes, and young partridges.
And ensure that on the day of phlebotomy, his drinking is greater than his food intake.
And ensure that some men are given to drink tyriaca alfarac or medicinal powders of musk, such as muscardine or acelita, before phlebotomy or before ventozacio or shortly after, so that the principal members be comforted and the wound be subtiled; and do not let them take any scalding drinks.
More specifically, the ventozas that are ses scarification should be applied to the liver, over the mesentery and podagra, over the umbilicus, in the areas of the joints, and the axilla; for these principal members do not suffer scarification upon themselves.
And it is not desired for those alone but an attraction of the limb's vein, thus as we apply a suction cup on the breast in illness of flux of blood from the blood of the nose; and we use that so that the fatty substance free from viscidity of the limb may be dissolved, thus as we apply over the belly and the umbilicus; for then it rarifies the limb and warms it and alleviates the pain which resolves the fatness.
And it is applied over the veins when there is an accident in their obstruction or phlegm, for by virtue of strong attraction it opens the obstruction and expels the phlegm from its place.
And it seems when applied over the liver and spleen, to dissolve fatness in those enclosed.
And these suction cups are applied only with suction; sometimes they are applied with fire.
And sometimes they are applied filled with clear water in illnesses of the spleen.
And this is so that the suction cup may be filled and become larger, then either clear water or water in which suitable herbs are infused.
Form a ventouse with fire: make the aperture about two fingers wide, as we have formed it; and the amount of suction should be half a palm's breadth; place it in the center, in the area along the circumference, making it small according to the amount that an needle can enter.
Make it of leather or citrus, with thick edges, lion's skin, equal and thin so that it does not deform the member in its position.
And let it be placed at the midpoint of the leather or iron ring, where the candle is paused over the fire.
And let this ventouse be much larger than the one we have described; and the smaller amount according to the ailments and the condition of those who use it.
And the ventouses for children and those in poor health are different from those for young and robust individuals.
And the quality of placing this ventouse on fire over the member is to extend the flame of a decent piece of wood before a small candle of wax, and place it at the midpoint of the transverse leather strap in the center of the ventouse, so that the fire is ignited around the placement of the leather strap without burning the patient's body.
And then place your hand over the part of the patient, and tell them about what we have said, within which when we have the vapors and do not intend for them to hold what is said and that the vapor dissipates over that part, then the vapor will soon be dissolved.
And then heat the iron according to its manner, and repeat that if you need to do so.
More in the case of a ventosa that is administered for pleurisy, it should be with water, in which there is no cross groove nor tube, and it is not administered unless it is filled with water, and is placed over the part only as much as necessary.
And this is the form of it: And this ventosa, the larger it is, the better, so that it can receive a large quantity of water.
Capitol. xcvi.
Sanguissuguas are not administered in large members but in the members in which the position of ventosas is not possible due to their small size, such as the fingers and similar parts; or in a member stripped of flesh, such as the nose and ears and similar parts.
And the quality of using those that you have found leeches in the waters of pools purified.
And shortly let them lie in warm water for a day and a night, so that they do not cause any inflammation in those; and soon evacuate the body at the beginning with venesection and fumigations; and rub the limb of the patient when it turns red; and place them over it.
And when they are full and swollen.
And if possible, suck the area with the fumigations, it is more effective for youth.
And if not possible, then wash the area with water warmed and add a bit of vinegar; and rub and express it.
And if the bleeding of the body persists at the place where the leeches are attached, and they continue to draw blood, then insert a cloth in cold water, and place it there until the bleeding stops.
And if the bleeding is excessive, then powder vitriol trissat or similar substances to those causing vasoconstriction over it; or place hot poultices of peeled fava beans on the area and let them remain until the fava beans adhere to the area, and the bleeding has stopped.
And cover, if necessary, the wound with bandages, when possible changing them.
And if the bandages are prohibited from being changed, then wash the area with fresh blood or place a needle in the areas until it is saturated with blood; and then change them quickly whenever there is any bleeding.
And when you want them to constrict, powder the area with a little aloes trissat, or salt, or ashes, and apply it quickly.
Thus begin the procedures of the second part: of restoration. This chapter is necessary in the art of medicine; and it deals with the restoration of fractures and dislocations in bones.
Oh, son, know that both the boastful physicians and the common folk, as well as those who for some time have not read the works of the Ancients or have not studied their texts even one letter, claim this chapter.
And for this reason, this method of the scientists in our land is kept private; and I have not forgotten it even for some time; and I have not acquired what follows except through long reading of the works of the Ancients and study over their understanding, from which I extracted the science.
And I have directed this experiment and study throughout the length of my life.
And I have already described in this chapter all that pertains to my science and on which my experiment has passed; now I abbreviate this for you others and deliver this from lengthy discourse; and I abbreviate this at the end of abbreviation; and I have shown this at the end of declaration; and I have formed these motions of forms of instruments you administer there, as is done by addition of declaration, just as I have done in two preceding chapters.
First chapter.
Summaries and collections are necessary for the fractures of bones, those of which a prerequisite is required before we begin the recollection of fractured limbs and various types thereof. Therefore, let us begin the prologue of this chapter with summaries of the discourse; and the chapters which require understanding at the beginning are those on which the artisan must stand firm on the truth of those. So it is you and they who are prompt to know or learn this noble art from others.
And therefore say that when a fracture or dislocation or twist or setting occurs, you must immediately proceed to the beginning with ligation or release of that, or both, unless some cause is prohibited, such as weakness of virtue, or if it is the one to which it happens, or in decrepitude, or at a time of intense heat or intense cold.
And therefore it should be maintained on a diet of fresh herbs and of flesh from pigeons and of crabs; and meats that are fatty and filling should be prohibited, as well as all foods that fill the veins with sanguine humor, until you are safe from the danger of an abscess. And if you fear an effusion of matter in the limb.
And then return the patient to his primary position according to the usual custom for him.
And so, when the broken bone begins to be restored, then ensure that the patient is fed nutritious foods rich in both fine and heavy moisture, with viscosity, such as foods made from cooked wheat in water, rice, eggs, fish, cow's stomachs, fresh peas, and coarse foods similar to these. And with this regimen, coagulation of the fracture is facilitated slightly by honey.
And know that the bones crack in those who are in their prime and in the elderly, it is not possible for them to be cured and consolidated according to their nature due to the drying out of their limbs.
But nature adjusts and amends the broken bone from any part of all similar causes to glue, in which there is thickening that adheres and strengthens it together with conglutination and liation together, in which come the end of strength and firmness, such as fire at the beginning, and from no cause do you prohibit it from its works.
And for this reason, it is necessary to place foods on the patient, foods in which there is heaviness and viscosity and coarseness, as we have said.
And know that the types of fracture are diverse according to the variety of the limbs, for a fracture of the thigh bone is different from a fracture of the skull bone; and a fracture of the foot bone is different from a fracture of the arm; and similarly all other limbs are different among themselves.
And I will briefly recall all types of fracture, explained in their own chapter distinct from the others.
Various types of fracture within itself. And the types of fracture in the bone are diversified; for some fractures occur as arcs, while others happen at the joints. Some fractures occur along the length of the bone: such as those from the pressure that causes writing to be prepared, fractures by slicing and disrupting the head, and small fissure-like fractures.
And for each case, there is a specific method or torment proper in restoring it according to the distinct recall of them in their places.
A sign of fracture of the bone. And for this, the bone fracture is known: there is a tortuosity of it, and an elevation and prominence of it in sensation, and its pain when you press upon it with your hand.
And when there is neither obvious tortuosity nor pain, you should make your touch felt when you press on the bone with some agitation, and if the patient does not experience great pain, then it is not a fracture.
If it is possible that it is tortuosity or a small fissure, touch it with your hand and apply compression fully; pause over it while using the medicines from which you recall at that moment what fits the place; and then proceed straight by subtlety.
And observe that the place when it is arched and does not split into two or another such thing that does not happen in its extent, as if everything of its composition is inflamed; then you should begin your correction from this point with the understanding that an apostema (inflammation) will occur.
And if an abscess occurs, let that be for some days until the abscess ceases; then equalize it according to any method you can of levitation and skill.
And know that the restoration and puncturing of it is lighter than the place where the accident occurs.
And then strengthen it according to the memory of it that will come.
More if in the bone you find it, then when there is a necessary extension of this broken member into two parts, whether it be the hand or the foot; or with your hand if the member is small; or with two cords or one cord and your hand.
And place your position such that you extend the parts of the broken member according to its natural figure, while the fragments are spread out from the broken member, then force yourself to return those additions with skill and according to any method you can in their places.
And see to it that your strength does not cause pain or injury to the patient through your operation; and force yourself according to your power to place one bone next to its companion according to their best forms.
And ensure that at that opportune moment you touch it with your hand, and if you see any other cause different, correct it and equalize it by the quantity of your virtue.
And avoid excessive extension and compression, as foolish doctors sometimes cause an abscess to occur due to their operations or cause contraction in the member, as we have seen from their operations.
The quality of the fracture of the affected limb is what I report; so that you may know that the broken limbs vary in their smallness and in their largeness and in the form of those.
And of those that are small like the arm and the thigh and resemble each other, note that the wrapping should be of soft fine cloth.
And of those that are large like the thigh or the chest, note that in those the wrapping should be broad and hard, for the broad band connects the large and strong limb from all parts at the fracture equally, ensuring that no blemish enters.
And then begin, after your first application of the bandage, pause sufficiently and conveniently over the place of that fracture with three or four wrappings according to which limb it is; and keep your hand a little firm on the bandaging.
And then place it at the uppermost part above the place of the fracture, and keep your hand firm so that your bandage is not looser than where you have tightened the place of the fracture. And then slightly extend the covering of the fracture area, and gradually soften the tension little by little, during which time take from that place a large part.
And then take another bandage and wrap it around the wounded area over the covering, and gradually adjust the coverings to the part of the fracture; and let your operation be on the tension of the covering and in the softening of that according to what we have said in the first covering above.
And then place stops or folds of cloth on which the curvature of the fracture is equalized, if there is any curvature; otherwise, do not stop at any point for this reason.
And then place on the other bandage, and gradually equalize over these coverings, properly made as soon as possible, if there is no swelling or abscess in that area; otherwise, place on what is the abscess there and which causes the swelling; leave that for a few days; then strengthen the coverings.
And let the coverings be of thick cane wood, well formed; or of oak bark; or of palm ribs; and let the width of each covering be according to this form and this figure:
However, ensure that the bandage placed over that fracture is both thicker and a little longer than the other bandages, and the length of the strip according to what is read regarding the member's size and smallness; then strengthen around the strips with another bandage according to your first tension; and place some honey above decently as we said about tension, and it should be your tension more in that area, and the more it is stretched from the fracture, the less the tension.
Ensure that the threads are medium in thickness and subtlety, and be of fine quality; if the threads are thick, as I have seen in some operations where flax threads were used for suturing the wound, it is a great error when tensioning the suture to an equality.
And such thin threads are not convenient, for you will not be able to tension them to achieve what you want, and it must be that there is no more than a finger's width between the bandages.
And if the patient is led by the ends of the strips near the tension in those areas, then place some padding of sheepskin or dyed wool between them so that it does not cause injury.
Sometimes fractures occur due to a blow, and damage to the chain occurs, and I will recall this in the Capitol according to its singularity.
And know that for any broken limb, it is not straightened with braces on the first day; for this cause, when the limb, if large, does not allow you to place it on braces immediately but after about 3 or 7 days, or more, according to your safety of the onset of an abscess.
And this is the method of plasters that the Ancients used to restore, which are placed over fractures, dislocations, and twists.
Method of plastering for the reduction of fractures, suitable for complex cases and especially for women and children, which is applied to that upon which no heat or friction is used: and it is that you take powder of millstone, which is the marrow of the flour that comes from the movement of the grain in the walls of the mill.
And prepare it thus as described, but sift it with flour of wheat, and use the preparation not too thick nor too fine; and then proceed with it.
Another method of plastering for the restoration of fractures, dislocations, and sprains: take asafetida, dragon's blood, acacia, fennel, and myrrh, which is extracted from wild milfoil, all in drachms x; myrrh and aloes in drachms v; alcohol in drachms xx; all to be ground, sifted, and mixed with alcohol or egg white if the wound of the patient is open; then use this plaster, good in composition, for it restores lightly broken bones and you may apply it to men.
Another method of plastering which restores fractures and sprains: take myrrh and half a drachm of white hyssop in drachms x; of myrrh and aloes in drachms v; of acacia in drachms vi; of Armenian bole in drachms .xx.
All to be ground in a mortar with the contrary ingredient, then sifted, and mixed with water or egg white and administered.
Method of plastering for joints and bones separated from their places, and for alleviating accidental pain in those areas and for fissures and fractures: take virgin wool and submerge it in vinegar and cooked oil, then place it over the area.
More in this plaster there is virtue of restoration, of cautery application and expel pains properly.
Another way of plaster to restore fractures: take leaves of fig tree and leaves of wild poppy; mix them all and make a plaster from them.
Another short method of plaster to restore fractures and when you want the resolution of an abscess: take roots of althea, chamomile flowers, violet flowers, farina de ers; mix all parts together and steep them in wine; apply it to the limb if it is not scalded.
More if it is scalded, then moisten that with water of fennel or with water and use it.
Another stronger method of plaster for resolution, different from the previous one: when you encounter an abscess that resists, to restore the limb, take roots of althea and seeds of flax, safflower, melilot, marjoram, violet flowers, chamomile; mix all parts together and steep them in water of sorrel or water of two colors or wine, according to the quality of the limb and the color of the wound.
May Hippocrates not say in his book that it should be placed over the limb immersed one should restore it rather a cauterization made of wax and oil and no other cause; and recommends that it be mixed between coarseness and subtlety.
May Galen observe that it should be placed over the limb broken one should restore it and the causes in which there is drying of little quality such as myrrh, resin, and similar to them among those causes we have recommended.
Method of plaster that comforts injury and pain: mix equal parts of cedrus, of human skin cut open orazel pen, and of althea, and salt; crush them thoroughly, sift them, pound them, and make a plaster.
May the quantity according to which you should crush the paste and then dissolve it be that you consider whether pain nor swelling has occurred and if the bone is not broken does not move from its place, then do not remove it for many days. And if pain intense or swelling or inflammation occurs at the site, then you should cauterize or remove it immediately, and apply the plaster to it.
And take a cloth and a sponge of wet marine sponge, and submerge that in clear water, and with that wash the area until that pain subsides; then place the limb at rest for an hour; then place over it lamb's wool soaked in vinegar and oil or rubbed oil, and bind it overnight until you are sure there is no abscess, and that the swelling of the limb has rested, and the pain in it has diminished.
And then apply that fine stricture and plaster a little and do not strengthen your first construction, but keep it subtle until it is healed.
And if you see that the abscess and the swelling and the pain and the inflammation and all the other accidents have already subsided, and there is no need for plaster and stricture, then apply that in the same way as you did at the beginning.
And if no other cause affects the limb among those we have said, then do not remove that for three to four days or five to seven; sometimes all this is left for twenty days according to how it appears by the slitting of the limb, as we have said, until the fracture adheres and settles into the coagulation of the flesh over it.
And then adjust more tightly than in your first grip to the constriction, and adjust to the swelling of the patient's abdomen, according to whether there is a previous recollection of it.
And if you see that the place of the fracture is already dried and exhausted more than it should, then perceive that nutrition is prohibited from reaching there; therefore, soak that area with fresh water for a full day and do this every three days; and slightly loosen the constriction, and by this operation supply the nutrient to the member, and it will be healed lightly.
And what the fracture restorers do another time when the member is not restored to its beginning state, according to the condition, and is restored according to tortuosity, it is an error according to their operation, and a great fear; if they were rightly doing this, they would have enlarged the Ancients' books on their own and accomplished this work.
And I have not seen them do this, so it is more reasonable that they do not do this.
When a fracture occurs in the head.
The species of fractures are motas, and their figures are diverse, and the causes are distinct. For some fractures, they are caused by the impact of a blow, which breaks the bone completely through the cartilage, leaving the bone like this in the wood, and for this reason, this species is named ascial; or the blow cuts part of the bone, and cuts into the flesh but does not pass beyond the surface of it; and this species of fracture is named levatio absoluta.
And the swelling of these two kinds of fractures is either great or small, and the friction fracture; its cause is a blow with a stick or a fall on a stone, and they resemble this.
And this fracture is penetrating, which nearly reaches the periosteum where the bone is located; or it is in the surface of the bone, and the swelling of these two kinds of fractures is either great or small.
And for this fracture, the bone is weakened in its fine hairiness, and for this reason, this species of fracture is named capillary.
And it is a fracture that is caused either by compression or by the strike of a stone, which causes some layer of the bone to enter the internal parts, and it occurs in the concave place as happens with the metal pans when struck and is part of their entry into the internal parts.
And most often this occurs in the bodies of wet bones, such as those of infants.
And to all these species of closed fractures, they are painful as if by separate stabs. And I will return to the recollection of all this at its location.
And we can recognize all these species of fracture by observation and by inquiry about the pain and the sign of corrupted flesh that is upon them.
And the capillary species is known because it is discovered on the bone, is scraped, and limits on it with a probe, for the fracture appears black.
More in the cure of fractures consider the beginning with the symptoms of illness, and if you see by these symptoms that it signifies manifestly by its meaning fear, such as vomiting of bile, extension, loss of understanding, absence of voice, fainting, acute fever, swelling of the eyes and redness of those, and resemblance to them of symptoms in major disorders, then you may doubt that it is not healed.
And if you encounter accidents not common, then hope for recovery, when you begin the cure of it.
And the cause is that if the patient has come to you at the beginning of the inflammation as it is inflamed and this is in the days of winter, then consider that you study in the bone tissue on the day four according to all disposition.
And if it is in the days of summer, then consider that you cut the bone on the seventh day, having that what is left of the bone be corrupted by the fatty tissue, and that accidents occur which we have recounted.
And if the fracture has already reached the fatty tissue covering the marrow, and is broken into many pieces, then consider that you insert the fractured piece, rubbing it, as I will recount to you.
And if you examine the thigh of the injured patient, and uncover over the bone according to custom and your method as possible based on the shape of the wound, and let it be light over the thigh.
And if it happens to you to detect the bone, flow of blood or abscess caut, then you apply yourself to it with what is convenient, and you fill the place with wrappings infused in wine and rubbed oil, and make the wound rest until the abscess be quieted, and you are sure of flows of blood; and then begin in the circuit of the bone and in the incision of it.
And this is according to one of two ways of operation.
And one way is that you incise the bone with an incisor of straight edge, and this is its form: And then administer another incisor here, a little more lateral than the first; and this is its form:
And then administer more the incisor more lateral than the second.
And ensure that you have the number of different incisors, some of which are more lateral than others; and some of them are shorter and are at the rear end of their extremities, and they should be made of iron or steel.
And use their ease in percussion over the incisions to prevent them from trembling and leading that.
And if the bone is strong and hard, first drill in the circuit of it before you make incisions with needles, which you call non-deep needles.
And they are not called so, but rather those that do not reach the end of the bone's length to what is near it, in order that the needle has a round extremity or edge resembling a small margin or circle, which you prevent from being submerged and passing through the thickness of the bone.
And it is convenient that you take many of these needles, each suitable for the thickness of each bone, ensuring that in all parts of the skull, the extremity of each is sharp, and the length and shortness in quantity be according to the thickness of that bone.
And this is the method for three types of needles: The quality of drilling in the circuit of the broken bone is that you place the needle on the bone and turn it with your fingers until you know that the bone has been penetrated; then, move the needle to another location, pausing where all of the thickness of the ray or environment is reached.
And then incise with a scalpel what is between each tooth of the bone, and make that thin pus above it at the end of levitation, as we have said, within which you remove the bone, or by your hand, or by some other cause through certain instruments which you will prepare for this, such as fine forceps.
And see that you be careful so that the scalpel does not touch any nerve of the head.
And then, after you have circled the bone and separated it from the head if it is continuous with it, and you have extracted that, be sure to scrape and smooth that area with the roughness of what is in the bone using another instrument similar to a scalpel, but importantly be sure that it is finer and more delicate than other scalpels.
And if you remove any small part of the bones and scrape, then take that with ease using one of the instruments; and then cure the wound with linen and ointment, which we have said.
And the other method of operation is lighter, far from fear, which divides Gaulia and lays it out with great laud; this is its manner: at the beginning you must necessarily start uncovering the part of the bone in the area where the fracture is most severe and most evident. When you have uncovered that part and placed your hand gently but joyfully on the end of this incisive instrument, which is of this form:
And it is that the lenticular part is lion and you do not incise any cause, and the acute part is divided into two cuts forward in length, thus as you see; that the lenticular part be adjusted to the chin against the face of the acute part incident on the bone.
And then strike on the incisive part with a small hammer as you incise the entire bone, thus as it is turned, and you be sure of the panniculus that it does not accede in any accident that you fear in any way; and if the medicant14 was the most fool of all men and the most ignorant of them; certainly, and if he were sleeping.
When a rupture occurs in any part of the bone in certain areas of the thigh, it will incise that part at the extremity of the incised lenticular one, and deliver that part with ease, for it is relieved of its damage and fear.
And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the muscle, and what is severed or remains from the bone is its surface, and it is rough and fine inequalities, then you must scrape that roughness away and eradicate those fine inequalities with your sharp razor, according to which you have prepared various quantities so that you can administer of them all the most convenient parts for their application and use correctly in accordance with where you are operating on that broken bone and its shape.
And you must administer according to your judgment, using the coarser part of the razor at the beginning, and then use more of its fine part, and do not cease doing this continuously until you reach administering the thick part and the fine part of all.
In any other small fractures or fine fractures, you must administer care according to where you are directing the correction.
And it is because they are not accustomed to doing so for all those who have studied that art. And place yourself on what we have written, as we showed in great fractures.
And if the bandage is torn when you extract the bone, then take a piece of cloth according to the size of the wound, submerge it in olive oil, and place it over the wound's opening; then take another folded or triple-folded cloth, submerge it in wine and olive oil, and place it over the first one, doing this gently enough that you do not weigh down on the dressing. And administer a plaster of lead over it, but do not press too hard onto the wound according to its size.
And leave it to this treatment for one day or two until you are sure of the abscess. Then remove it and administer medicines that require additional dryness, such as linseed and wheat bran, and powders of thyme and arsenic, and similar substances.
And you make these medicines into a powder that is dusted over the wound, such as when it is dry; generally, administer to it any medicine of a nature that will cleanse and not irritate.
And guard that in your treatment the wound in your cure be clean; and do not leave it surdyce of ointment or another; nor let virulence be added to it; for when adjusted over the brain cloth, corrupt that and spoil it, and accide on the patient nearby this malign evil.
And it affects the face of the head, as from it the bones are changed and especially when the cure is neglected, and a blackness appears on the surface; and therefore consider when it affects the patient the accidents that we have said, know that it is dangerous for him.
And if no blackness occurs but from the medicine that is applied, and it is due to that medicine causing the blackness, then take part of honey and part of rubbed olive oil in equal parts, mix those lines on a cloth, and place it over the face; and cure it with the species of cure that you deem appropriate until it is healed.
Third chapter.
On the restoration of the nose when it is broken.
Know that it is not broken from the nose but two parts together more overable, or one of those few times, because in it you have two bones, for the part left is cartilaginous, and is not broken, and you do not damage it but friction and tortuosity and sinuosity.
But if one of the two parts is broken, you must introduce the little finger into the nostril, and equalize that fracture inside according to your finger's indication, and outside, between the finger and the nose bone, so that the nose returns according to its natural figure. And do this for you to facilitate the operation, and guard that it does not become inflamed as a result of your procedure on the patient in pain.
And if the fracture is in the more overable part of the nose, and your finger cannot reach it, then you must equalize it at the end of the bone where there is a small swelling.
And if the fracture is in two parts, then you make it appear as such.
And quickly have the patient restored to their position on the first day of the fracture, if possible; otherwise, as soon as the seventh or eighth day, give them rest from the apstema caut.
And insert into the extremity of the nose a wad of linen cloth, if the fracture is in one part, or two wicks, if the fracture is in two parts, and let them fill the nostril.
And some of the ancient restorers say that the wicks should be soaked in honey, and replaced throughout the day, but this is not seen by me; instead, let the wad be soaked in honey wax powdered with flour; and leave the wick until the bone is set and the cartilage has hardened.
And sometimes insert into the nose instead of a wick, a hot cloth wrapped in linen cloth; and this is when the nasal fracture is very severe and the patient is not prohibited from breathing.
And this cause is not necessary for you; and if you wish, do this, and if you wish, use wicks.
And if another abscess occurs, cauterize it, apply a plaster on the nose with wax or a cloth soaked in vinegar and olive oil, or with a pessary.
And if no abscess occurs, when you need to plaster it externally, use sesame flour and powder of dried thyme mixed with honey; then place your hand over the swelling, and do not touch the nose for any cause.
And if the bones of the nose are broken with a small fracture or are comminuted, when you need to split those, extract them with instruments suitable for those; then close the incision, treat that with what encases and consolidates, and use plasters as appropriate.
And if a plague occurs inside the nose, when you need to treat that with washes and administer lead pipes until it is completely healed.
Chapter IV.
On the restoration of the jaw when broken.
When the jaw is broken and the fracture is not open, consider whether the fracture is only superficial, and not broken into two pieces but bent inward, in which case the perception is light.
And thus, if the fracture is on the right side, you should introduce the left index finger into the mouth of the patient; similarly, if the fracture is on the left jaw, then introduce the right index finger; and push the swelling of the fracture inward with ease to the parts outward, with your other hand from the part outward of the bone; do this properly so that it goes well.
And if the fracture of the jaw is already separated into two parts, then you should apply extension to both parts according to straightness so that the alignment of the bone is possible.
And if you encounter the loosening of teeth along with disruption, then strengthen those of which you expect will break at the edge of gold or silver or copper; and place a hot cautery over the broken jaw, place one over the doubled cloth, and place another over the large star-shaped stake made decently, or a single piece equal in length to the jaw; and tie it above as appropriate for your ligature and the application, so long as it is not destroyed.
And command the patient to take rest and peace, and abstain from his usual meals for a while.
And if you estimate that the figure has already been altered in any manner, then you should change it on the seventh day; and then correct what has already been altered in him and plaster it with powder of alum, or with chalk of oak, or with flour of bran, but that you have previously applied his cerote, and place a lion's skin over the plaster.
And then, once this plaster is applied and adjusted to him, and the position of the bone is not altered, leave it as it is, without changing it until the fracture is healed and strong; for major fractures heal in three weeks.
And if another time an abscess occurs, then administer what we have said previously in the cooling of him until it is healed, and expel that abscess.
And if the fracture is open, then consider whether it is a severe separation of the bone or a displacement, and then you should carefully align those displacements with what you have done in the removal of those from the muscles.
And if the wounds' openings are wide, then you must enlarge them according to the quantity of your necessity.
And shortly after you have completed those stages, and there will be no more bleeding from those wounds; then, if the wound is large, you must enlarge it; otherwise, place one of the plasters that suit this over it and let it heal.
Chapter V.
On the restoration of the furcule when it is dislocated.
When the scapula is fractured, in the part facing forward, you should break the muscle, and this fracture can occur in one of three ways.
When it is fractured, separated, or completely broken into two parts without involving stages, the restoration is easier. If such incidents occur with stages, the restoration is more difficult. Or when the fracture occurs through a wound.
And the operation in this case, when the fracture is through a wound, is that you have two ministers present, so one holds the assistant and guides the broken scapula, and the other extends the neck at that part.
And then equalize the fracture at the ties said between where the form of it is made according to how it should be, and not on its prominence too little or concavity.
And if you need more extension, then when you place the patient's limb on a pillow or cloth, let it be the size according to your necessity; extend and elevate the fork and press the pillow with your hand so that you equalize the fracture as needed.
And if you cannot extend the extremity of the fork to the parts outward, because it is obstructed by the bone, then let the patient be laid on his side on a pillow, and place a medium-sized cushion on the muscle.
And the surgeon presses the muscle on the parts until the bone of the fork is elevated to the bone, and then you realign the fracture and equalize it at the ties said.
But if you feel the fibers of the fork and they are loose, then cut over that and remove those fibers easily.
And if it is retained in the bone, then you skillfully incise it with one of the scalpel blades you have prepared for this, after placing a fork as a support under the instrument that serves the chisel; and this instrument is either of wood or of iron, of which this is the form:
And it is similar to a spoon, of which this is the concavity; and its width depends on what you need of it, according to the size of the bone or its smallness.
But the length of it should be according to what is possible for the operation; it should have two extremities thus like this, and one extremity should be broad and the other narrow.
And if the disruption of the wound which you have incised when you have extracted the piece from the bone is wide, and there is a certainty of abscess formation, then you adjust the two edges of the wound with sutures.
And if the disruption is small, or you fear abscess formation, then you use the wound with cloths and powders according to the extent of the incision of the wound.
And if an abscess occurs, then fill a cloth with warm oil and vinegar, and place it over that area.
And always ensure that the stick is not pressing on the broken bone; thus, you should check the wound daily, as when the lint becomes moist or you see the stick no longer pressed tightly, then you adjust and strengthen the bandage.
And then place the patient's head on their pillow, and support their neck so that during sleep at night a small cushion is placed under it; thus raising the assistant's hand towards the wound of that side, and therefore the fracture of the furcula is elevated to the elevation of the muscle; or the arm on the side is laid against the neck of that.
And do not remove the bandage unless there is an accident in the same place or abscess within twelve days.
And then renew the plaster if you see its face turn to that, and adjust it to the stricture and restore it, and leave the fracture of the furcula to be restored and coagulated.
And it is strengthened and made comfortable according to the need in twenty-eight days, and in some cases, it is done in less time.
Chapter VI.
On the restoration of the fracture of the shoulder.
The splint is broken in the middle of the wound and not broken from the wound itself, but at the edges.
And when the place is broken — and it is broken in the middle of the place — and not known otherwise than by touch, then according to the figure of the fractured bone, prepare it and reduce it according to the natural figure in every manner which is possible to you.
And then place powder of ground album of wheat and stoped lion over the area; and then place粉末的撒布量应根据汤匙的大小，或者多一些。根据桌子侧面的薄片，适量撒上。
And if you leave the slice concave in some of the areas of the spoon, then level that concavity with stoped lion, and then place the slice according to equality.
And then strengthen the flesh above with good suturing and ensure the slice is not displaced from its place.
And consider the healing on each day; and every time it becomes softened, ligate again and strengthen and equalize the slice if it is displaced from its place.
And place the patient on their side.
And the spatula is restored in 20 days or in 25.
And when this number is completed, then you dissolve the bond, and you know for sure that it is from which bones where the beginning was not feared nor their dissolution.
And if you proceed from the location of the bone to the ligament, then place a hook there, and cut over it, and hold it as we have said in the fracture of the scapula with an apostematous cautery, if this happens here.
Chapter VII.
On the restoration of the fracture of the foot.
The foot sometimes breaks in the middle of its location; however, its ends move and tend to become united and healed.
And the accidents when the foot breaks in its middle decline towards the inner parts and cause great pain, difficulty in walking, coughing, fever, and vomiting; these are evident in the cavity of the broken bone and cannot be hidden by sensation.
And the restoration is that it should be resupinated on its back, and a cushion is placed between its shoulders; then press on its muscles, adjust its spine against the ribs, and be subtle in your operation and alignment according to every manner that is possible and suitable, so that the figure of the bone returns as much as it can.
And then place it on the plaster and sponge, and lay a thin layer of wax or salve over it, similar in lightness to how you wrap it in cloth; then be subtle in placing that over the broken bone so it is not too thick; and go around the back several times, making sure it is tightly but decently secured; and consider the bandage at all times, strengthening it when it becomes softened.
And if necessity causes a swelling or pus, or pain, or abscess to occur in that place, then you should incise or probe it, or relieve the pain, or remove the abscess that has occurred there. When you do so, remove the bandage and eradicate the plaster, and correct what has occurred by the method of healing; then reduce the plaster if the swelling persists, and adjust its tightness until it is healed.
Chapter VIII.
For the restoration of the ribs when they are fractured.
Know that fractures of the ribs do not occur except in large spaces between them; and at their ends at the front part, such contact does not cause fracture since they are cartilaginous. And the knowledge of this is not hidden from the feeling; you must inquire about it with your fingers.
And the restoration should be done by equalizing the fracture with your fingers according to the possible manner, ensuring it is fitted as it should be, and then apply a plaster and strengthen the broken bone with a splint, if needed.
And if the fracture of the ribs is occurring at the inner sides, then it causes severe pain and puncture-like sensation in the patient, similar to the pain that occurs when something has pierced them. For this reason, you place a cloth over the bone; and it results in difficulty in breathing, coughing, and vomiting due to spasm; and this is of difficult cure.
And already the Ancients were ingenious in such matters.
And they say that by placing food in the patient's mouth that causes inflammation and swelling, the belly will become swollen and extended, and the fracture will be pushed outward.
But let us consider this so that it is not a trivial cause for generating a carbuncle; and if it does happen, then aid the patient.
And some of them say that it should be placed above the windpipe and near where pus will form with strength; this seems like a reasonable argument, but nevertheless, it is feared that the windpipe might carry the superfluities to that place due to weakness.
And some of them say: cover the area with wool that has been submerged in oil, and let it be packed with powder between the ribs until it is full, ensuring the dressing fits snugly as you wrap it according to the shape; and treat the patient with therapy involving food and medicine.
And if the patient is violently constrained causing pain which they cannot endure, and you make a puncture in the skin with the blade to relieve it, fear for the patient, then cut over the place, uncovering from the broken rib, and place your hand over that instrument which retains the flaps, the memory of which precedes, and incise the bone with facility, and extract it.
And when we adjust the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with suturing, and cure that with plasters until it is healed.
And if an abscess happens inside, then incise and insert powder in rosin oil and place over the area, and cure the patient with what is appropriate for the abscess inside.
And let it be dressed over the lint on which they sleep, until it is healed.
Chapter IX.
On the restoration of fractures of the spine in the back and neck.
In some cases, when fractures occur in the bones of the neck, and then apply friction and similar treatments to the vertebrae of the back. And when this happens to someone and you want to know if they will be cured or not, then consider whether their pulse is already softened, numbed, dead, unable to grow, extend, or strengthen those areas. And when you constrain them with ropes or poke them with a needle and they do not feel pain in them, then you should know that they are not cured, and under such conditions, it is fatal.
And if you feel pain in them when constrained with ropes and poked with a needle, then you should know that the bone socket is saved and that the gout will heal by cure.
And if you feel along the spine of the neck and want to know if they will be cured or not, then consider the pulse in their feet.
And if you feel that they are already softened, then feel along those areas where the pulse in the hands has changed, and closely observe their breathing and digestion according to their will, and sometimes they may be lifted onto their back and want to urinate but cannot, then you should know that it is fatal, and then do not attempt to cure them.
But if none of these causes occur, the cause is better and lighter.
And the cure for it is that you need to cauterize for the anesthesia of the abscess caut which you place over the lower or lateral part of the spine, or with pieces of hot cloth; place it over that area for several minutes each day until the abscess is numbed.
And then place one of the comforting and healing plasters, and apply a poultice over it; and command the patient to take rest and be tranquil, and not to sleep on the part where he finds pain until he is healed.
And if it happens that there is pain in the joint or any cause already separated from it, then you must cauterize the tendon and hold that bone; and adjust the two edges of the wound, sew them if it is large; and treat that with some red ointment until it is healed.
But if the lower end of the thigh bone is broken, and it is near the knee, then you must insert the little finger of your left hand into the buttock, and align the broken bone with your other hand as much as possible through second intention; and then place a plaster and bandage over it, if you need those, and treat that area.
And if you feel broken stages in it, then work on that, stop the bleeding, and treat the wound with the cure that comes after it is healed.
Capitol.
For the restoration of health.
The bones of the feet are broken, and if they break, then the fracture is merely communication at the extremities of those bones and is inscribed in their length, declining towards the inner parts; and accidents such as pain occur in the area and puncture, and the leg is stunned when it is fractured.
And the restoration of it is that you place your hand over it while it is at the location of the fracture, which is the figure of the leg.
And if the fracture is only at the extremity of the leg, then you align that part according to what appears to you by symmetry until it resembles its natural figure.
But if the fracture is in the middle or has already declined towards the inner parts, then you apply pressure to the leg's belly while preparing for the restoration of that fracture. And when you have equalized that, place a plaster over it, then place the wooden or copper rod over that, and tightly bind the area without fearing puncturing for fracture or removal of the rod.
And equalize the cavity so that it fills the area where the hernia will be reduced according to equality, and command the patient to lie on their back or on their side.
But if an abscess occurs during the operation, stop the extension of the incision and its restoration until the abscess is sedated. Then place something over it to sedate it as previously described; then return to the restoration of the incision and tightly bind it as usual.
And if bones in the area are fractured or comminuted, then set them.
Capitol.xi.
Of the restoration of the fracture of the adjutrix.
Adjutori is that which is between the coracoid process and the shoulder blade.
And if it is broken, the restoration of it is in one of two manners, of which one is that you take a piece of large leather according to this form:
And attach two threads at the ends, and then suspend it from the elevated area.
And place the patient on a mat; then throw its broken arm over the leather so that it reaches the midline of the area where the curvature of the leather is attached.
And place it over something heavy or let the servant extend it to the sides. Then the doctor, while holding the fracture with his hands, do so together until the fracture returns to its proper position.
And the other method is to place the patient supine on their back and suspend the neck with a thread; then command two servants: one to hold what is above the fracture with his hands, and the other to hold the lower part. Each of them extends to their side.
And if you want the extension to be stronger, then strengthen the fracture with one splint and another with another splint, and each of the two attendants stretch on their parts.
And therefore if the fracture is near the end of the muscle, then place the middle of the splint on the tendon and leave the other part over the fracture, securing it well.
And similarly if the fracture is near the joint, then place the splint at that location and over that joint.
Equalize that with ease and your work, and once it is equalized as it should be through good application, then strengthen it if an abscess does not occur.
But if an abscess does occur, then leave the dressing for five days, and place over the sewn woolen bandage seven fresh and rubbed olive leaves until the abscess has had time to rest, and then strengthen it.
And the way to strengthen it is to place a plaster over the fracture, and then wrap a linen bandage around the plaster; and adjust the arm over that support, and place your hand open over its muscle.
And place the cloth firmly over the assistant's arm so that the arm is in the place of support, without prohibiting anything due to the broken bone.
And then use splints.
And you should place that splint over the fracture which is longer and stronger than the other splints; and place the width of each splint according to the break, with the length of the splints according to the break plus three digits in total.
And then firmly place the splints at the fracture which I mentioned at the beginning of this chapter.
And ensure that your bandage over the location of the fracture is tighter. And when the fracture is longer, use a looser bandage.
And so, if you adjust the position of the splints and the bandage as we have said in the hour when you restore the member to its position, then you do this.
And if you fear an abscess, then leave the string and stakes within for seven days as we have said.
And then consider the ligament in all parts for three days so that no accident happens at the place of pricking or inflammation; or is forbidden food to reach the member by disposition of excess of string; and therefore correct all this according to what we have said.
But if you are confident that no cause of this will happen, then do not release the ligature for at least three days or more.
And let the patient's hands be on their back, and their feet on the stomach.
And place your hand on the support cushion filled with wool accordingly. Consider at all times of the night or day that the figure of the broken member is not altered, or that the ligament is not softened, therefore correct this entirely with your virtue.
And provide food to the patient according to the order we have mentioned before, ensuring that the food is subtle at the beginning until it starts strengthening; then gradually increase the amount of food.
Four days is customarily the time for the leg and the thigh to be strengthened; then it should be loosened and a bath should be given, and an ointment should be applied which will heal it.
And if the fracture is healed by attrition, then you do not loosen it with ligaments and wires over one or two months.
Capitol. XII.
On the restoration of fracture of the arm.
The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the ulna and the radius; the former is small and is that which we call the little bone, while the latter is large and supports the other from below.
And if the large bone is broken alone, or the small one, and if they are both broken together.
And when the small bone is broken above, then the restoration of it is easy, and its healing is easier.
And when the fracture of the leg is broken, I leave the fracture bad, and the healing of it is difficult.
And worse when two long bones are broken.
Therefore, if the broken bone is the smaller tibia, then it is convenient for the doctor to restore it, allowing a slight extension to facilitate its alignment.
But if the larger tibia is broken, then you must allow greater extension.
And if both tibiae are broken together, then you must allow greater traction more forcefully.
And you must place your hand in such a way to restore the bone and extend it lying on a cushion, while keeping the wrist of the hand above, more so than the others, and the auricular finger below the other fingers, and the thigh on a sloping bench.
And place a cushion in front of it in the upright position, so that the thigh does not further work.
And then the minister extends the arm of the affected side and places it either on his hand or on linen, and another minister extends similarly above.
And then the physician sets the bone in place and reduces it according to the best form that can be achieved.
And if there are fragments in the fracture of the bone, then you must reduce the entire piece to its place with your virtue.
And if there appears a separate fragment that cannot be reduced to your satisfaction in the restoration of the bone, then you set it in place and reduce it according to the manner we have said above.
But if the fracture is comminuted, I have already treated this separately, and therefore take up the treatment of that.
And if an abscess occurs at the beginning of your reduction, then you apply a linen cloth moistened with a mixture of olive oil and white wax, making it moderate in thickness, and tightly wrap the area around the abscess to allow it to drain; then remove the wax and apply a prepared plaster made from powder of mustard seed with honey, and place a bandage over it; let the bandage be placed slightly above and more firmly.
And know that the number of ribs in the arm I see in the major dispositions, or rather the fracture in one limb or two limbs together.
And place your grip firmly and vigorously over the location of the fracture. When the grip is strongest on the parts above the fracture or on the lower parts, place it a little more tightly according to how the memory of it is recalled at the beginning of the chapter.
And the cloths that you wrap around the fracture should be moistened cloths, neither hard nor rough. The string with which it is tied should be strong linen, finely mixed between thin and thick, as we have recommended.
And consider the limb and the ligament for several days. And if any cause arises for which correction is necessary, as is often the case with what happens to the limb, then you should immerse the limb in water until that pain ceases.
And let the limb not be bound until it has rested, and then return the grip.
And if the contraction is already softened and the bone is already mended and resembles those, then correct all this with your virtue.
And consider more if the nourishment is prohibited from reaching the member due to excessive contraction, for then you must soften that slightly and leave it for some days until the nourishment flows to that, and then strengthen that.
And if to the patient none of the causes we have said occur, then you must wait approximately 20 days or around those.
And place the hand of the patient over its virtue of agitated movements, and make it sleep on its back.
And know that this fracture is restored in 30 days or in 32 days, or more gently in 28 days, and all this depends on the complexity and disposition of the virtue.
Chapter XIII.
On the restoration of fractures of the hand and fingers.
Know that at the wrist of the hand and the knuckles of the fingers to heal a fracture, do not damage them but rub with visible grains.
And when a fracture or sprain occurs in the hand, ensure that the patient remains lying down and extends the limb for one hundred seconds according to equality, and then place your hand over the extended area.
And then extend the broken bones and the doctor must ensure that they are set with good alignment.
And then apply plaster and cotton, if no abscess develops use a cauterization; then place a candle above according to the size of the area, and you have already wrapped that in a cloth.
More so if the rupture is within the parts of the palm, then make a semblance of a pocket of cloth, and command the patient to hold that tightly with their ruptured palm; then have them hold it firmly with long cloth.
And place the candle on cloth which is elevated, so that the body is applied to the palm; and hold that tightly as needed.
If the fracture is on the outer parts, then you should place another piece of the broken part in your palm, so that your hand is open and straight; then place the splint, as if your hand were turned to the wrist between the fingers with sand.
If a fracture occurs in one of the phalanges of the fingers, then if it is the finger tip, equalize it according to what you can see and then strengthen it on the palm. If you wish, place a small splint above it so that the fracture is elevated and not displaced.
If the fracture is in the other fingers, as in the middle finger, or the index, or the ring, or the little finger, then equalize and bind it to the finger where the fracture is; or bind them all continuously, which is better; or place a small splint above it, as we have said for the tip.
And consider, in your restoration, and nearby, the placement of cautery and opposition — during your operation — according to what you see when an accident occurs from those causes, as described repeatedly in this text.
Chapter XIV.
For the restoration of fracture of the hip bone.
The hip bone fractured in several places and the pain is felt according to how it is displaced anteriorly and posteriorly.
And the restoration is done by strengthening the ligament over the fracture and another ligament below the fracture, with the patient lying on his back and facing upwards.
And then the minister stretches the ligament along its part according to the quality, when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
But if it is stretched to the side of the hip, then the ligament is extended along the outer side of the femur, so that the extension reaches there, and another ligament below the fracture.
And similarly, if the fracture is on the outer side, then the ligament is stretched along the femur, and the extension to the parts below.
And then the doctor aligns the bone by bringing his hands close to where you have reduced it according to the natural form; the bone is joined by good articulation; then apply a plaster and bandage, so as not to infect the limb with an abscess. But if an abscess does occur, then you leave it alone for a few days until the abscess can be cauterized, and then return to your treatment.
The bandaging should be done as follows: first, wrap a hard bandage around the fracture, fold it two or three times, and secure it to remove any excess; then wrap the bandage so that it reaches the ankle and the back of the thigh.
And insert a long needle between the thigh and the leg near the fracture at the divisions left, so that the ends of the needle extend well beyond both parts, then wrap the bandage around the leg and thigh with what excess of the bandage you have.
And then place something on the thigh at the location of the fracture, and place a stick over the bone of the leg.
And then fill the space between the waist and the thigh with soft cloths, so that the contraction may be constricted.
And then begin a strong contraction of the muscle over the place of the fracture with three or four layers, and the farther you are from the site of the fracture, the less your contraction should be finer and softer.
And then extend the ends of the ligament to the parts where it will reach the foot cavity, and strengthen both ends of the splints from the other side to prevent the ligament from being displaced from its place.
And then place the contraction over that, so as not to injure the limb with cauterization or emphysema resembling those; and if any of these causes occur, then apply the appropriate treatment for it, and correct what has occurred as soon as possible, according to what we have said previously.
More so if in the bone it is worse at the place where it puts on, then you should equalize that as much as possible; and if not, treat it and keep it immobilized, and cure what precedes the remembrance of this until it is healed.
And sometimes this fracture of the thigh is strengthened by making it fit to the stiles, as we said in the assistant and·on the arm.
But still in the restoration done in such a manner no limp occurs in the patient; and if it is restored alone, or if the other leg is applied, then it is necessary that the other one limps.
And know that the thigh is strengthened in about ten days or a few more weeks, and all this is according to the diversity of the complications and other dispositions.
Chapter XV.
On the restoration of the fracture of the ankle.
Know that the fracture of the ankle occurs less frequently, but it often happens more than once or twice with an injury.
But if a fracture does occur, it is often just a crack or a break in its parts, and this can be one or several cracks, and over this, the sensation is always present.
And the restoration of it is attempted to be made equal to what is broken from the parts of it among the fingers so that it may be added and joined according to what is possible by equality, ease, and fabrication.
And then place the plaster and press over that round stencil, if you need it; and strengthen above at the structure to what is convenient.
And then consider all the dispositions which we have recommended in other fractures, thus as for an abscess, cauterize and examine those that are applied to any accident at what is convenient until it is healed.
Capitol. XVI.
Of the restoration of the fracture of the flanks.
Know that in the flanks there are two bones, of which one is thick and is named after the flanks; and the other is thin and is named fragile.
And accidents of the species of fracture occur to these bones as they occur to the two bones of the arm, and for this reason, its restoration is done similarly to the restoration of the arm, and the operation of it is one.
And if you need to break two bones at once, the joint is dislocated in all directions.
And if you need to break a finer bone, the joint is dislocated in all directions forward.
And if you need to break a thicker bone, you find the fracture, and it is one of those causes that are not under your control.
And then administer extension, elevation, and ligature of the veins according to this method.
However, if the joint fracture is loose with visible spots, let the extension be milder and more gentle, and alleviate it with your virtue.
And in the joint, if there is any cause for an operation on the arm, and when you align the stars and complete your entire surgical operation, then you will take pieces of wood from a fir tree which are placed under the causes that are stopped in tendons, and make them thusly from palm branches; leave those with little thickness, but not too thick like the thickest, and let their length be according to the length of the joint, and place them inside the joint.
And then wrap each one in two layers of cloth according to the length of the foot, and place one layer over the top of the leg on one side and the other layer on the other side, and let them be positioned under the foot's base location.
And then place the two supports at three points of the extremities and in the middle point, for at this structure the foot is forbidden to lean to the right or left side, and is kept in a good position.
And then a brass strap is applied according to the length of the foot; and the foot is placed in it so that it maintains its movement.
And you should especially do this in fractures, and when that is inflamed properly.
And then consider the foot on each day and study it carefully, and guard it from boils and inflammation or other similar causes; and if any of these causes occur, then apply this treatment until it is healed.
Chapter XVII.
Of the fracture of the tibia and the bones of the foot and the toes.
Of the tibia, it does not fracture completely; more often fractures occur in the bones of the foot; and few fractures occur in the toes of the foot, and do not fracture but are treated on those in proper condition.
And if the bones of the foot fracture and sometimes those bones are elevated over each other, then the patient places his foot on prepared ground in this manner.
Then place the other foot on what is elevated from those bones, and compress, press, and align those bones back into place.
Then place a plaster and bandage over it, and place the belly of the foot on a small table with two supports.
Then strengthen the bandage on the foot with structure properly placed, for you have wrapped that bandage with cloths and other materials as needed.
And when three or four days have passed, then you untie the bandage, for you will find that the bones are broken or are displaced, and the operation in those cases is as you know.
And if some say they are broken, then restore those, and set them as I and have shown you in the restoration of the fingers of the hand. And then place the broken finger in a splint according to the length of the finger, and slightly above it. Then lay the hand on this table which you have already prepared, and bind it with a bandage properly.
And if what is broken of the bones are two or three or more, then you place each broken bone in a splint according to its quantity wrapped in linen cloth, and strengthen the table at the bottom of the foot, and standing on one of the ends of the table, make a hole in the sole of the foot so that it has good retention.
And it is important for you not to forget that you should not consider all the causes that we have mentioned to you in other fractures of the accidents we have discussed; and pause there for what concerns this.
Chapter XVIII.
On the fracture of the thigh bone and the pelvis and the scrotum of the man.
When the thigh bone is fractured, make that incision in the cutaneous wound, and then incline it slightly towards the side of the fracture behind.
And then the midwife fills the thigh with something soft, and does so in the thigh as she wishes; and then the woman is shaken gently, and her legs are raised little by little, for all this must be done carefully until the thigh is in the right place and the fractured bone returns.
And then place powders on her legs, and when she wants to urinate, moisten the soft part to facilitate it; then let her urinate, return to that position according to the method by which you placed it at the beginning, and then return to her original powder.
And do so for seven days or until it is restored.
And if you wish, take a swine bladder and strengthen it with thread around the anus a cannula of cane; then insert the entire bladder into the cavity of the patient, and blow through the cannula to infuse virtue into the bladder so that it becomes inflated inside the cavity, for the fracture returns.
And it should be filled with pus and left for some days according to our recommendation, until it is healed.
And when the bone of the pelvis of a man or woman is fractured, then administer in the restoration and needle therapy of it what we have recommended for the bone of the hip.
And what is right is not hidden in these nearby fractures and those that occur rarely, especially to him who has some study and experience and understands this my free will; for that fracture means to you through the major judicial dispositions in the restoration and contraction of it, and therefore understand well.
In the case of the scrotum of a man when it is fractured, protect it from infection, and place the scrotum in it; then cover it with a cloth wrapping, and let it be wrapped up, and leave it for three days or around that time, until it heals.
Chapter XIX.
For the restoration of bone fractures when they are displaced.
It is convenient to use that which you apply when a fracture is displaced, especially if the bone is large, such as the thigh bone or the fibula, or similar. You should then set and bloodlet that area frequently, as the conditions for bloodletting are present, as we have said above.
And if the displacement flows pus, then cover that which you set with retention to see if you sprinkle it with safflower. If another cause is not present.
Then begin to restore the fracture on that same day, and do not delay this, if an abscess does not occur.
More so if an abscess does occur, then you leave the restoration until the ninth day, after the abscess has subsided, and do not approach it on the seventh or tenth day, for then you will cause worse accidents.
But if the broken bone is prominent over the knee joint, then you must probe to reduce it and equalize it with your hands with some ease and little extension.
But if the extension is not at your readiness and the equalization with your hands is not easy, then you reduce it with this instrument; and this instrument is made of iron, its length being seven or eight inches and its width according to the quantity of the wound; and for this, the doctor must take three or four of them according to the quantity needed in the treatment for all kinds of fracture.
And it should be round, and of small thickness so that it does not bend during the operation.
And it should have sharp ends at its extremities; and be thicker at the bottom, and thinner in the middle.
And this is the form of it:
And it is called in Greek "labre volontz atelarem," so it is a small palette.
In order that the extremity of the patient be elevated above the end of the prominent bone.
And push it all at once into the place where the bone returns, and let it be equal to some standard.
And therefore strive to equalize the extremities of the fracture between them, and if the broken extremity is fine and does not take that tool for a good exception, then you must introduce the extremity of that bone where the instrument has the power to do so.
But if you cannot reduce the bone altogether as we have recommended, then incise it with those instruments which we have mentioned; it will be that with one of the saws in any manner that is possible for you.
And then clean the bone of roughness and small scars.
And when the bone is reduced, and after the reduction, the patient finds intense pain in the area, then you should know that the bone has not returned to its natural place; and then do what you will confer with the patient for great relief.
When your restoration of the mouth is completed, and then submerge a cloth in vinegar tied with a black string, and properly in summer, and do not stay over the wound too long or any other cause which might be oil, so that it does not happen reddening and corruption.
And then administer steams at the time of the full moon after the restoration of the bone, and leave the wound uncovered until it begins to heal, using scissors and applying dressings according to the size of the wound.
And guard yourself with all caution not to irritate the wound with the fracture, for many times doctors have caused these leaves to inflame the patient's illnesses or bring about a fatal corruption or severe illness, which would be unwise. And if the lunar phase is light, moist, different from the strictures of other fractures.
And if the wound is large or a bad wound, and you fear certain harmful accidents which we have mentioned, and find pain in that area, then do not stay over those points too long. Instead, apply cloth pads instead of steams and strengthen it with those.
And when about one or two days have passed since the wound has started to fester, where a boil has been generated, then lift up the cloth you had placed over that area, and immediately apply calms, ointments which according to our custom we use to treat wounds, thus applying tetra-pharmcon and similar to it.
And you should loosen the bandage and examine the wound at midday and evening until it is consolidated and closed, and ensure that the member is prepared in such a manner that suppuration flows from it to the areas where you have facilitated this.
If the wound passes many days and is not consolidated nor has the boil been discharged from it, then you should suspect that here are signs of gout, and you must examine the wound by puncturing it. And of those signs that are separated, extract them. Those from which nothing is extracted and cause the member to become painful, forcibly incise them as much as possible.
And if you notice pus or bad odor in the wound, it is stioma or another species of corruption and putrefaction. Then you must place there what is appropriate for the treatment of such conditions, as there is a preceding narration of the cure in its own chapter.
And from this place where the main sore is located, you should make present your hand: when the flesh is cut, lift over the member as the flesh of the thigh and of the helper and resemble those of the large members, and do not presume too much of it, nor the extraction of it, for many spots seen to happen by this there will be death; having left that which can rot, for strong decay will fall on its own in about 20 days or 30; and then cure the wound if you see fit, and if not leave that.
Capitol.xx.
For the cure of a hernia that occurs in the vicinity of any fracture.
Spots seen this hernia occurs in the vicinity of bone healing, and especially close to the joints, and alter the shape of the member; and strongly prohibit the member from its natural operation.
Then consider if the hernia is recent and administer those medicines that have astringent properties such as aloes, enemas, and observe, examine closely, and compare them; try taking some of these or all, and confirm whether they are astringent, or white from urine, or sweet, and place them on the hernia in cloth, and constrain them over it with good constriction.
Leave the constriction in place so that you do not loosen it for several days; then remove it and put another one on, while the knot is being loosened; or strengthen the lead sheet hanging down, as lead has the property of tightening whatever is swollen in the limbs.
But if the knot is already in the vein and tightened, and necessity demands that you loosen it, then split it along its uppermost part, and incise the superfluous and prominent part, or lance it with a hot iron while the knot is being loosened; and treat it until it is healed.
Chapter XXI.
For the restoration of fractures, when restored and then the limb is reduced according to its natural position.
When a bone fracture is restored, and then the limb is reduced and set according to its natural position, this is done for several reasons: one reason is the abundance of fluid in the joint and the setting not being done as it should; or due to excess constriction of the ligaments while nutrition cannot flow to the limb; or due to excessive application of ointment; or due to unnecessary movement at the wrong time; or due to insufficient strength in the patient's body and weakness.
And the treatment for this is to give the patient something to eat and make the heart of the patient tender while the scab multiplies within it; administer baths; and intermingle hope and joy with it.
And place your hand over the member, so that the hand draws in nourishment, or continue the moistening with strong wine, while the nourishment flows and returns to its natural form.
Chapter XXII.
For the treatment of broken bones when they are reduced in a tortuous manner, prohibit the operation on them.
When the member is already reduced near the completion of its reduction and stabilization of the broken bone and setting, and this is due to the form of the member, but still the member does not prohibit its natural operation, then you should not receive the word of someone who thinks that part of the member is newly broken.
Yet there are many foolish physicians and reducers who have done this in our land; this operation is much reproachable, leading to great fear from the sign of which is fatal.
If claudication and nodulation are recent, then soak them in a mixture of sheep's milk in which you have put softening herbs such as hyssop, rue, melilot, similar to those; and prepare a poultice with such a poultice to soften it well; or use mucilage of rue and mix it with gauze or oil of cinnamon, applying it as a poultice; or use fat figs and roast them in dove's dung, resembling those mentioned among the medicines for consolidation.
Sometimes it is dissolved by gentle friction applied to the more humid parts, and movement of the limb should be administered at all times in all hours.
If tortuosity has already gone on for some time and becomes strong, turning into a stone, and requires treatment, then it is necessary to remove the pus above the cecum and dissolve the continuation of the bone, and incise what is superfluous from the nodulation of that method on the bone with fine scissors, and facilitate it in that area by stimulating and studying it.
Capitol.xxiii.
Of speech on dislocation.
Dislocation is the displacement of one of the joints of that particular place, making it forbidden to move, and distorts the shape of the limb, causing great pain and injuries in the patient.
Therefore, when a dislocation occurs, it is essential to act quickly to reduce it. Do not delay the reduction, for if delayed, the area can become gangrenous, making the reduction of the dislocation much more difficult.
And for this reason, it should neither be cut nor stretched during the time of gangrene, for moist wounds cause spasms and severe pains.
More importantly, when this happens, you should immediately perform a flap surgery on the foot, and allow it to rest until the gangrene subsides; then, the limb should be soaked in warm water and oil, and finally, the dislocation should be reduced with ease.
And every member be treated with water of which the memory will bring to its place.
And I have already and ordered the chapters of dislocation according to what is preceded in fracture; from the part of the body first down to the part last.
Chapter XXIV.
For the treatment of dislocation of the jaw, proceed.
When both jaws are dislocated and not reduced; and the dislocation of both is made according to one of two manners: either they are slightly moved from their places and slightly mollified; or they are completely dislocated, in which case they must be thoroughly reduced at the joint where saliva flows from the patient and cannot open or close his mouth, and the patient's tongue should be wrapped in a cloth.
But when the dislocation is slight, it often returns to its place in major movements due to little cause.
But if the dislocation is complete and thorough, then you must administer a gentle reduction, and not delay it entirely.
And the minister should hold the patient's head, and place the doctor's thumb from one hand in the recess of the dislocation of the jaw inside the mouth, if the dislocation is on one side; or that he place both his thumbs together, if the dislocation is on two sides, and the other fingers of his hands be outside to support them; and command the patient to cease moving his jaws and bring those out from any part back to their proper place; and the doctor should align the jaw and push it back into its place.
And if the reduction is difficult, especially if both jaws are completely dislocated, then administer evaporation with hot water and oil, while performing a light reduction of both and do not delay the reduction of both entirely, as we have said before.
And when returned and aligned, and the mouth of the patient is closed and not softened, then place it over those powders of cloth with cerate, made of wax and rubbed oil; and soon apply something to facilitate the ligatures with many bands.
And let the patient sleep on his back, with his head standing between two pillows, so that it does not swell on either the right or the left; and do not force him to gargle for any reason; having his food forbidden until the pains subside and his jaws are relaxed, then allow what he wishes.
And let this be administered with ease, and you should not interfere with the appetite for eating and drinking or spitting, until his jaw is relaxed and healed.
And if the reduction of two jaws when dislocated for some time and not returned to their proper places causes fever and continuous swelling, and a strong pain in the abdomen of the patient, as well as severe vomiting of pure bile.
And when you see this, then know it is dangerous; and severe swelling may occur to the one upon whom this happens in a few days.
Chapter XXV.
Of the reduction of the dislocation of the furcula and the extremity of the muscle.
The furcula is not dislocated from the leg inward by its continuation to the foot; and sometimes it is dislocated outward, and this is declared by the sensation.
And the restoration of it is that the patient lies down and extends his arms. And then compress the area with your palm firmly, for it will return.
And then place your hand over the area, apply the plaster and powders, and strengthen it.
More so, the extremity of that which is connected to the thigh is not dislocated in any day; then it must be reduced and equalized according to what we have said and according to what is within your means.
And then place your hand over the area, apply the plaster and powders, and perform an extraction, commanding the patient to maintain calm and rest until it is healed.
And in this method of cure, the extremity of the muscle is reduced when separated from its place.
Chapter XXVI.
On the Reduction of Muscle Dislocation.
Know that the muscle is not dislocated in any manner but according to three ways, of which one is when it is dislocated from the tendon to the bone.
And the second is when it is dislocated above the muscle, which is called taut; and it is not dislocated at the rear parts by the shoulder; and it is not dislocated at the front parts by the nerves.
And it is most dislocated and outwardly displaced at the rear parts of the tendon, especially in those where the flesh is scanty, slightly being dislocated; more so in those where there are more muscles, with greater difficulty.
And sometimes such cases occur in certain individuals due to a blow or collision, and the muscle of the person develops an abscess from a carbuncle, which is exacerbated because it is already dislocated.
Then cover what you are particularly over them with, and proceed in the cure of them.
When the dislocation is in the shoulder parts, you must feel for slips; so that you can distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the normal muscle, which you find to have a manifest difference; and you find in the head of the muscle a concavity, and by feeling for the slip at the head of the muscle it should sound like a hollow, and the patient cannot bring his hand to his ear, nor raise it with all movements.
If it is dislocated, you must feel the foot or above it, and then you will find a clear sensation, which is not vague.
And for this dislocation, a gentle reduction is made when it is fresh and the patient is unconscious.
And the reduction is that the minister raises the patient's foot to above the parts; then places his fingers on the slips and feels for the slip, raising the joint with strength at its proper place, and the minister raises the patient's foot, extending it properly; then places his fingers there so that it returns gently.
If, however, it does not return through what we have said and only from the beginning of the dislocation accident, for several days, then the patient should be bathed in cold water and a wet compress that alleviates and soothes should be applied as if it were roots of plantain, fenugreek, and melilot in water, and should be administered.
And then the patient should be laid on their back and placed in such a way that the tilt of the body is equal between levitation and stiffness, and the doctor places his hand on the spine, elevates the head of the muscle by its virtue, and pulls the foot of the patient to prevent it from being twisted, while another attends to the head of the patient, preventing it from being twisted, for then it quickly returns to its place.
And if you wish, return the second in this manner: and it is that you make someone present who is longer than the patient, standing on the side of the affected limb, and inserts his muscle beneath the tilt of the patient's foot, elevating the tilt of the patient upwards between the limbs so that the patient is suspended in air, while another attends to pull the foot of the patient from the sides of his abdomen. But if the patient is light, then that which another cause is suspended, so that the serious one may return quickly, for the dislocation returns soon.
But it is reduced by another manner: and it is that the patient be placed on the ground with a long pole whose head is round in shape, like a mortar handle, neither too thick nor too thin. Then place the patient so that their head rests on the head of the pole; next, cover the top of the pole with lion skins, and let the patient lie along the length of the pole. Extend the hand of the other part towards the divisions below; and extend the body of the patient from the other side with strength, for the joint returns to its place quickly.
And if the reduction is difficult due to all the causes we have said, then use this cure: and it is that you take a pole whose length is two braccia, its width is four fingers, and its thickness is augmented in the palm of your hand according to this form.
And place lion skins on the round head of the pole so that the pole does not slide off the patient.
And then place the patient's head, and stretch your hand or arm along the body between the parts, and tie the body and the arm and the extremity of the hand to an assistant.
And then place the arm on a step of the ladder according to its width, and stretch the hand along the parts below, and the other side be suspended from the other part, that the joint may soon come together.
And when the instrument for it is completed according to any manner that is possible, and then place beneath the head a pillow of wool of equal quantity; and then apply a plaster prepared of powder of molten wax and honey over all the muscle, thus thoroughly mixed on top, and then tightly bind the head with something decent; the plaster be thoroughly applied over the plaster, and the hand thereof be attached to its neck, and let it be left, and do not move the hand from it for seven days.
And ensure that the food of the patient is moderate, until the limb is comforted, for it is then more easily healed.
And then more food should be given about seven or five times a day and exercise should be performed; and therefore if it is closed and not softened, then it is healed.
And if the joint is dislocated due to frequent attacks of humidity or for another cause, then it is necessary that a cautery be applied three times, as stated in the chapter on cautery.
And if all this is done and after seven days the ligament and joint are not closed, and the plaster and stricture are reduced several times over but still not closed with a catgut suture, and the arm cannot be raised above the parts above, then you should know that the nerves of the muscle, which are at the head of the muscle, are either incised or extended or softened, and you should know that the joint will never be fixed in its proper place.
For the dislocation of what is caused, you should reduce the foot and calf or the parts behind, the reduction is done by impulse and extension by the muscles, while it returns.
And let it be administered in the other stricture, and care that within it be healed.
And if there is a delay in the healing and a decrease in the movement of the limb, then the patient uses warm baths until the delay in healing is alleviated and returns to its original nature.
Capitol.xxvii.
On the treatment of dislocation of the shoulder.
Know that the joint of the shoulder is dislocated with difficulty and seems to return with difficulty; and it is dislocated in all directions, especially向前方和后方。当肩关节脱位时，你能够明显看到关节的凹陷，无论是在迅速查看还是在触摸时根据关节脱位的具体形状来判断。当你复位脱位的肩膀时，这关节的位置就很明显了，因为关节是凹陷的，无法弯曲手臂，也不能触及自己的肌肉。
And note the symptoms, and reduce the dislocation as soon as possible before it becomes inflamed. For if it becomes inflamed with an abscess, reduction is difficult, and even strong medicine may not cure it completely; especially when it occurs in the rear parts, for it is worse than all other types of dislocation, causing more pain and often leading to death.
And the restoration of the patient, when it is that which can be reduced, is that the patient's hand be extended between two others, and the doctor's arm be stretched out, with the doctor's hands on the knees and let go, and he push the joint with the heels of his hands or with the edge of his palm as it returns to its place.
If the dislocation is in front parts, then return it thus by bending the hand against its own, striking the knee with the edge of his palm.
And if the dislocation does not yield to reduction, then administer strong extension and vigorous manipulation.
And let two ministers extend the arm, and hold that position with two ministers so that it is not remauged during the extension.
And then let the arm be rotated completely, as it is wrapped in a long folded cloth around the patient's hand, or bandage.
And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, anoint that area with some oil so that it helps in the lubrication of the joint for ease; and then push the joint vigorously as it returns.
And after the reduction of the cavity, place it on that cushion where there is a pad and evacuation with white oil, and extend it by stretching downward, and the arm be suspended from the neck, and let it be left for some days.
And then it should be released; and so if the joint is formed in that location, then you release the ligament and leave it there.
And if you see the joint not well strengthened, then reapply the plaster and the ligament, and leave it there for some days until it is extended; and then release it.
But if accidents happen to it shortly after the reduction of the joint, and its disposition is in motion, then administer moistening in bath and subtle friction and compression, until it is healed; or pause over the joint for a while, so it is a matter of rapid movement; and then bind it, and leave it over the bone day and night. And then immerse that in the bath; and when it is soaked, then rub the joint with mild friction, and then apply it over that for a while, so it is a matter of rapid movement, once, and the second, and the third time. am intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.
And if you wish, place your hand over that wet and weathered crack and press strongly against it; do this several times, for that is wet and you are reducing it to its proper state.
Capitol.xxviii.
For the treatment of dislocation of the shoulder, it is of the joint that is between the arm and the hand.
Shoulder of the hand is sometimes dislocated, and the reduction of this dislocation is easy. The opposite is true for other joints; however, more importantly, it is necessary to act with great speed in the reduction when it occurs, before the area becomes inflamed or an abscess forms.
And the reduction of the dislocation is that you place the hand joint of the patient on a table and have them extend their arm. The surgeon then places their hand or palm over the area near the joint and gently push it back into its proper location.
But firstly it should be considered if the palm is already placed on the belly of the hand, then the patient places both hands on a table for extension and reduction; and if the dislocation is previous, place both hands, then the position of the hand of the physician intrinsically on the table, so that the physician's hand falls over that vicinity of the joint.
And so if it returns soon, that is good; and if not, then strengthen the area by applying pressure to the abscess and leave it as it is; and do not repeat this, for if you do, you will neither be able nor allowed to proceed with the reduction of the dislocation for several days.
But according to the tortuosity of the joint; and do not note any cause to the patient, but rather that the hand is softened and cannot strengthen any cause; then you know that the nerves are torn or stretched, and in this case it should be strengthened with a cautery near the site and reinforce it with some cause.
And since the swelling has returned, place it on the poultice which we have recommended, and let it be applied and strengthened for five days; then loosen it and leave it, and exercise the hand.
But if the movement in it has been overstayed and some gravity occurs in it, then apply that which is water cauda and with friction several times, until it is alleviated.
Chapter XXIX.
On the cure of dislocation of the fingers.
For some time, dislocate the fingers completely.
And when one finger is dislocated on the side of the palm or in its center, then hold the finger and push the dislocation back with your fingers until it returns to place.
Then support the head of the finger, and suspend that part to which it is dislocated, and leave it for two days.
Then suspend that part and extend it until it is straightened in that day.
And when it is night, ligature that according to that narration, and do not cease to release and exercise it during the day. Ligature it at night; and do this for several days until it is straightened.
And make it seem as though you do this, if it is dislocated in the abdomen of the hand, and join that to that part, and do this your first operation, within which it be healed.
And make it seem as though you do this when it is dislocated in the other parts.
Capitol.xxx.
For the cure of dislocation of the cervical spine.
When the vertebrae of the back or the neck are fully dislocated, and several vertebrae around that location are displaced, then there is no cure for that, for death will ensue to the patient.
And the sign of this is that the patient's excretion is forced out against their will, and they cannot retain it; several times, parts of their body or their legs or one of their arms become soft; or a vertebra is displaced from its place, for several times are displaced and multiple divisions are made to remove those dislocations in four directions.
Then that is mended at the rear parts and is named gilblowitz.
May the cure of it be that when you consider if the gilblowitz arises from puella, then in that case there is neither cure nor does it heal completely.
May it be that in those which come from congelation or percussion or semblance to those, the Ancients have spoken of the methods of cure at length, of which the most returns to prophecy; but I will now abbreviate that of which the slight omission from excess of that, for my proximity to the clarity of my exposition, which I have here expounded and formed from various instruments, by which I will show and expand that.
And of those, only the one that arises in the two sides is cured as I advise.
And it is that the patient be extended on his back close to the wall, and be covered with a wet cloth so that his feet are not chilled.
And place a straight stake, planted in the ground at the end of the back near its head, and another stake on the sides of the feet at the other end of the stake.
The minister hold the stake, and it should not be fixed in a hole; another minister hold the other according to that form.
And wrap around the head of the patient and tie tightly with a strong linen band; extend the end of the bandage to the stake which is at the head of the patient, and tie that there; and tie the other bandage tightly around the hips of the patient under his buttocks, and support his legs; and adjust all the bandages and tie those to the other stake which supports his feet.
And the minister should extend the bandage to the part of the stake, and do not move both stakes and the bandages in which they are fixed, but they should not be fixed in this manner as we have said.
And the doctor places his palms on the spine with strength so that it returns, or he places one hand on a table and adjusts his feet on the table as it returns.
And if it does not return in this way, then take a table of which the breadth or length is about three braccia, and dig in the wall where we said was near the wound a place at the end of the table. And place the majority of the table on the spine, and the doctor places his feet on the other end. He presses well so that the spine is compressed and returns to its place.
And if you wish, open a hole in the buttock which is revolved with your hand; and when you are on the ground, place the patient's head at the heel of two sticks, the length of which is one braccia, and place his head at the heel of two sticks in the same manner; and let the distance between each stick be a palm. Then put something through each hole to turn the spine, and secure each end firmly on the ground so that it does not move.
And there should be a round stick for the hole, and it should be turned in the two slots of the two sticks.
And at the end of it is a slot in which the stick is inserted, the length of which is one palm's breadth as it is turned; and in the other two sticks, it is similar to that.
And then strengthen the ligaments you have pulled in the feet of the patient in the slot where you place their head, and the ligaments you have pulled in the thighs of the patient in the hole where you place their feet.
And then you should place each hole for a minister to hold the hole with his hand, and the doctor straighten the spine according to what we have said.
And when the spine is returned and the area is straightened, then cover it with a paste of honey, and some wool; then place a slice of table wax over the paste, such that its width is about three fingers or nearly those, and its length is sufficient to cover the part of the spine, and on top of that portion of the spine.
And then apply the paste which we have mentioned, and use the patient for subtle nourishment until it is healed.
And if there is any danger in the area at the end of the healing, then ensure that medicines that mitigate and soothe are administered through long-term use, which we have recommended; and already a layer of lead has been applied to that location.
And sometimes accidents occur at the end of the vertebrae in the back, and are caused by that dislocation; and it is that bone where you already foresee that no suspicion should arise about it with this medicine, for it would make your accident fatal.
Capitol.xxxxi.
Of the cure for a dislocated hip.
Know that the joint of the hip and the joint of the muscle should only occur through dislocation alone, and do not happen in those cases where small displacement and凹陷 occurs in other joints.
And the joint of the thigh is dislocated according to four manners, which is dislocated to the internal parts, or to the external parts, or to the anterior parts, or to the posterior parts.
And primarily it is dislocated to the internal parts, and little to the anterior or posterior parts.
And the sign of dislocation to the internal parts is that, when you adjust the healthy leg's knee against the malformed one, the malformed leg appears longer and the kneecap is more prominent than the healthy side. The malformed leg cannot bend its knee; instead, it must be stretched out. This is the place where a cauterization of the apostema is applied, so that the head of the malformation is already reached here.
And the sign of one who suffers dislocation to the external parts is that the symptoms of the condition are contrary to this dislocation.
And the sign of one who suffers dislocation to the anterior parts is that the knee swells according to the complement, but it cannot bend the part that is in pain. If forced to extend further towards the anterior parts, it cannot do so; and his urine is retained, and his swelling is an apostema. You must treat his mobility on the sole.
And the sign of one upon whom you have dislocated the parts behind is that he does not expand the groin, nor can that in front be bent which bends the one behind, and his thigh is shorter than the other, and the one behind is softened, and the hip bone is displaced at that location.
The main reduction of the species of this dislocation is that you consider, at once, if the dislocation is old and ancient, whether it has already hardened. If so, you administer the reduction according to its position as soon as possible; in such cases, this is not part of the entire treatment; then one should not conjecture about it further.
For the case where the dislocation is recent and belongs to one of the four species of dislocation, you should turn the joint back and extend it to the internal and external parts, and move it to the right and left, for it naturally returns and does not require further treatment.
Moreover, if it does not return in this manner, you should prepare a strong agent and extend the thigh of that side more, or on its legs, or apply linseed which is pressed over the groin; another agent should stretch the hand from above so that it touches the inner sides of the legs; then strongly apply linseed over the front of the thigh, and have another person hold the end of the linseed.
And it is the extension from his side inside to the angle at the side of the furcula, or from the back side to the side of the flank.
And it is the extension of all those in one go, so that the patient lies on the ground and arches his back.
And this type of extension is common to all four.
And therefore, if the dislocation returns as we have said, it will be well; otherwise, for every type, what I say about its own treatment is necessary.
In the reduction of its own, when dislocated, and the dislocation is on the inside parts, make sure the patient lies on his side; then place the cushion over the side in that location where between the hip bone and where the buttock is placed the angle; and extend the cushion above the part of the angle to the other side of the furcula.
And then another minister firmly takes hold of the legs, and presses the area around the hip on the affected side, extending to the outer parts by strong extension, so that it returns to its place.
And this species is of a milder cure for which that member is reduced compared to other species.
And if you excuse yourself and do not follow the training for this method of cure, then make sure that both feet of the patient are tied together firmly but gently, over both ankles and both insteps.
And let the length of each part be equal to the quantity of four fingers, and let the patient's thigh be extended more than the other by a quantity of two fingers.
And then place the patient's thigh over the top of the post, and let it be in the crook of the arm; and let the length from the ground be equal to the quantity of two braces.
And command a strong youth to lift the thigh, and place it over the patient's thigh. Another strong youth should lift the buttocks firmly, so that the joint returns to its place quickly.
And in the reduction proper, when dislocation is at the outer part, make sure the patient's thigh lies on a cushion according to what we have advised regarding the firmness; and strengthen the bandage over the patient's thigh and its ankle.
And then place two sticks, one on the foot and the other on the head; and place well-adjusted sticks in the middle of the leg placed over which wet cloths be wrapped, so that the patient is not damaged by the stick being between their thighs, for you must ensure the extension from the parts left behind is not pulled.
And then each minister extend to their part, and the doctor with his hand equalizes the reduction according to the art.
And when the dislocation is in the front parts, then may it go well that the leg be slightly extended, and this according to this narrative method for the leg; and the doctor places the palm of his right hand on the front of the injured leg, and approaches with the other hand, and at that approach, he holds the extended part at the back part to the front part.
And if the dislocation is at the rear parts, then do not cover the patient with a blanket leaving it open, and elevate it above the ground; having done this, place it on a hard cause, as when the width of the patient is dislocated to the rear parts, according to what we said about its position on two widths; and it should be over its face and the linens be extended, according to what we said, with no harm.
And a compression should be applied on the area where the joint is displaced.
Therefore, when the reduction is completed as it should — and you notice the sign of the reduction, which is that you extend two legs from the patient, and when you see them equal and the leg extends its usual space, then you know that the limb has been returned according to what is needed — then you place two cushions, apply padding, and wrap it with a bandage so that the width is not distorted in any part; and adhere the patient to rest for three or four days.
And then separate the thigh from the abdomen, comparing one hip to the other.
When you see them equal in circumference, you know that the dislocation is already fixed, and then let the patient go.
And if you see any sign of swelling, then you return and apply a compress to that area, and extend it according to your initial structure, and leave it for three days.
Then return that, and allow it to heal gradually over each part for some days until it is comfortable.
Capitol..xxxii.
On the treatment of dislocation of the shoulder.
The shoulder can be dislocated in three ways: it can be dislocated to the outward parts, to the inward parts, and to the front parts more than to the back parts; it is not dislocated to the rear parts.
And the sign of shoulder dislocation is that when you command the patient to apply their hand to their hip; then you know that the shoulder is dislocated.
And the restoration of all manners of it is that you make sure the patient lies straight, try to extend his back as much as possible; adhere your two hands to his face, and place his foot between your feet; then make sure to adhere the bottom of him with your palms, keep those between your own feet on the bottom of him with strength, and another minister extend his back so that the bottom returns to its place.
And the sign of relief is that his back adheres to the thigh with ease without effort.
And then apply that and adhere the back to the thigh, and place those simultaneously with a bandage for three or four days, and then remove those.
And do not use the patient in any labor for a few days until he is healed and comforted.
But if the reduction of it is excused to you, then administer strong extension to the limbs of which in the cure of the hip the previous narrative was given.
Capitol.xxxiii.
Of the treatment of dislocation of the thumb.
The thumb is sometimes reduced by slight movement, and sometimes dislocated according to need, and the dislocation of the thumb is performed either on the internal parts or on the external parts.
And the sign of the dislocation of the thumb is that you see the thumb swollen proceeding from the part to which it is dislocated.
More the treatment of the reduction of the thumb is by gentle stretching, and it should be extended easily and equalized so that it returns.
More in the treatment of the thumb when dislocated according to need, ensure that you make the patient lie down, and have a strong and brave assistant behind the side of the thumb in the middle of the location.
And then place your right hand on the foot of the upper part, and with your left hand hold the lower part of the foot at the location of the heel.
And then draw the foot to your right hand, and to your left by two passes, and extend your left hand; and push the foot on the right you lower the leg thereafter.
And do this by two passes as we have counted.
And then push the foot towards the leg for the third pass, and you are at the heel.
So if it returns in one or two passes according to this manner, and if you close the foot well, that is good; otherwise, then iterate the operation, for that does not return.
But if in you the reduction of it as we have recommended is prohibited, then make a cut on the outside of the foot, and stick a pointed rod into firm earth, and that should be between the patient's thighs, and you have already wrapped it with a cloth so that the wound does not get infected.
And then the minister should hold their thighs, and another minister extend the foot with their hands or with cloth that lies over the heel of the foot; and then each minister extend themselves against the extension of their side, and the rod should be extended between the patient's thighs holding it there, so that the body of the patient is not drawn to the sides you lower its extension.
And then the doctor equalizes the dislocation with his hands, while another assistant holds the healthy thigh at the parts left, so that the dislocation returns with ease.
And then, as the dislocation returns and the health of the reduction is declared to you, then apply a plaster strongly with wheat grains, and tie the foot with wheat grains to the leg.
And be careful of the nerves behind the talus, for the wheat over that area should not be strong and severely affect those nerves.
And leave it for two or three days; and if the wheat becomes moist, remove it.
And remove the wheat in the third day or in the fourth, and prohibit the patient from walking for forty days. But if it is necessary for the patient to walk before that time, then be sure that the dislocation is not dissolved and corrupted, and that it does not receive cure.
And if an abscess occurs at the site, then when you administer in the cavity of the area as mentioned in what preceded our narrative, in another location for treatment and fomentation, before it is suppurated.
Chapter XXXIV.
For the treatment of dislocation of the toes in the feet.
Make sure that which is dislocated is gently reduced within a small extent; and what is not difficult, before it is severe.
But if the dislocation is in some of the bones of the big toe, then make the patient lie on their side on the ground or on a table, and keep them in this position.
Then stand on the patient's side, and place your foot over what you suspect to be the joint, and gently press that area with your foot using its natural strength so that it may return to its proper position, and observe that which has been reduced and see that no swelling appears in that location.
And then place the foot of him on a table that can hold the whole foot, which has two ends, and strengthen it with structure decent and firm for three days; then release that and allow that rest from walking for many days, until it is strengthened and its recovery is assured.
Capitol.xxxv.
Of the species of displacement that are caused by inflammation or by fracture or by any combination thereof.
When any of those causes occur, and you are involved in the treatment of it and its restoration, you must ensure that the success leads to recovery.
And for this reason, you must not presume in the treatment of it; rather, one who is wise in the art, long accustomed to its use, merciful and pious, delayed, neither angry nor presumptuous, should begin with medicines that cauterize abscesses only, leaving the disease to divine judgment, but to him to whom you hope for a cure, for alleviation of the illness, in which some hope appears. And then make a reduction at the beginning of the cause as soon as possible, before it becomes an abscess.
And then, if the limb returns as we want, administer a regimen which prevents the formation of an abscess and heals the wound as is convenient with the use of drying ointments.
And if dislocation is accompanied by a fracture or injuries in the separated bones, then you reduce the joint, and do so as we have said in simple ailments previously discussed in those places.
And use and avoid according to your virtue that which is in the ways of fear according to what precedes my preaching; for you should give thanks to your Creator, who is more permanent for your glory, and pay more honors to your true self in your time. Thus you finish the words of Albucasim perfectly, for which may God be blessed. Amen.
