O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	O you, dear children, I have completed this book which is the last of the medical science together with its contents, and I have made the end through its explanations and by its declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to me in vision that I should complete it for you with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, that is to say "surgery".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of hands is neglected in our region and is completely foreign to us, the science has perished and decayed, and nothing remains of its essence except for small descriptions in books by the ancients that have been moved by the hands.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this came the errors and vanity, and intentions are closed off and the science is distant.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	It seems to me that I should revive it together with the ordinance of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and I will come together with the forms of cautery instruments, and other tools of the work with the adjustment of the declaration and preparation thereof, as is necessary.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And because there is no good master of hands found in our time, the art of medicine is distant.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And it is necessary for one who engages in this to surpass in the science of anatomy, as Galenus says, so that they know the truth about the members, and their forms and connections and separations from each other, and have knowledge of the bones and nerves and muscles and their number, and the movement and rest of the veins, and their origin.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And for this reason Hippocrates says that names with names are much, and with deeds are little; and similarly in the art of medicine.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	We tell you at the beginning of this book that whoever is not knowledgeable about the things mentioned before, should guard against falling into error and harming people; thus I have seen many times those who interfere with this science and rely on their own knowledge without experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa I apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	For I saw a foolish doctor who lanced an abscess of scrofula on the neck of a woman, and cut into the arteries of her neck; thus so much blood flowed out that the woman fell dead in his hands.
Et vis I autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens III jors.	And I saw another doctor who tried to remove a stone from a man's bladder, and the stone was large; he took with it a piece of the bladder, and the man died within three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I had already been called to remove it, and saw the condition of the patient and the size of the stone, and knew well that if it were cut out he would die.
Et vis I autre mire qui prist en cure I duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi I termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And I saw another doctor who took care of the duke of our land who had a broken leg, and with the fracture there was a wound; and the doctors, full of ignorance, set the fracture over the wound with splints too tightly, and left no cloth to cover the wound at all, and left it thus for some time; and he commanded that it should not be loosened; and it remained in this condition until the leg became swollen and the foot turned black, leading to his ruin.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I was called to come to him, and I hurried to come and loosen the leg; and when I had loosened it, he felt at ease and did not feel any pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	But once corruption was already confirmed in the limb, it could not be healed; and the corruption continued to spread throughout the limb until the entire limb was lost.
Et vis I autre mire qui effondra I apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And I saw another doctor who drained the embedded abscess and then burned it with the malice of his lordship.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For a carbuncle, when it is full of melancholic humor, should not be touched with iron unless it is in such a place where all the corrupted matter can be removed.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en II divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And for that reason, dear child, it is necessary for you to know that the work of hands is divided into two categories: namely, where there is danger in many circumstances; and I will show in each place in this book where there is fear and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	Therefore, it is necessary that you guard yourselves so that the foolish doctor cannot speak ill of you. Take your arms in readiness, and approach your patients gently but firmly, and use the best method so that by the grace of God you may reach salvation and be praised; and leave behind terrifying illnesses due to severe treatment; and remove your weapons from those whom you doubt, and act in such a way that you may come from this world to the next with glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	Galenus states in some of his warnings: "Do not take seriously harmful diseases, or you may be called a foolish doctor.
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	I have composed this treatise according to three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapter is about fire cauterizations and medicinal hot cauterizations, and the chapter is organized from head to feet; and on the forms of instruments, and tools for cauterization, and all that is necessary in the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and cupping and wounds, and the extraction of arrows, and similar things; and the chapter is organized along with the forms of instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things; and it is organized from head to feet, and the forms of instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Thus, as we recall the work, it is necessary for me to tell about the quality of help and harm of each temperament.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the qualities of help and harm are lengthy speech and subtle science and secret responses; and about these spoke many of the wise, and agreed on them; and I suffice with little of their words, for I fear lengthiness.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que II complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that the cautery universally aids in all constitutions where there is matter, whether it be two constitutions: namely, a hot constitution with matter, and a dry constitution with matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In a constitution that is both hot and dry with matter, some argued and said that the cautery is great help there; and others said the opposite: that the cautery is not useful for diseases that come from heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	For the nature of fire is hot, and it should not be used to treat hot diseases with heat or dryness; and those who say the opposite claim that the cautery provides great help for hot and dry diseases that occur in the body.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you examine the body of the person and their moisture according to the complexion of fire, you find the body cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this statement.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have found it to be true through experience.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And in all ways, let no one interfere except those who have tested it, and who know through long practice the chapter of cauterizations, and the diversity of humors in people, and their predispositions and causes of illnesses, and their outcomes and timing; we fear not from other humors, especially in cold and moist ailments.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all the doctors gathered and agreed on the cauterization.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, son, that the fire cautery together is of the secrets of treatments, and of greater goodness than the burning cauterizing agent.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For the fire is simple, and does not affect any part other than the one being treated, nor does it harm another limb if there is no contraindication.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	Burning medicines spread from one limb to another, causing diseases that are difficult to heal; and by chance may kill the patient. The fire, due to its height and the goodness of its nature, does not do this unless there is excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	And this I have found through experience and the length of service and study that I have put into the art, and it is upon the truth of things; and for this reason I excuse myself for the length of speech, for it displeases me to take from you the secret which is hidden in the fire, and the quality of the work, how it overcomes bodily diseases, as the philosopher says in demonstrating; now receive it into your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, my son, that they agreed on the time when the cauterizations should be performed, and chose appropriate days.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And I say that cauterization is appropriate at all times, because the harm caused by ailments can be prevented with the help of cauterization; and especially if the cauterizations are necessary for pains that cannot wait due to urgency so that no greater mischief comes to the limb.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And do not think, dear child, as foolish doctors do; for the illness that is healed by cauterization has no relapse; and they say otherwise, but it is not so as they believe, because cauterizations are a medicine that changes the complexion, dries up the humors which cause pain, and works faster than other medicines due to its power and the virtue of its operation.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	And it is possible for the illness to come sometimes according to the temperament of the patient and the place and nature of the illness; and the superfluities gather in him through the acquisition of food and similar things, except where there is little excess and moisture, such as cauterizations for toothache and similar things, and such pain does not return; but this happens rarely.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And many people do not understand why cauterizations are called the last resort in medicine, and this is true; but they do not believe that cauterizations can be effective after other treatments, yet their understanding is false, and cauterizations are the last resort in medicine because when we administer methods of treatment for certain illnesses and they are ineffective, then we use the cautery, and it works.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Then it is clear that cauterization is the last resort of medicine, not according to the understanding of foolish doctors.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	The ancients said that cauterizations with an instrument of gold are less harmful than those made of iron, and they stated this not because of the quality of the gold or its high nature; but they also said that the place where the cautery is applied does not cause putrefaction, which is not true as I have experienced it, and I found that it can be true for some people; and cauterizations with gold are no less harmful than those made of iron, as they claim.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	And still, when you heat an instrument of gold, you cannot tell when it is hot by the color of the gold, and it cools down quickly; and if you heat it too much, it will ignite in the fire; and thus there are enough hindrances.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And for this reason, we use fire cautery which we have prepared for our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	I have ordered this chapter from head to foot so that the path may be easier to find.
dou cautere olivaire	of olive cautery
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	This cautery is useful for moisture and cold affecting the brain, and there are two that are made due to a disease called "soda," and due to various humors descending from the head to the eyes and ears, and also for numerous dreams, tooth pain, sore throat, and especially for all diseases caused by cold such as paralysis, soda, apoplexy, and similar illnesses.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief III nuis ou IIII, selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The form of this cautery is such that the patient should be purged with a solvent medicine cleansing the head for III nights or IIII, according to what the strength and age and habit of the patient can bear; and then do behind the head of the patient.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses II eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	And then make him sit cross-legged between your hands, and place his hands on his knees; after that put the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his two eyes; there where your thumbs will be, bleed from underneath, then heat the cautery which is called "olivare", here is its form:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os I sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren I poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse III jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place it on the spot marked with ink, and do while descending and squeezing your hand little by little in a spiral; then lift your hand gradually, and examine the spot if you see the bone slightly raised; and if you do not see it, then repeat the cautery until you see the bone as I have said; after take a bit of wax, and mix it with soft cotton inside, and place it on the spot, and leave it there for III days; afterwards put moist wool in butter; and leave it on until the heat is gone; then treat the wound with ointment which is called "tetrafarmakon", until it is healed.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And the ancient ones said, that the longer a wound remains open, the more it is cleansed; and for this reason, they help it to heal.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And some said that one should leave the cautery long enough for part of the bone to be burned, and then remove what is burned from the bone, and treat it.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme I vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And others say that the cautery should be left on for a long time, and pressed so forcefully that it abrades the bone as wide as a finger joint to allow the humors to flow out; and one must leave the wound open for a long time; afterwards, it should be cleaned and treated.
Et ces II manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And these two methods of cauterization do not seem entirely good to me, except in some people where there is a risk of fear; and I believe that I should leave it as such; because the head becomes weakened by continuous solutions of nature, as we witness in other parts of the body; and even when the patient's condition is naturally weak, the first method of cauterization seems safer and gentler to me, and thus I use this method with a view towards healing.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	of the old pain of the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	When chronic pain comes to the whole head and lasts for a long time, the patient should use herbs and pills called "cochie," and perform purging of the head and oils and plasters; and if one performs the cautery as we have previously mentioned, it is not effective.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Take care if the head of the patient is of strong nature, and that it is not too cold; then cauterize below that area a little as we have said above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai I cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est I leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	After cauterize each horn of the head until the bone, as we have said before, and perform the cautery at the place called "vasselz"; and there are places where one applies suction cups; and move your hand so that you do not see up to the bone: the patient feels much greater pain in this cautery than in others, and I will speak about it later; and the cauterizations of the horns should be finer than those used for the center of the head, and this is the form:
dou cautere dou chief	For the cautery of the head
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc II manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When sudden pain comes to a part of the head, and the illness extends to the eye, and the bone is purged with cleansing medicines, and all the other treatments that I have mentioned in the division of illnesses have been performed, and none of these help: then I perform cauterizations according to two methods, namely with dry medicine and with fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope I poc as II chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi XII houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi II jors ou III; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	The cauterization with dry medicine is done as follows: take a dose of garlic, remove the skin and place it in a small pouch made from two pieces of cloth, and then apply it to the temple where the pain resides in such a way that you can press the garlic under the skin; when it has been applied, secure and compress it well and leave it so for twelve hours; then untie it and treat the wound externally with crushed garlic, and leave the wound like this for two or three days; then apply a poultice of butter-soaked cloth until it heals.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the treatment of ointment until it is healed; and if you wish to do so with some burning medicines that I have written in the twelfth chapter about burning medicines.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	The cautery of iron is according to this manner.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Heat the cautery as follows:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait I poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And it is called "clos" because the head of the cautery is made in the shape of a ring with a slight curve, and in the middle there is a small appearance; and place it on the painful area, hold your hand and turn the iron slightly, until half the thickness of the heart's flesh is burned; and lift your hand so that the artery does not burn, which is outside, and let abundant blood flow.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par III jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	After put cotton in a bandage and place it over the area for III days; then place moistened cotton with butter on it, and then treat the area with ointment until it is healed; and if you wish to cauterize this ulcer with the cautery called "cultellare", do so to the entire point, but be careful not to cut the artery in this ulcer which is not old.
de emigraine	of ulcer
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	When you treat an ulcer as we have said before in the division of diseases, and it does not improve, and see that the cauteries previously mentioned from medicine and iron do not suffice, then you must heat the cautery called "cultellare" until it is white; and draw a line half a digit long on the painful area, and withdraw your hand once to ensure you do not cut the artery and reach the bone; be wary of the jaw that moves when eating, and the nerve that causes movement and spasm for the patient, and beware of blood loss from cutting the artery, which greatly fears both the cutter and those who are unlearned and inexperienced; but I will tell you how to stop bleeding when an artery is cut, and I will show you where it applies in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait II coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	And if you see that these cauterizations do not alleviate the illness, and the patient is suffering, cauterize him on top of the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it heals; and if you wish, administer the cautery that we have described in the chapter on artery extraction, with the cautery which has two knives; and this cautery is better than that one and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	of the pain in the ears due to coldness
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When pain from cold comes to the ear, and one has applied medicines that dissolve and other treatments that we have mentioned in the division, and the pain does not subside, then heat this cautery which is called "pins," of which here is the form:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les II se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait X poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After puncture all around the sick ear, or around both if the pain is in both, and move away a little above the root of the ear after you have marked the spot; and put ten points around each ear; then treat the area until it is healed.
de la torture de la bouche	of the treatment of the mouth
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	A cautery should not be used for any except those that are caused by phlegm, as we have said in the division of diseases; and do not apply a cautery to similar conditions that come from dryness and nerve spasms.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de III cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des II levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When you treat this condition that moves from phlegm in the throat and head purging and gargling, if it does not improve, then you must cauterize the patient with three cauteries: one at the root of the ear, another a little outside the temple, and the third at the junction of the two lips; place the cautery on the part that appears healthy, and apply it near the top of the ear slightly below the horn of the head, and another in the temple as long as a finger's width; leave the cautery on until half the heart area is burned; this is the form of the cauterization:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And it is similar to the spatula we have mentioned before, but it is a bit more delicate and the knife should be a bit larger; after treating the area as I said before, until it is healed.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai IIII cauteres: II sus les II cornes dou chief, et I emmi le chief, et I ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When apoplexy is long-standing and you treat it as we have said before, but there is no improvement, and the patient does not have a fever, then make IV cauterizations: II on each of the two horns of the head, and I in the middle of the head, and I at the place which is called "vasselz" as we have mentioned previously, and the last cautery above the stomach; and let them be treated as we said before.
de litargie	For litargie
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	For this illness, give the patient large doses and cleansing pills for the brain; then anoint the head of the patient entirely, and place on the occiput a plaster of mustard which is written in the treatise on plasters; and this is the method of the cautery: do as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai III cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere I doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai I cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, II autres sus les II cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If he is healed thus, it is good; and if not, make III cauterizations from the middle of the head descending to the neck, with a space between each cautery I thumb's width; and treat as with others, and if you wish to add, and the patient is suffering, make one in the middle; and if necessary, two more at the two temples, and continue treating until he is healed; and let the cauterizations called "olivare," as I said before.
de la froidor dou chief	of the coldness of the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et I derrier et III sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai IIII cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	It is necessary that the head be cleansed of dirt and what we have previously mentioned; then anoint the patient's head, afterwards perform a cautery in the middle of the head and on each temple, and one at the back and three along the spine of the neck; if you need more, and the body is moist and the patient suffers, and the illness is severe, make four cauterizations along the spine; let them burn until they are as mild as possible, then lift your hand; afterwards treat it until it heals, and for the cautery called "olivare" which we have previously mentioned.
de l’epilempsie	of the epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	Epileptics should not use fire cautery except for those who are phlegmatic, and it is necessary first to cleanse the brain of dirt and other treatments that we have mentioned in the division when the patient is large and suffers from a lack of proper medication.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai I cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et I cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if it is a child who cannot bear it, make them gargle and chew cleansing substances for the brain often with good meat; then raise their head in the middle, and perform the cautery as we have said before, on the vessel, and on each horn; and if the patient is outside and suffering, perform cauterizations as I have said to those who have paralysis and weakness of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and let the cauteries be olive according to the manner that I have described.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai I cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is a child, perform a subtle cautery according to this manner:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When due to melancholy the excesses or moistures are corrupted and phlegm is thick, then cauterize with such cauterizations as we have said for those who have paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if due to melancholy the excesses decline towards melancholy, and the body of the patient is moist, then give him something to drink that purifies the brain, according to what is stated before in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai I torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com I cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After raising the head of the patient; then make a torteau of well-made linen, as in a circle, and place it on the head; and let the patient sit cross-legged, and be held firmly from all sides; then present the liniment, which should be made with sheep's grease from an old sheep; heat it over a gentle fire until the patient can bear it to be applied; then empty the circle from inside onto the head, and let it cool down; and do this for the patient once a week along with other good care, until he is well.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	When you wish to cauterize it, make multiple punctures throughout the entire cauterized area.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	This method of cauterization moistens the brain excessively; then apply cotton soaked in butter and goose grease.
de l’awe des eulz	from the pain of the eyes
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When the pain first comes to the eyes with the signs I mentioned in the division, then begin and give the patient something purifying to drink, and protect them from all moisture, and make them sweat in the bath several times on an empty stomach.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai II cauteres sus les II temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as II eulz ensamble, ou en I se li dessendemens est en I; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	Afterwards, command them to lie with their head back, and cauterize in the middle of the head, and make two cauteries on both temples if the pain descends to both eyes together, or one if it is in one; and cut into all the veins and arteries that are beneath the heart, and let the cauterization be long according to the width of the temple; and beware of excessive bleeding, and if you see too much blood coming out, then stop it with such force as you have.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les II os derrier.	And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and at the incision the caution how you shall stop it; and sometimes a cautery is made between the two bones behind.
dou cors des larmes	from the body of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: I cautere emmi le chief, et II cauteres sus les II temples, et II cauteres ou haiterel desoz les II os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout I petit cautere.	When the tears from the eyes are old and habitual and affect the veins, treat the arteries that appear on the head's surface; and if it is seen to be due to cold phlegmatic excesses, then perform the cautery as I described at the beginning of the treatment descending to the eyes: I make a cautery in the middle of the head, and two cauteries above the two temples, and two cauteries between the two bones; and if there is need for more, cautiously cauterize above the eyebrows with small cauteries.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	from the body of tears within the eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide III nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai II cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les II sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you treat it according to what we have said in the division, and it does not improve, then give the patient three nights of cochiseed broth to drink; after that, raise his head, and apply a cautery at the center of the olive-shaped cautery area; and make two cauteries from the cautery called "clavilis" on the two sides, a little below the hairline; be careful not to cut the artery.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the form of the cautery called "clavilis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	When the white of the eye becomes softened due to disease and moisture, then cauterize it with this cautery called "olivare".
de coi ci est li forme:	of which this is the form:
Et se tu vues si fai II cauteres sus les II sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you wish to apply two cauteries on the two eyebrows as long as the eyelashes are; and do not let go of your hand except when a third of the skin is burned, according to the manner I have described.
dou poil qui point l’oil	of the hair that points toward the eye
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	Sometimes it happens that the hairs of the eyes grow inward and prick the eye, and one applies cauterization according to two methods: either by fire, or with burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they grow and are even, then place the patient in your care; after that, cut into the paper around the eyes a figure that is like the leaf of myrtle, and let the beginning of the sign be near the hairs; then put cotton soaked in egg white and parsley juice on the eye, then heat the cautery as described above:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi III jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After cauterizing around the figure you have marked little by little many times, until the redness is burned away there; and the signs of the treatment's success are that you see the paper retracting, and the hairs rising to the edge of the eye; then lift your hand, and leave it like this for III days, then put on cotton soaked in butter until the burning sensation is gone; after which cure with ointment until it is healed.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if the hairs come back after that, and the skin is softened, then begin the cautery on the same spot as you did before; and if the hairs have fallen out, cauterize until the skin rises to its natural level and becomes even, so that the hair does not prick the eye.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en I oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en I, et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse I poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The cautery of hot medicine is that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; then make a shape from parchment like a myrtle leaf; then take one ounce each of French soap and live coals, and grind them together well; and do it quickly so that it does not cool down, then spread it over the shape you have made as with a myrtle leaf, and place it on the skin around the eyes; and if the patient only has an issue in one eye, then treat just that one, and both if necessary; and put under the eye cotton soaked in egg white; and hold the patient's head steady and press down on the medicine every time the patient feels a prick from the medicine, because it pricks like fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done this for a long time, then remove the medication at its proper time.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	And when the bite has passed, lift the area, and check if you see the skin raised as it would be if it had been lifted by fire or by cutting; and if it is so, then it is well.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If not, then apply the medicine to the area again until it has taken effect and your work is even, and your eyes set properly; then place moistened cotton in butter until the burn is healed, after treating the ointment application site which is called "dyaphanization" and others, until it is healthy.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	And if it is necessary for you to be very careful with your work so that none of the medicine falls into your eyes.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And if the skin becomes soft afterwards, and the hair pricks in the eye, then reapply the medicine to that spot which is softened by the proper parchment, as you did before; treat it until it is healed; and this is the method of the myrtle poultice:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And know that the eyes of people vary in size and smallness, and adjust accordingly; and do not reveal the right way to one who lacks the study of this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	for the treatment of a fistula with a cautery
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat a fistula as we have said in the division of diseases, and your treatments are ineffective, then it is necessary to perform a cautery on it according to this method.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	Instruct the patient to place his head in your lap; and hold the patient's head between your hands in such a way that it does not move or shift; afterwards put a ball of moistened lint in egg white or parsley juice on the eye; afterwards heat the cautery which is shaped: and is arranged on the head like the shape of a vulture feather, together with how the cautery should be; if you wish, let it stretch from one side to the other, and if you wish, let it be as a tent; but nevertheless, this arrangement is useful for your work.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	After pressing the fistula if it is open, and removing the pus, and drying it; and if it is closed, then work on it, and draw out the bowels; afterwards place the hot cautery firmly, and hold your hand above the cautery at the part of the blade above the eye, so that your hand does not act foolishly; and apply the cautery to the fat of the eye, and corrupt it.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	If you proceed to the beginning of the cautery up to the bone, it would be well.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	If not, then start the cautery again, and do it another time if you need to, and leave it for three days; afterwards put on cotton soaked in butter, and treat with a desiccative ointment until it heals, and if forty days pass and it does not heal, then apply corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed; and proceed according to what comes next in his chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	And there is a method of cautery for fistulas that some of the ancients described.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	Attend for the fistula to come to a head, and then incise it; afterwards place in the opening one small piece of cotton wool, which is made as follows:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	And they make it in the quantity of one .З. of molten lead; and hold your hand on the camahan firmly, and let not the patient move at all so that the molten lead does not flow into their eye; and it is necessary to place over the patient's eye a cotton pad moistened with egg white or water: the lead will thus seal the fistula, and heal miraculously.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	And if the fistula is healed by the cautery that we have mentioned, it is good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	If not, it is necessary to administer a cautery with a knife, and bring the fistula back to its proper place within the body.
des crevaices en levres	of cracks in the lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Often there are cracks in the lips which are called "hairs," and especially in the lips of children.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe I petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these cracks of what we have said in the divisions, and the treatment does not help, then heat a small knife-shaped cautery according to this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place it quickly in those cracks until it reaches the base; afterwards, treat the area with cerate until it is healed.
de l’aposteme de la goule	of the abscess of the cheek/gums
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies I cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou II, aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When an abscess comes to the root of the cheek or in the uvula, or on the palate, or at the roots of the teeth, it becomes pus-filled and swollen, ages, and turns into a fistula; you treat it as we have said in the divisions, but if it does not help: then you must prepare a cautery according to the size of the fistula; afterwards, introduce it through the opening of the fistula, and hold your hand until the heated iron reaches its base and deepest part; do this once or twice, followed by treatment as we have said in treatments, until it is healed; if it heals thus, that is good; but if not, then you must uncover the area and remove the corrupted bone, according to what you find in its chapter.
dou movement des dens	of the movement of the teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicine but it is ineffective, then place the head of the patient in your lap; afterwards heat the cautery as described below such that you put a chain on the tooth; and insert the hot cautery quickly inside, and hold your hand until the patient feels the heat reaching the root of the tooth; after that lift your hand and repeat the cautery according to your will; afterwards fill the patient's mouth with salt water, and let it stay for an hour and rinse out.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in this manner, the tooth that was moving becomes fixed, and the softened gum is restrained, and the corrupted moisture dries up.
de la dolor des dens	of the pain of the teeth
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc II manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When tooth pain comes from cold, where there is actual cold, and the remedies of medicine are ineffective, then cautery according to two methods is necessary: hot butter cautery and fire cautery.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus I fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	Butter cautery is such that you take sheep's butter and put it in an iron or bronze spoon; after that, take cotton and wrap around the tip of a probe, and dip it into melted butter, then quickly place it on the painful tooth and hold until it cools down; do this often until its effect reaches the root of the tooth. If you wish, moisten wool and cotton in cold butter, and apply it to the sore tooth, placing a hot iron so that the heat reaches the top of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	The fire cauteries together are such that you take an iron or bronze cane, and let it be thick so that the fire does not come to the mouth of the patient; then heat the cautery, from which the form will come hereafter, and place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery is cooled; do this often, for the pain will be removed that same day or the next.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it is necessary that the patient fill his mouth with good butter at the moment of this cautery, and then rinse well; and this is the form of the cautery:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	And apply the cautery to whichever part you wish, according to your ability; and this is the form of the cane:
des scrophules	for goiters
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	When scrofula is caused by cold phlegm and does not respond to digestion through medication, then heat the cautery with a shield as described below, and have two openings for the smoke to escape from the side of the cautery; place the hot cautery on the abscess once or twice if necessary, until it reaches the bottom of the abscess; if the abscess is small, apply the cautery according to its size, and leave it in place for three days; then apply moistened wool with butter until the burn is gone; afterwards treat the area with ointments and bandages until it is healed.
Li forme de la cainne:	The shape of the cautery:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	When the moistures overpower in the channels of the body, and especially when it comes from cold complexion, then it is necessary that the patient first be emptied by solutive medicines; afterwards, I do cautery at the root of the throat, and take care not to go up to the throat, nor burn the heart but a little.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	Afterwards, I do another cautery at the joint of the neck to the head of the spine, and let the cauterizations which are called "clavile" be as we described their form before; and treat the area as we said before until it is healed.
de la toust	of the cough
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et I autre cautere emmi le pis entre II mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When all the diseases of the body are from cold moistures, and the patient has neither fever nor dryness, and the illness is chronic, if I do one cautery on the shoulder in their places; and another cautery between the two breasts; and let the cauterizations which are called "clavile" be according to the form that was described before.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	And if you wish, perform cautery by pricking the entire area which is called "points" of which the form is described above in the disease of the ears; and let the points reach up to XXX, or inquire around.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	After treating the area as described above, let the cauterizations be three rows according to this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais III a cop.	And for those the cauterizations are lighter, because you make three at once.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners douqueil ci est li forme:	After the patient lies on his back and on his side; then lift the arm that is inside the armpit with your left hand; and if the joint is dislocated inside, heat the cautery which has two curved edges as shown here:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble IIII cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a III ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a III ners:	and cauterize the arm until it pierces to the armpit, and the shape of the cautery will be four cauteries in total; and for that one is made with a cautery which has three curves, so the shapes of the cauterizations are six cauteries; and the nerves follow the subtlety of a tent and this is the shape of the cautery which has three curves:
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce I nerf por coi il i a VIII cauteres.	And sometimes it is adjusted on this one nerve, which results in eight cauteries.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After place the cauterizing powder crushed with salt; then let the patient rest, and do not move the limb for a long time until it is well comforted.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	And if it is dislocated above, which happens rarely, then make a cauterization on the thick part of the cautery navel, or many cauterizations by pressing.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	For the joint is closed, and the moisture is removed and the patient is healed.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	When coldness and much moisture come to the stomach such that it deviates from its temperament, and the catarrh is multiplied within him, and customary methods of treatment are ineffective, then the patient should be suspended on his back, stretch out his legs and arms.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture; et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	From there onwards, I make three cauterizations: one spoonful of pitch for the quantity of a doigt, throughout the cautery clavicle, and two cauterizations outside the two sides until the shape of the cauterizations is at three angles, and have such space between one and the other that they are not joined together when they discharge pus; and let the cauterizations be so deep that they penetrate both sides of the chest, and let the shape of the cauterizations follow this form without adjustment:
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme; et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche; puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if you wish to cauterize with a large cauterization in the middle of the stomach according to this form; and for those who fear this cauterization, cauterize by pricking and cutting one point on the stomach as much as you wish; then cauterize all over the cautery which is called "points".
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the treatment of the condition we had before, as long as he is well.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez; et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil; et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient; et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi; et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere; et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez; et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais; et c’est li forme:	When the liver is in pain due to cold and moisture and excessive gas, and it is weakened from its natural temperament by excesses; and the patient is treated according to what we have said in the divisions, but it does not help him; then the patient should be bled over his temples; and make three cauterizations according to this form, figure, and size above the liver, outside the hypochondria, where a man's ribs come together; and leave between each cautery the thickness of a finger; and let them be long in line with the body, and do not press too much on the entire cautery area; and burn only half as deep as the heart; and have the patient stand upright on his feet; and if he cannot, then lay him down, stretch out his legs, and raise his arms; and this is the form.
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors; et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	And if your will is so, cauterize these cauteries of the elbow, if you are subtle and wise in the art, and beware that you do not burn all the flesh, for you would dry up the entire body; and let it not reach the eye, for the flesh is very delicate there, and you know this well.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile: s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort; et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	When there is an abscess in the liver, and you wish to know if it is in the flesh of the liver or in the membrane: if it is in the flesh, the patient feels pain but not very strongly; and if it is in the membrane, the pain is severe.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste; et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	And when this treatment is to be applied to the eyes, the patient should lie with their head raised; then incise the area where the abscess is, and then heat the cautery which resembles a reed, as follows:
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers; aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez; et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	And cauterize until the flesh is burned and reaches syphac, until all the tissue is completely charred; after which treat according to the treatment of ulcers until it is healed; and it does not suit anyone other than those who have studied long in the art of medicine, and by whose hands these diseases have been treated at times.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	Then he may boldly proceed with the treatment, although it seems to me that it might be better to wait.
dou cautere de pleuresin	for the cautery of pleurisy
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize I cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et II petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et II cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et I cautere emmi le pis, et I autre sus l’estomac, et I entre II espaules, et II as II costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre II espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	The ancients said that one should make cauteries for pleurisy from the roots of aristolochia, and in this manner: take a root of aristolochia as long as possible, and it should be as thick and as long as your thumb; moisten it in oil, and rub it on the fire, then cauterize one cautery between the shoulder blade and the neck, and two small cauters slightly downward below the beard area; and two cauterizations between the fifth and sixth ribs, inclining slightly backward; and one at the base of the spine, and another above the stomach, and one between the two shoulders, and two on either side near to the cautery that is between the two shoulders; and do not press your hand hard, but rather open it as when smelling.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	And some ancient ones said that some men use the fire cautery similar to shaving, and they heat it and place it between the ribs until it reaches the abscess; then the pain subsides, as we have said regarding the liver abscess.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	But in this work there is fear that the patient may die now, or an abscess may occur that cannot be healed.
de la mice	of the mouse
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent III manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the disease of the mouse as we have said in the divisions of treatments, and it does not improve, then they propose three methods of cautery that are all good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos; et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	Of these, one method is that you make three or four cauterizations in a line along the length of the mouse, according to the shape of the liver cautery as we have said before; and do not press your hand over the entire cautery area, and let the patient lie on his back; another method of cautery is that you heat the cautery with two sides, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; and lift the side where the mouse is, or where the pain of the patient comes from left to right, and let the elevations where you lift the side be according to the side, according to the length of the body, and the cautery should be according to the width of the body.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	After inserting the two heated nerves until the wound is perceived from the other side, and then draw out the cautery, and thus there will be four parts. And if you wish, you can cauterize all at three nerves.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After the treatment when it has expelled pus for a long time, and this is worth more than the other treatments mentioned before.
de ydropisie	of hydropsy
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	Cautery is not effective for someone with hydropsy, except in the manner called "asclytes".
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	When you treat it according to the methods we have described in the divisions, and your treatment does not help, then you must make four cauterizations around the navel, one on the stomach, one on the liver, one on the spleen, two behind the back on the spine, and one near the kidney; and let the cauterizations be close to the area of the heart.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les II ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	After leaving the cautery open for a long time to expel impurities, do not leave the treatment of the patient after the cautery; and healing would hasten, and both intentions would be together with the help of God.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The shape of the cautery for the abdomen should be the cleaver that we have shown before; and that for the back should be olive-shaped, as it is placed above.
de l’enfleure des piez	of swelling of the feet
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	When the feet are swollen in one who is hydropic, and are full of yellow water, you must cauterize on the back of the foot between the little finger and the ring finger; and lift your hand with the cautery turning it.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	And do not enter too deeply, so as not to harm the liver, and apply the cautery in this manner:
Aprés fai sus II jambes II cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After that, make two cauterizations on each leg at the point of the kneecap; and let the cauterizations be long, one below the knee in front and the other outside, in the middle of the leg; and leave the cauterizations open for a long time without healing them, so the effect lasts; then treat with the other treatments we have mentioned.
de la menoison	of the diagnosis
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai I grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et IIII cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout I cautere clavile subtil, et II cauteres sus les hainches.	When the solution of the abdomen comes from cold and moisture, such that the retentive and digestive virtues in the stomach and intestines are weakened, and cannot be cured by usual methods; and you see the patient suffering greatly and with great strength, then make one large cautery on the stomach as previously described for the stomach fire cautery, a circular cautery; and four subtle cauterizations around the navel, each as fine as one small clavicle cautery, and two cauterizations on the hips.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et I cautere sus chaicun yle, et II petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see the moisture abundant and the patient suffering, perform a cautery on the wrist, and one cautery on each armpit, and two small cauteries near the stomach by the large area, for the treatment is beneficial when there is good assistance.
de la cure des emorroydes	of the treatment of hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois; et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	When the hemorrhoids are in the fundament, one or more, and they are old and consist of large cold and moist corrupted humors, and have been treated as we described in divisions, but it does not help, then perform cauterizations: three on the spine of the back, those that are completely outside under each hip bone diagonally, and one cautery below the navel two fingers away; and if you think their stomach is too cold, and the food does not digest, and swelling occurs in the face, then apply a large cautery near the stomach as previously mentioned, another on the liver, and yet another on the spleen for the entire clavicle length; and leave the cautery open for a long time.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After treating the area until it is healed.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the fleshiness which is called "thelul
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou II, et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you cut into the thelul, heat the cautery until it seems like a razor, and then place it fully heated on the cut thelul; leave your hand there until the cautery reaches the base of the vein, from where blood flows; do this once or twice, and if there is much thelul, cauterize each one as we have said; afterwards treat with beneficial ointments until they are healed; and if you cauterize a large area on the flesh, it will provide greater help.
de plaie mal curee	of an improperly treated wound
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot tolerate incision or opening, which we will recount in its place, if such a disease comes that cannot be healed except by cautery.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	When a fistula comes to someone and is inflamed and discharges putrid matter and corrupted moisture, then you should measure it thoroughly with a probe, and be sure that you know the entire depth of the probe.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	After heat the cautery which resembles a razor, and apply it to the fistula according to the depth that the probe entered, and continue the cautery until all the putrid and corrupted flesh is burned, once, or twice, or three times, depending on how much is needed; and be careful not to burn the nerves that are nearby, and large veins.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	If the fistula goes to the bladder and intestines, be careful in these areas, and do not make an incision except in flesh, and consider that it is not passable; afterward cure the area until it is healed, and if the wound is infected, and the matter has been removed for a long time, then you know that the wound is completely healed; and if the matter has not been removed, know that the condition is found, and the bone at the root is corrupted; and thus as one of those we will mention in its place.
de la maladie des reins	of the disease of the kidneys
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra III cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When pain from cold comes to the kidneys, and there is great gas formation, and it does not respond to female treatment, then you must make a cautery on the kidneys from one side and the other with the clavicle cautery that we mentioned before; and if we cauterize in the middle, there will be three cauters in a line, and they will provide greater assistance.
de la vessie	of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et I a destre et I a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais I cautere defuers le dos, ou II se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder is weak and cold due to coldness and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then apply a cautery externally on the part above the bladder where the hair of the groin begins, one on each side, and let each cauterization be as long as the width of a thumb; and make another cautery externally on the back if you need to do so; and let these cauteries be shaped like keys according to the form described before.
de la marris	of the wheal
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice III cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et II cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the wheal is cold and moist, and does not allow for conception, and the flowers are corrupted and their terminations are delayed; and when they come, there is great pain: then it is necessary to make three cauterizations around the navel, as we have said in the cautery of the bladder, and two cauterizations on the back; and let these cauterizations be shaped like keys, as we have said.
de la hainche	of the thigh
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a I cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When the viscous humors descend to the joint of the thigh, and for this reason it moves from its place, and the sign is that one thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and if the source of departure is found there, then you must cauterize the patient on the joint of the thigh with a cautery similar to a circle, and mark before the spot around the joint as it turns, so that the joint lies within the circle; and let the cauterizations be such as those which one has used for the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai III cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if these cauterizations are not present for you, make three large olive oil cauterizations, and let them be as deep as all the veins; and treat until it is healed.
de la dolor de la hainche	of the pain in the thigh
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain comes in the joint of the thigh, and it is due to coldness and moisture, and the patient is treated as we have described in the division and the treatment does not work, and the illness is old: then you must purge the patient of thick humors with fetid pills or other good similar pills.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	After you apply the cautery; and the method of the cautery is according to two methods: that is to say, with burning medicines together, and fire cautery.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	Fire cautery is according to many methods, of which one is as follows: you cauterize on the joint of the thigh three triangular cauteries according to this form, and make them with good depth and large, and there should be between each cautere a space the thickness of two fingers, and let the cauteries be olive-shaped; sometimes one makes a cautere in the middle above the head of the thigh, for which there are four according to this form:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you wish, cauterize with the circular cautery that we mentioned earlier in the case of hip dislocation; but do it in such a way that the circles encompass the entire hip, and all the nerves be burned.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	And this is the way it is done in sciatica, when the pain stays in the hip, and does not reach as far as the thigh or the leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if it reaches as far as the thigh and leg, make II cauterizations where the patient says the pain holds them, and I cauterization above the ankle IV fingers, on the left side; and let the cauterizations be circular, and burn the thickness of the nerve; and if the patient feels that the pain extends up to three or four finger widths from the sole, then cauterize where they feel the pain III points or IIII at the cauterization called "points".
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if necessary, do more; and if he knows that the pain is below the knee towards the thigh, make a cautery with the cutellaire or circular cautery, and take great care in all your cauteries that you do not leave so much burning that you burn the nerves and large arteries, and that you do not cause the patient more harm and contraction.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	And I myself have seen many who made a cautery on the ankle of the foot, and they left it burning so much that the leg was completely swollen, and the foot as well, and it became pierced and corrupted throughout.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	After a belly treatment from which he died.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	And if the pain is in two parts together, make a cautery in one and in the other, according to this manner.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	And the wise said in the cautery of the thigh, concerning which here is the method, make it such iron and let it be at the head as thick as one new nail of oak, or a bit less, and let it be between the teeth and let there be from one tooth to another a space the size of one knot of wood; and let the teeth be covered on two sides, and let them also be like loops, and there should be one handle of iron well made; and this is the form:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois I cautere reont et lou laisse III jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And let it be heated until it is all red and sparks, and then place it on the diseased side of the thigh, and turn it to the healthy side; and the cauterization once done, leave it for three days; and then make a plaster of butter, and leave the wound uncovered for a long time; after treatment with ointment until it is healed.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Albucasim says that we use this cautery little due to the fear of his regard, and see few who use it; and nevertheless this is one of the good cauteries, which can bear it, and there where it applies.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi; et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	The cautery of burning medicine is such that you make the instrument with interlocking pieces in which descends the margin of the door, and it should be made of brass or iron on one side long, and at the height have two parts, and between each should have the thickness of a finger; and they open outward and above, and join together according to this form:
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche; aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	Then place the hip box on the patient lying on their healthy side, and then put your hand much upon the hip box; afterwards pour between the two circles of the hot awl which has been heated in the fire a little, and leave it for one hour of time, and let the patient feel the warmth and burning.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu; et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit; et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait; et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	For there is found a burning as from fire; and when the burning has passed, lift your hand with the instrument and raise the thigh gently, and leave it thus for three days, and put on butter until that which is black from the scalding be removed; and let him lie for three days so that pus may come out; and this would be the last aid after the cure of ointments until he is healed.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument; et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	And if the pain has spread to the thigh or to the leg, make an instrument that holds warm water as you did for the thigh similarly; and this is the way of hot water, and I have written it in the chapter on the preparation of medicine.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	Take alkaline substances and live charcoal, an equal amount of each, and grind them together, and put them in a new pot.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir; et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main; et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	where there is a small hole to drain so that the point of a razor can enter; and place over that pot another lead pot, and put on alkali and heat with water above it until there is a layer of foam on top of the powder which you have taken in your hand; and leave it thus until water and bits come out of the lead pot, then take all that foam, and throw it onto alkali and heat as before.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	And then it will be much more effective and is administered in various works of medicine and in cauterizations of other members Because it performs a different kind of work like fire, and there are other medicines with which one can well cauterize the hip such as honey anacardium and heat with soap, all these things mixed together.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	And Galien tells us of a cure where a man was treated for pain in the hip and sciatic nerve, and he praised it greatly, and said that no other treatment was done, and that he was cured in one session when this cure was performed, and he bathed as is taught hereafter.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie; et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	And he says in this manner that you should take green and dry litharge and grind it much with a little grease, and apply it to the hip, thigh, and leg where the pain is, and bandage it; and leave it on for three hours until the patient no longer feels the burning sensation.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	And then have him enter the bath until his body is slightly refreshed, and then put him to bed, and the pain will go away entirely and he will be healed.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	And you should know that no one must use a cautery with such medicines unless it is after the evacuation of the body.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout; et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	And Dioscorides stated that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with goat hair, it helps greatly; and the cauterization should be done in such a manner.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	Take wool and grease it with old oil, and place it on the hollow between the thumb of the foot and the one called foscile.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains; et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee; et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	After that, take dry goat hair and burn it to charcoal, and place it on the wool, and leave it until it turns black; and do this again, and continue doing so until you think by sense that it reaches up to the thigh, and the pain ceases; and this method of cauterization is called "goat cauterization.
de la dolor dou dos	of the pain in the back
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, whether from falling or from percussion or from excessive bloodletting, or from similar substances spread coldly, cauterization is not helpful in any of these cases, except for that which comes from an infusion of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne V cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai III cauteres ou IIII au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	It is necessary after the patient has been purged with foul pills or other similar treatments, to place on their back, where the pain lies, three lines each six inches long, and in each line five cauterizations or more according to the strength and quantity that the patient can endure; and let the cauterizations be made according to the cautery which is called "poins"; and if you wish, make three cauterizations or four at the cautery clavile mean in this manner:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	This illness often comes to young children, and the signs of its beginning are that they have difficulty lying down when they try to lie down, and fear; and you find in the last spine of the back and in what we call the appearance which comes upon other spines.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this and you wish to treat it, cauterize it with the sponge cauterization according to this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	So that the cauterization affects each part of the spine equally.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	And if you wish, cauterize around the spine with the pricking cauterization in lines of II or III, and let the points be close to each other.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	After treating the area until it is healthy as we have said, and beware of applying cauterization to a swelling caused by a nerve spasm.
de la dolor des jointes	of the pain in the joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When pain in the joints is caused by moisture spread throughout each limb, and when the pain occurs in the feet, which physicians call "gout" properly, and when it is due to cold causes and cannot be cured with medicines, then it is treated with cautery in this manner: apply the cauterizations around the joint of the foot, and let the cauterizations be olive-shaped according to this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	And if there is need to cauterize the sole of the foot, then apply the cauterization entirely with what is called a "point.
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if the pains come to the knees and other joints, which happens often, make a cautery on each knee III cauterizations or IV of each part, for the entire olive-shaped cautery; and if you need more, do more, but do not hold your hand beyond when the thickness of the skin is burned.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	And if the pains descend to the knees and the back, administer the cautery that we have mentioned in its chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	And if the pains are in the hands, make points around the wrist II lines; and if there remains pain in both, make points on each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if the pains come to the elbows or to the shoulders, cauterize each part, and provide good care for the patient and proper medicines.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	For if you give it proper management and purge phlegm, it will be healed with the help of God.
de la routure dou syfac	of the fracture of the cheekbone
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When a fracture occurs in the ribs, and the bowels descend to the thighs and this is recent, it must be that when you wish to treat him, he does not eat on that day; and that he uses things that loosen the belly so that his feces come out of his belly; after make him sit between your hands with his back up, and command him to hold his breath until the ribs are reset, and reset them by hand, and sew from behind near the fracture above the bone; then heat the cautery in this form:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	until they are white and until they shed scales.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	Then reset the bones to their place; and have the assistant press their hand over them so that they do not move backward; and work well on the thighs of the patient, and put a cushion under him and another cloth over his thighs, and one under his buttocks which holds the hands; then apply the cautery on the spot with your whole hand, and hold it straight and hold it until you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, repeat it again until you reach the bone; and be careful that the bone does not protrude when you are applying the cautery; that you do not burn it; and that through this the patient does not die or suffer another harm.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	And you should know that when you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your work is worth nothing.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And the cauteries for children should be delicate according to their size, and for adults they should be proportionate to their size; after three days, treat the area of the cautery with butter until the burn is gone; afterwards, treat it with other ointments until it is healed, and have the patient lie on their back for forty days until the wound is well sealed; and ensure that they are restrained for a long time so that their eyes do not protrude when they try to move into rooms.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	And after forty days, when he wants to get up, give him a well-made bandage and let him wear it for another forty days; and ensure he has good rest, doing little work and avoiding excessive drinking and eating, and refrain from raising his voice too much; and when he follows this advice, he will be completely healed.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And I will say hereafter the treatment for cutting in his chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	of the rupture of the abdomen
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	When ruptures occur in other parts of the abdomen and are hard, if you wish to prevent their growth, apply the cautery according to its size, and let it burn one-third of an inch; afterwards treat it as we have said; and some of the ancients have said that it should be cauterized with a three-angled cautery in this form:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	but first mark the location and draw a line across the width above the rupture, and another below, and evenly throughout the entire cautery area.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But the first cauterizations are lighter and gentler.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	of old pain in any limb
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	When pain comes to any limb, whether from falling or being injured, and that pain persists for a long time, and medical treatment is of no use, then it must be cauterized with the cautery called "poins," and the size of the cauterization should follow the length of the limb and its smallness and weakness and strength and location of twists and its pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	If it is healed from the first cauterization, that is well; if not, begin another cauterization on top of the previous one, for such a custom exists that the limb must change to be closer to health, so it is necessary that you perform the cauterizations until the patient is healed.
de meselerie	of confusion
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	The sick are sometimes cured by cauterization with great help, and especially the diseases that come from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief: I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	When you see fit to cauterize, take care if the illness is in its beginning stages, and if it is treated according to what we have said in the division, do not stop or delay, and if you fear that corruption will spread throughout the patient, then apply V cauteries on the head: I at the top of the head nine times, and the other towards the forehead at the end of the hair; and II on the two temples, and I behind on the occiput; and leave your hand long enough so that the cauterizations reach the bone, and until the skin comes out so that the vapors from the thick humors can escape; and apply the cautery on the armpit as it is described before.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et I cautere en som lou neis, et II cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et VI cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et I grant sus la crupie et I autre delez, et II sus les II espaules; et II sus les coutes, et II sus les tendrons dou pis, et I sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et I autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et I autre sus lou foie.	And if the mischief is spread everywhere; and it appears clearly, then you must cauterize with those cauters that we have mentioned at the beginning, and one cautery on the nose, and two cauteries above the spine of the neck, and six cauteries along the spine of the back, and one large on the buttocks and another nearby, and two on each shoulder; and two on the ribs, and two on the tendons of the foot, and one on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands; and beware of the nerves that are above the heel, so as not to burn them; and sometimes a person cauterizes on the bone of the elbow, and another on the bone of the stomach, and another on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	And know that the more cauterizations you perform, the greater the help and benefit to them; and know that the patient does not feel pain from the cautery as a healthy person would, because their body is already completely corrupted.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	And it is necessary that the cautery be large and small according to the members and joints, according to what you will find in the ways of horseshoes.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	After treating, apply flour of wheat with honey and other treatments until it is healed.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	When swelling occurs in any limb and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, but it does not heal, then make cauterizations on the limb according to its size; let them penetrate slightly into the thickness of the flesh; then treat with ointments until it heals.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	And sometimes a cautery is made on the hand and foot and back, at the nerve that moves the limb, and thus the swelling is removed; yet no one should interfere if they are not knowledgeable about limbs and the nerves that move the body.
de albaras	of boards
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the disease called "albaras" is advanced, and medicines are of no use, then cauterize it with a cautery slightly deep, according to the thickness of the skin, until the whiteness is removed, and its color changes; then treat it with flour of barley and lentils with rose oil and plantain leaves, and pheasant blood and lark blood, one part each; and mix them all together, and apply it with a cloth until it heals.
li cure de chancre par cautere	the treatment of a sore using cauterization
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	When a sore begins to appear and you want to stop its progress, then cauterize it with a cautery that forms a circle all around the edge of the sore.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	And still the wise say that one should make a cautery in the middle of the ulcer; and still this does not seem good to me, for I fear it may become ulcerated and corrupted, and I have seen it happen before; and more prudent is it to cauterize around it, with the cautery called "circule," as we have said concerning many kinds of cauteries.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	of the swelling that cannot be cured
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi.	When someone has a disease called "adubelati," and it delays death either due to the excess it produces or due to the age of the patient when they are infirm (that is, too old) and have little blood, or due to the time; and you wish to hasten its end: then cauterize around with many small cauteries by pricking; after leave it as such.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	For she will hurry to kill me.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you wish to pierce it with the entire cautery, then heat the cautery as follows:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	And place your hand in the middle of the disease called "adubelati" until the cautery has pierced the heart, and make such a cautery that the patient feels it externally in such a way that the course of the putrefaction is alleviated.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	After the treatment until he is completely healed.
li cure dou feu par fer	the fire cautery with iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	There is another type of disease called "corrodens," and it is nothing other than a member eating disorder, for it consumes the members just as fire consumes dry wood.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	If you see this disease in a place that can endure cautery together with fire, then heat the cauteries to a very fine and large degree, according to what is necessary for the place where the disease is; afterward cauterize it from all sides until you reach all the corruption, and let nothing of it remain, so that everything that is corrupt be removed.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	Then leave it for three days, and put on the cauterized areas a mixture ground with oil until the burns from the fire are removed, and all the corruption is gone.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	After the treatment of ointments that generate flesh.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	And if after three days you see that no healthy flesh is growing, it is good; and if not, then restart the cauterization on what remains of the corrupted areas.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	And this sore has sometimes been treated with a medicinal ointment instead of fire cautery; but nonetheless, fire cautery is much more helpful, and I have already described the treatment of the medicinal ointment in the section: take it when you need it.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	of blisters that come to the feet
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	Many times it happens that on the feet from outside a disease arises which is called "clos" according to our understanding, and it is a swollen thing that impedes the foot.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	And the cauterizations for this disease are according to two methods.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	That is to say, fire cauterization, and hot water cauterization.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	Fire cautery is such that you heat it until it resembles a feather of vulture, and it should be made of good iron to the measure that it can penetrate the nail on all sides, and there should be fine edges; after placing it very hot upon the nail, turn your hand completely around the nail until it reaches the tip of the nail; then leave it thus for III days until it begins to produce putrid discharge; then I make a poultice of wild mallows crushed with salt, and leave the poultice on all night, and the nail will fall out and be uprooted from its roots.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat the site with an ointment that promotes flesh growth until it is healed.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	And if they are converted from the outside of the body, and this often happens in hands and feet, then you must administer hot water cautery to them; it is done as follows: take a chain of iron or steel, or a feather of vulture, place it around the nail and althea root, that is to say wrinkle warts; put the chain on so that it penetrates all around, then add a little hot water, hold firmly with your hand, press your hand as you turn so that the edge of the chain reaches the base of the nail, and let the hot water penetrate deeply down to the root; allow the patient some pain from the hot water for an hour; then leave it like this, and it will uproot itself completely along with its roots.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	Do this one after another, until you have treated all those who are on the body, then treat them with salves that generate flesh.
li cure dou trembler	the treatment for trembling
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices IIII cauteres ou IV sus l’espinee dou dos, I cautere entre chescune espinee; et I cautere ou pez, et I sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	When someone trembles from cold, nervousness, or a quartan fever, you should perform IV cauterizations on the spine, one between each vertebra; and one on the feet, and one above the stomach at the olive cautery; this will stop the trembling and hasten recovery from the cold illness.
des pustules puans	treatment for foul pus-filled blisters
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	At times, baths or foul pus-filled blisters appear on the surface of the body, which come from large corrupted substances.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	It is necessary at first when they appear to make a cauterization on each head of the pustule: a subtle cauterization with a branch of myrtle, whose point should be seized by fire, or with a long root of aristology, or a lentil-shaped cauterization.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	And sometimes they are cauterized at the beginning when they appear, in this manner, and they cannot grow any further, but the excess from which they come is broken off, and they are healed; but it must be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	when the artery is cut
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	Many times there are great hemorrhages from the artery that is cut at the wound coming from outside, or from incising an abscess, or cauterizing a limb, and similar things; and it is a very serious thing to stop.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren I, ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	And yet when this happens to anyone, hasten to place your thumb on the wound of the vein, and press very hard until the blood is still beneath your thumb, and no more drops emerge; then put in the fire olive leaf cauterizers both small and large until they are all red; then take one, either large or small according to the wound and where the artery runs, and place the cautery on that vein where you hold your thumb, and keep the cautery there until the blood is restrained.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement I autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if it spurts out when you lift your thumb off the vein, and the cauterizers are extinguished, take quickly another of the cauterizers that are in the fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des IIII manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And do not stop doing this one after another until the blood is restrained; and be careful that you do not burn the nerve that is nearby, and that no other harm comes to the patient; and know that when blood flows from an artery, it cannot be properly stopped immediately if the artery is large, unless it is done by one of the four methods we have said: either by cauterization, or by extraction when it has not healed, or by tightly binding with thread, or by applying medicines which have the power to stop blood flow; and let it be bound and compressed accordingly.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Who will treat the foul smell by tightly wrapping cloths or placing burning things upon it, or other similar things, if there is no benefit from doing so.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And if this happens to anyone and there is no physician or medicine present, then he should place his thumb on the wound of the vein as we have said, and spread it well until it is foul-smelling over the wound and over the vein; and do not move the thumb, but moisten it with very cold water frequently until the blood is congealed and thickened and becomes foul-smelling; and make a poultice from what he needs for cauteries and medicines.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Here begins the second book of surgical treatments
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	We have told you in the first chapter about every disease in which it is necessary to use a fire cautery or hot medicine, and the symptoms, causes, instruments, and forms of cauterizations; and I placed that chapter from head to foot, and I will proceed in this chapter in the same way so that what one seeks may be found more easily.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And thus as I begin this, it is necessary, good sirs, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first of the cauterizations, and therefore greater caution is required.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	And I advise you not to undertake folly.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	For many kinds of people come for treatment.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	They come from those who are so afflicted by their illness that they change easily due to the madness they find in their sickness, and because of the severity of their condition; one must be afraid of such people.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse.	And among these are those who regain their senses and say: "Wait, I am healed"; yet the illness is severe.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	It is not right for you to consent to those who come to you with such behavior, but place greater care in your honor than in your desire, and do not act foolishly but wisely about those of whom you are certain, and from whom you can gain respect and praise; and use prognosis and indication in the treatment of your patients where healing may be converted; and this will help you to acquire a good reputation, glory, and memory of praise.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Most dear child, Our Lords grant you good understanding and uprightness, and if you wish to draw breath from the holy inspiration of His hand, amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Now I have ordered this chapter by dividing it into sections, as it is before the chapter on cauterizations, which I discussed from head to foot, so that you may more easily find what you need.
dou chief plein d’aigue	the head full of water
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	Know that this disease often comes to children at birth, and when the child's head is held too tightly; and sometimes it happens for a reason that is not known.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And I have never seen this disease except in children, and in all those whom I have seen it led to death quickly; and for that reason it seems to me that it is best to leave off working on such treatments.
Et je vis I enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com II nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	And I saw the child whose head was full of fluid, and his head swelled each day until he could no longer hold it up; and the moisture grew so much that he died, and this moisture is gathered beneath the bone over the sphenoid, between the heart and the bone; and the work should be such if the moisture is between the heart and the bone, and the abscesses are small, that you split across the head a wide slit; and let it be as long as two fingers, until the moisture runs; and see here the shape of the spatumile:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai II fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is more swollen, and the abscesses are larger, then make two slits in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief III fendures selonc ceste maniere:	And if the moisture is beneath the bone, and you see the seams of the head open on each side, and the fluid jumps outward when you press it inside with your hand, and this does not return to its place: then you must split across the head three slits according to this manner:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	And after the incision, extract all the moisture outside.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	After extracting the dressings of cloths and powders, and putting wine and oil on them, leave it like this until the fifth day; then remove it, treat the wound with poultices and ointments, and allow the head to drain evenly, and give the patient dried meat that has little moisture as long as the limb is becoming healthy and sound.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	And another way of incising is to look at the opening of the abscess and where the fluid accumulates; for sometimes it is in front; sometimes behind; sometimes on the right; and sometimes on the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	Cut then where the abscess is open and the accumulation of fluid, and make the incision according to what you have the ability; be careful not to cut an artery; if blood flows, it may cause the patient to die from excessive bleeding and loss of moisture.
de reume	of phlegm
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les II arteres.	When someone falls ill with a disease called "cataract" in the eyes or the nose, and the illness is long-standing, and medical treatment does no good, then the last resort is to use cauterization on both arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	Then when you need to cut the arteries, have the patient lie down with his head back; then rub the area with a rough cloth until the arteries become visible, and then instruct the patient to grip the cloth with all his strength; then observe where the veins are located, as they are situated behind the ears and are easily reached; mark their locations, and then cut each one with a sharp instrument from both sides, cutting down to the bone, ensuring it is done near the top of the head.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com II dois au traver.	And if you wish, place the spatula beneath the artery and the cloth above, cutting as II should across.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is cut, the blood spurts upward continuously forcefully.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And if the artery does not open upon feeling it, you must measure the quantity of space of III fingers, then cut through to the bone; and the amount of blood that should be let out is VI cotes, and perhaps a bit more or less according to what the patient can tolerate, and the engorgement of the artery; then examine the wound: if there remains any point of suppuration on the bone, cut it so that no abscesses may form, then treat the wound by cleaning and bandaging, applying ointment until it heals.
de emigrainne	of migraine
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When old migraine comes, and sharp catarrh, due to the moisture of tears and heat in the temples and an old enraged sore and similar things, and it is treated by methods of medical care and all this does him no good, then we cut open the arteries in the temples and apply cautery, as we have described.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And the method of extracting them is that the patient shaves behind the hair on his temples and listens for the artery in the temple, because it beats very clearly, except in some people who are too cold; and if it can be felt, the patient should press on its side with a piece of cloth, then rub the area with a rough cloth, and rinse the area with hot water until the artery becomes clearly visible; then take the spatula which is made as follows:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	Then strip the skin gently until you reach the artery, then trace it upwards to the ligatures, and separate it well from the tissues that are beneath each part; and if the artery is fine, then turn it with the tip of the hook, then cut it from that part according to the quantity of the two heads.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	For if it is not cut, then the blood does not flow completely.
Et trai dou sanc des VI c/, jusc’a III; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en II leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les II liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And draw the blood from six places, up to three; and if the artery is large, then it must be tied in two places with a double strong silk thread so that no corruption comes before the wound heals, and there is bleeding; then cut the excess that is between the two ties at that same moment, and then, if you wish, apply the cautery of the cautery knife to the bone until the heads are cut; and this is the main work, if the patient does not have a fever and they have a hot constitution.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For the cauterizes are helpful to finish the moistures: for this reason, they are of greater help against moistures.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de II pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	For when it is necessary to extract an artery, one should fill the area with old cotton and place well-made bandages on top; and when they are removed, treat them with dry medicines that promote tissue growth and apply bandages until they are healed; and if a piece of the artery is missing as you work, hasten to cut it off with a cautery, filling the area with vitriol and holding it in your hand so that the flesh hardens; and if you do not have this available, place something appropriate over the area such that the flesh freezes, and rinse the area with cold water until the bleeding stops, and bind it as is necessary; and what is milder and more efficient in extracting an artery is to cauterize the vein from this cautery cutting across two parts, but ensure the cuts are well-spaced to preserve their heat longer.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the instrument is too cold, it holds less of its heat.
Et doit avoir entre les II coutelz I doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les II leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en II leus; et soient esloigniet entre les II chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And there should be one thick space between the two knives, and when you have marked the two places with a pin, place the hot iron on until it reaches the bone, and cut the vein in two places; and keep them apart between the two heads because they are not joined throughout this cautery; and this is the form of the cautery:
des larmes	of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When the tears from the eyes come down from the veins that are above the forehead and no benefit is gained by medicinal treatment that you may apply, and you see the face of the patient redden, and feel the front move as if trembling; and when the eyes are cold and moist such that the hair on the cheeks falls out, and the cheeks are heated and scorched by the heat of the tears, then this cure is needed.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins; et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	And the ancients called it “cure contuse,” which is that you make at the back of the patient who has this disease the hairs on his forehead, then you make III incisions on the forehead evenly according to the length of the forehead; and let one of the incisions as II do all over the forehead going down until the nose, and the other two are on each side above the temples, and beware of cutting into the arteries that are on each side above the temples; and keep your hand away from the continuation of the two mandibles, and let each wound be the size of III fingers across; then have a piece of sponge and much cloth ready to wipe the blood, then place the spatula sharp at both sides as shown in this figure:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les II fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	from the incision which is near the temple until the second incision; and scrape off all the skin that is between the two cuts to the surface of the skull which is over the bone, then do likewise from the middle incision until the other second one, and then pull out this spatula.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	Insert into the first groove the instrument which is called "cultellaire", and it is very well suited for cutting on one side, while on the other side it is smooth, not cutting, and this is its form:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	And place the cutting edge towards the flesh of the heart, and the smooth side towards the bone, and insert it until it reaches the middle groove.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And cut all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes until the incision is continuous up to those near the heart, and then make another incision in the middle groove until the other side; and then draw out the blood evenly, and apply pressure to stop bleeding; then place a piece of old cotton in each groove, cover it with moistened cloths made of wine, oil, and pitch, and guard against abscesses forming; on the third day loosen the bandage and bring plenty of boiled water, then treat it with basilicon ointment mixed with rose oil, and other treatments used for wounds, until he is healed.
dou reume des eulz	of the rheum of the eyes
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	When catarrh comes to someone frequently, and you see the eyes swollen and small, with weakened vision, and the membranes reddened; and the hair falls out, and in the head there is pain from a fever, and the patient sneezes; then by these symptoms you know that these matters and this catarrh come only from many veins, and if there is mucus to be treated, it is of this kind.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	And when you instruct the patient to lie with his back against his forehead, then make a deep incision across the forehead, and another one on the side of the head.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	And start from the incision on the left temple to the right temple, and let the incision reach the bone; and keep your hand away from the nerves of the temples that move while eating; when the bone is exposed, wipe all the blood with a sponge, then separate between the two edges of the incision and put old cotton there, and cover it with linen bandages; then place damp cloths made of fabric soaked in wine and oil over it, and be careful not to get a hot abscess; when it is removed, you must rub the bone until flesh begins to grow, then treat it with substances that stimulate growth.
En teil maniere: pren II parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine IIII parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In such a manner: take two parts of wheat flour, and four parts of colophony, and make an ointment; and apply it to these wounds to generate flesh throughout.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the obstruction of the ears
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des IIII choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	All that falls into the ears is one of the four things: grains, animals, or stones from mines or similar things such as iron; seeds, such as beans, peas; or flowing substances such as water and pus and similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	When a stone or any other substance that does not belong in the ear falls into it and does not grow within the ear, place the ear towards the sun.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus.	If you see a stone, then drop some drops of violet oil or cumin oil, then proceed with extraction; and make them sneeze by condition, and plug their nostrils when the sneezing comes, and place pieces of cloth or linen around the ear; and hold the ear above.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	Often force comes from this treatment; and if it does not come by force, then proceed with the extraction using fine instruments, which is described here:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If it comes out by the force of the forceps, that is good; if not, then proceed with extraction using a fine needle with a small curve; and if it does not come out even by this means, make a thread of silk and insert the tip of the thread into the ear canal firmly, and plug around the thread with soft wax so that air cannot enter through the thread; then pull forcefully, for often it comes out as we have said; and if it does not come out in such a manner, take bird glue and place some instrument which is suitable to do this on it, and put a little cotton around; then press the glue onto the stone or whatever it may be, and pull forcefully.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if she cannot escape from all these things that we have said, then hurry to cut the ear in such a way that an abscess or spasm may come to it; and the manner of cutting is as follows: first let blood from the patient using cupping vessels according to the measure of her strength, then sit the patient between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and make a small cut at the base of the ear where the fat hangs; and let the cut be like a crescent moon until you reach the stone, then remove it as much as possible, and suck it quickly into your mouth; and continue treating her until she is healthy.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre I spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if the grain is inside and it swells, then administer extraction; and if it cannot come out, then administer this thin spatumile according to this form:
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	And minister an incision of that abscess.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	But do not do this when you think the abscess is moist due to ear moisture, until you have made many incisions; then extract it with fine forceps and a suction device, as we have said, so that the extraction is gentle.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	In acute cases where water enters the ear, the patient should use sneezing to dislodge it initially, and then plug the ear with old cotton.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	And lie down on the side where the water is.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	If it comes out that way, it is good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	If not that way, take many stones according to the length of your thumb, light and easy, and warm them slightly by the fire; then place one stone in the patient's ear, and pull it out with his foot from the other side, and strike another stone on the stone that is in the ear; and do not stop doing this with stone upon stone until all the water comes out, and thus it will come completely out; and if you wish, take a reed, and insert one end of it into the patient's ear, and set fire to the other head until the softer part of the reed is burned; then do the same with other reeds until all the water has come out, as we have said about the stone.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	In the removal of the beast, if it is small like a flea and similar things, treat it as we have said in the division; but if it is large enough to be felt, then use extraction with forceps; and this is the easiest thing to remove from the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	In the extraction of worms from the ears, when you treat them as we have said in the division and in treating the distillations, and the treatment is not effective, then it is necessary that you examine the ear in sunlight: if any worms are visible, remove them with fine forceps, and if none are seen, use this form of remedy:
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	And let it be narrow below and wide above.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	And insert the finer end into the ear according to the extent of the patient's suffering, then form it completely throughout the remedy; do this frequently until all the worms come out.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And if they do not come out willingly, plug around the remedy with cotton as I have said for stones; and if they do not exit as we have said, administer distillations that the ancients have proven effective against worms, which you will find in the treatment of distillations; and if you distill your oils and medicines into the ear using this instrument, whose form is shown as you see:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a I petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a I estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren I raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations I poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And let there be a narrow sieve of silver or brass with small holes, and above it place something to catch the drips; and for pressing within the distillation use an instrument of brass well made for this purpose, and if you wish take a razor and wrap around the tip carefully cotton; then pour your oil or juice, and what you want of your medicines into the funnel, and let the funnel be in the ear; then put inside the razor to all the cotton, and press with your hand moderately until the oil is distilled at the bottom of the ear; and let the patient feel this within, and let the distillations be a little heated by fire as one distills into the ear; and beware that it not be too cold, for the medicine would not be so good.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Of the stuffiness of the ears
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient I poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born with a hole in their ears; and the same thing happens to adults due to ear congestion, or when flesh grows inside the ear, and these obstructions sometimes occur deep within the ear, such that one cannot see them; and at other times it happens that pus comes out of the hole, and then one can clearly see it.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	The one that occurs deep inside and cannot be seen is difficult to treat in many cases, and for the one you can see, you should place the patient's ear towards the sun; and look inside: if you see pus present, then proceed with this spatumile as follows:
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	And let it be sharp and cutting in front and behind all flat so that it does not damage the ear; if the excrescence is of flesh from the body of the ear, hold it with fine forceps, and cut lightly, until all the flesh is removed.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	And if the excrescence is deep in the ear, take a fine and light razor and heat it slightly over fire, then apply it to the body of the ear.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	If you feel the excrescence where the patient feels pain in the ear, pierce it lightly, and be careful not to damage the nerves of the ear; then place a wick in the ear according to the width of the opening, and moisten it with Egyptian ointment.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Do this on a certain day until the wound is sealed, or take a tent (medicinal application) and moisten it in rose water, and powder it with vitriol ground; and if you see the ear swollen, then it is necessary to draw out the tent and move another tent moistened in cerate which is made of olive oil and wax, until the swelling is removed; then care for it until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if bleeding occurs, then dip a sponge and cloths in cold water, and place them on the ear, and use other treatments that stop the bleeding which are in the treatment of hemorrhages.
de la char des papieres	of the flesh of pigeons
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	This althaea root that comes from pigeons' eyes when they are moist and dry, you should stretch it with tongs and pincers, and cut a piece of about one spathule of its roots; then place powdered vitriol on the spot.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And if they are not completely removed, then cauterize with the lentil cautery and let them heal after incision; and often they repair when something remains of their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
de la gresle	of hailstones
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	Many times, in the paper of the eyes, things come that seem like hailstones in form and hardness, and for this reason this disease is called "hail," and it is an accumulation of thick moisture above and below the paper; the treatment is as follows: watch if the hail moves from one side to another, and it is easy to know; then cut broadly, then lightly peel each part, then take it with forceps, and remove it.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	If you cannot cut it without piercing a bit of the membrane, do not harm the patient; and if the incision is large, sew it up with a suture, and treat it until it heals; and if it is small, make no effort, for the ointment will heal it quickly and regenerate flesh.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	And if the granule is descending inside the ear towards the upper part, turn over the membrane and extract the granule with tweezers, cutting and pressing it from both sides; and if the membrane is displaced by the incision, it does no harm; and when the granule is removed, rinse the area with salt water, and treat the wound with a substance that regenerates flesh until the patient is healed.
de la graisse des eulz	of the fat of the eyes
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	Exinach is a grease that is generated in the membranes above the eyes, and this happens more often with children than adults, and it greatly troubles their eyes, and they get catarrh in the mornings, and cannot look at the light of the sun because tears hasten to their eyes; and for this reason they lie down on their beds immediately, and sleep thereon, and their membranes below their eyebrows are moistened by the exinach which appears in the eye.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	And when you press the area with your two fingers and feel the exinach between them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren I drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	And the manner of the work is that the patient places his head on your lap; and then take a piece of linen, and prepare a tent in the shape of a circle according to the quantity it contains exinach from each part, then place it over him; and press with both hands from one side and the other so that the exinach is assembled within the circle; then cut a slit in the middle of the moisture with a sharp scalpel not larger than the incision made for venesection; and cut through the skin completely until you reach the exinach; and in many cases, exinach comes out from the slit, resembling a piece of white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Draw it then in one piece of torn cloth between your two fingers to spread it out, and move your hand right and left until it is dispersed; and be careful not to press into the incision, so that you do not come to completely rub all of the spatumile up to the eye, so that you do not injure it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	And if the excrement does not appear at the beginning of the incision, then enlarge the incision slightly until it appears; then draw it out as we have said, then moisten cloths with oil and water, and place them on it, and bandage.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	And there are such people who grind salt and put it on to corrupt the moisture that remains.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat him until he is well.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it comes to an abscessed area that is hot, treat it with soothing plasters until he is well.
des poilz des papieres	of the hair on the palms
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc IIII manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When hair grows on the palms that is different from what nature intended, and it becomes irritated, it harms the eyes and causes certain illnesses such as habitual tears and softening of the palms and albuginea, leading to eye damage; and the cure follows four methods: either by cautery with fire together, or by medication according to what was mentioned before in the chapter on cautery, and is done through incision and suturing or cantharides, as I will explain.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai I fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai I fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	It is necessary that you place the head of the patient in your lap, then turn the paper of the eye towards your left hand; if it is turned, it is good; if not, insert a needle along all the thread; and let this be near the margin of the paper where the hairs grow among these hairs, and draw the thread above the entire paper, and turn it to the edge; then cut in the part below the paper, below the hairs attached, across the sphenoid bone from the large tear duct to the small; then extract the thread, and place under the paper a small tent of cotton and cloth, then sign on the paper a figure of a wedge, like the leaf of myrtle, and still it must be that the figure is according to the quantity you wish to lift the paper which is designated for all.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor; et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	And if there is need to cut off a large quantity of the paper according to how the paper has softened; then make all the spatula along the two lines that you have marked, and begin from the larger tear up to smaller ones; and let one of the cuts be near the natural hairline in the thickness of a root, then insert a needle into one of the two corners of the eye, and remove the skin entirely; then sew together the two edges with a needle using one fine thread, and wipe away the blood, and trim excess threads around both eyelids with some sticky substances if you wish to do so; and if not, do not worry about it, leave the sutures and the threads for three or four days; then treat the wound without stitches of drying and constricting things, because the paper rises quickly from the wound's healing and its assembly, but the suture is soft (as the ancients say), and these works are done without fear; and there is another way: which is to mark the paper with a shape that resembles the leaf of myrtle, as we have described, for three inches apart according to the form that is here shown:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	Then cut those which protrude above the small parts equally according to the shape which is here:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans; et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	And if you cannot hold the forceps, and the parts are not equal, then take a needle with thread, and insert it in the shape; and place one thread next to the large wound margin, and the second thread next to the small, and tie both threads equally; then lift your hand evenly, and lift all the skin where you have marked, as we have described, then stitch together the two edges of the wound by suturing, and heal it until it is healthy; and if an abscess comes from your incision, soothe it with cerate and similar soothing ointments; and sometimes the hair on the paper turns: it is necessary to use what we have said about the incision; but the stitching in one way or another requires more skill.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai II caines par art, et II liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as II chiés de II pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les II cainnes des II parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	The treatment of canthi is according to this form: you must turn the paper and cut inside as I have said, then make two canthi by art, and two fine threads as long as the paper and the width of the spatula are; and tie at the two corners where you hold the threads; then carefully join one over the part that protrudes from the paper of the eye, and pull the two canthi firmly from both sides; and leave it thus for some days, and the skin which is stretched will die and heal and grow, until it falls off by itself.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	If it delays, then cut with force, and treat until it is healed; and when the wound has closed, and if the paper has lifted, and no more hair will grow; and this is the form of the two canthi that you will make according to this figure, and according to this measure of length and width:
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute I fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse I autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a I ou II ou III ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	The work is such that you take a fine needle, and insert a thin silk thread underneath it; then join the ends of the hair and tie them together finely, and let the length of the threads be one palm in length; then arrange another thin silk thread briefly on the surface, and tie the ends of the thread; then have the patient place their head in your hands; and do this near the sun so that the work is illuminated, for it is a delicate and intricate task, then insert the needle along the follicle next to the hair, and pierce quickly through the membrane as you pull over the natural hair; then extract the hairs up to the surface of the skin with the natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo II jors ou III, tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne I poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	And if the hair is treated and does not come out with it, draw the needle entirely through to the end of the thread that you have ordered, until the hair comes out from the hole above and you can see it by eye; then pull out the needle and leave a stitch behind for two days or three, until the hair grows in its place and flesh rises up; and if the hair is short, accompany one long hair from natural hairs, and raise it with that which you left, until it is lengthened and then lift it.
de la porriture de l’oil	from the pus of the eye
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	When this disease which is called "aleacrati" or pus comes in the eye, there are two ways it can occur: one naturally, and the other unnaturally.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	And it happens by sudden opening of a wound, or cutting, or cautery, and by similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	And the method of work with it is that you should split the seam, and separate its edges, and place linen tents inside, and leave it until it heals; and in no case should you use in its treatment things that dry out and constrict.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	For if you do that, the illness will return worse than before; but work with softening things, such as fenugreek; and apply a poultice of water or ale mixed with flaxseed, and ointment made from melted wax in some oil, and wrap it in a bandage, and treat it with these.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the treasure of your treatment is that you guard against it not healing according to its former form; and all the works we have mentioned are nothing but remedies for this disease, so that it does not return in its former form.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	of the flesh that comes to the eye
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	This disease which is called "axacrati" in truth, and it is natural causes and accidents.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	The accident comes from wounds and cuts and cautery and similar things; and the method of treatment is that you take a needle, which has double thread, and insert it into the flesh, and make it pierce from the left tear duct to the right, so that the thread goes through two parts of the flesh; then stretch the flesh above the entire needle, and cover with a piece about one spatumile wide.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the figure of the paper returns according to what is required, it is good; if not, take the scraper and place it in the crack, and turn the paper, and make two cracks on either side of the paper; and let the edges of the two cracks be at the two corners of the incision that you have made, and make one angle so that when they are put together, the figure is as the shape of a letter which has the name "I griesche"; then remove that flesh, according to the quantity that its sides are sharp underneath, from what is inside the paper, then join the two separated parts with thread; then treat it with what we have said about softening medicines and tents until it is healed.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les II leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	And if the illness comes from a crack or seam or cautery, it is necessary that you make a full incision beneath the hairs of the paper, as was said above; then separate between the two leaves of a tent, as I have said; and one must perform the work according to the form of the illness, for it is very diverse in shape, and wise masters prepare ingeniously with all their power how to bring back the figure to its natural form; and the patient himself, according to what requires work and instruments in various circumstances.
dou soudement de la papiere	of the sudden swelling of the skin
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	When this swelling occurs in such a manner that the skin above is swollen with the white of the eye, and cannot move or perform its natural functions, you must then insert the tip of a razor underneath the skin, lifting it up; and hold it with pincers, until you cut away what adheres to the delicate membrane, without being too sharp or too cutting, so that the patient does not suffer from an overly sharp incision bleeding the eye; and make your excision, where you peel off this assembly, gently, so that the skin returns to its natural form; and heal entirely this assembly, sometimes placing salt water in the eye, and lifting it with sweet water; then place between the skin and the eye a piece of linen cloth, and put on the eye wool moistened abundantly with egg white; and after three days use poultices and soothing things until he is healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	of the nail of the eye
Saiches que li ungle est selonc II manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a I dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	Know that the nail is according to two manners: one is nervous and similar to hard skin, and another which is not nervous, but is like frozen white moisture, such that when it is touched by iron and one thinks to remove it with forceps, it cannot be done; and both of these begin near the large tear duct, and grow little by little until it covers all the sight and light and movement of the eye.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met I poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et I fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	And the manner of incision is that the patient place their head in your lap, then work with their eyes; and lift the paper to your hand, then roll the nail with forceps gently, and stretch it out; then take a needle, and put some horsehair, or ox hair, or buffalo hair on it, and strong thread; and double the point of the needle slightly and insert it into the nail, piercing all the way through, and tie the nail with a thread and stretch it out, and shave off all the hair from the side of the nail which encloses the flesh and the silk to the head, then cut the remainder at the root of the tear duct with the fine spatula and small forceps, leaving natural flesh in the tear duct so that by the incision tears do not come regularly; and sometimes stretch the nail only at the corner, and on the thread as we have said; then shave off all the subcutaneous tissue as shown in this form:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	And ensure that the spatula does not touch the delicate tissue and break it, and that the probe is not pierced; and after the incision sprinkle a little ground pitch into the eye, and make a poultice of litharge, and leave it until the next day; then treat it as needed until it heals.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And if the nail is not attached to the nerve and you cannot insert a needle, and the forceps cannot enter, this kind of nail can be treated many times with medicines; it grows as I have described in the section, and if you wish to cut it, proceed carefully with the patient's eye, and take a light, sharp spatula according to this form:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	And lift the nail gently above, and if you see that it thins slightly and the root adheres, then drip from your mouth into the eye a poultice made of litharge and red ochre and ground pitch, and plug the eye until the next day; then resume the work according to this same method, until it is all removed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If anything is contrary in the eye, such as a hot abscess, then treat it, and first heal the hot abscess until it is healthy, then resume work as before, until it is healthy.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the appearance of the flesh from the eyelid harms the eye severely, then suspend it to the nail, and cut off a part but not all, so that no blood comes out; then drip into the eye red choler made from litharge.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	of the flesh that grows over the pupil
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre; et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	In some people's eyes, red flesh sometimes grows and covers the pupil, pressing against the eyelids and turning them outward, resembling a purple flower; the treatment is that the patient places their head in a healthy position, then works on the eyes, using appropriate hooks to coil all of this flesh, and maintaining it with force; then cut off the first layer of flesh, and continue cutting until you reach the base, being careful not to injure the eye during the procedure; make an incision as described for nail removal and small forces where bone is removed, as illustrated in this chapter afterwards; once the incision is complete and all the flesh has been removed, apply oil made from crushed seeds or similar medicines that are corrosive, then place a cotton pad soaked in egg white over the eye to prevent a hot abscess; if anything remains and there is suspicion of a hot abscess, treat it with things that soothe a hot abscess; then return to your work until the eye is healthy, and proceed as such for any similar growths in the eye.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	However, it is necessary that you treat each weak eye by the natural way; and in case of accident, with iron work; and do not put your hand into any of these works until you see that this member can bear that work.
des voines des eulz	the veins of the eyes
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	Red veins that cover the eye cause trouble in its function and weaken the eye all day.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	Therefore, first you must check if the eye, in which the problem lies, is healthy, and there is no other disease except for this issue; then treat it as follows: instruct the patient to place their head on your hand, then suspend those veins along the entire finger according to your wisdom, and let the fingers be double fine according to this form:
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en I cors selonc ceste forme:	And let two incisions be made in stages on the body according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	Then, when you press on those veins gently with force, and wipe the blood hour after hour, until you see those veins come out of the eye; and be careful not to damage the eye with the points of the spatula, and do this work at noon facing the sun, and be very diligent in your work so that you only affect those veins; and when you have done this, then pour into the eye green and red collyrium to dissolve what remains of the sore.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	And if you are unable to do this all at once during that hour, then apply a poultice to the eye with soothing ingredients to alleviate the pain of the eyes, and leave it for several days until the pain is reduced and there is assurance of a hot abscess, then restart according to this method as described before until it is healed; and this is the form of applying force:
de la fistule de l’oil	Of the fistula of the eye
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	The doctor calls this type of fistula "arissati": when you treat it with cautery and hot medicine as I said before, and it does not heal, there is pus in it that you must incise where it should drain, and extract all the moisture inside until the bone is exposed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a I chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone is exposed, and you see the corruption and blackness, remove it with all the instruments of which this form shows; and it is called "aspre chief," and should be made of iron bent like a knife tip, and should have points like a file as shown in the present form:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And place over the site of the corrupted bone, then turn it between your two fingers, and press your hand a bit until you know that the corruption is removed; and do this several times, then restore the area with drying medications.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	If the tissue is sealed and flesh grows there, and the body of the bowel is sealed, and it remains thus for forty days, and it does not renew itself nor become an abscess, and no bad accident occurs, know that he is healthy; if this is not the case, then there is another intention to bring the fistula to the anus opening according to this form: which is that you uncover the bone a second time with iron, and by means of drying medicines, and when it has been uncovered take one probe according to this form, and let the tip be in three angles, and the shaft be slender up to the head as you see here:
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	Then place it on the bone near the temple, and keep your hand from the eye one inch away, then withdraw the probe completely until it pierces the bone and the patient feels it if he holds his hand over his anus; and then restore the area with dry medicines as I have taught you, and when flesh grows and hardens the tissue, let the matter go to the anus; this is a lighter thing for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	From the issue of the eye
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil I liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en IIII, et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the eye is fully open and there is no disturbance or reduction in vision, you must bind the patient; then heal it, then apply suction cups to draw out impurities without injuring; then place on the eye a poultice made of boxwood, aloes, frankincense, and myrrh, and then remove the eye; and cover with bandages and cloths; and the way to prepare the cloths is that you take soft cloths, fold each one into four layers, and then place them over each other according to how much the eye needs; then press firmly under a stiff bandage, and reapply the suction cups without injuring; then remove the suction cups and leave the eye bound day and night, and if the poultice becomes loose, you must tighten it again; then remove the binding after day and night have passed, and if you see that the eye is healing, it is good; if not, continue with the poultices, cloths, bindings, and suction cups until it is healed.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	from the tearing of a woven cloth
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com I grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait I fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When a disruption comes in the woven cloth, it is opened up, and then paper pulp is applied as thickly as resin grains, which is terrible to see; then if you wish to repair it, work like this: insert a needle at the root of the part below until reaching above, then insert another needle where there is double thread from the side; pierce there and leave the first needle according to its position; cut around the area with double thread and tie one part of the woven cloth tightly, then remove the needle and put on wet wool soaked in plenty of egg white; leave it until the threads fall off with the woven cloth, then heal the wound with comforting things until it is healed; sometimes the wound is restrained by a circle of cloth from all sides until it is healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the eye appears swollen, pierce it with a fine spatula that comes in from the side of the eye, and draw out the watery humor and lower the eyelid; then extract it until it is healed.
de la bowe de l’oil	from the socket of the eye
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	This disease which is called "alcunnati" is nothing but an inflammation in the eye, resembling an aqueous condition, yet it is not actually aqueous; and the manner of its appearance is such that you should seat the patient on a prepared and upright chair, then take his head between your hands from both sides, and move it gently until you see the swelling come up to your eyes; then if it remains there without descending, know that it is an aqueous condition, and if the descent of the swelling does not occur as we have described.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	Seat the patient between your hands, then take the spatulum and cut through the corneous skin along the conjunctiva with the corneal tissue and the cornea, until the pus comes out; and when it has come out, pour into the eye hot honey mixed with honey, or water boiled with fenugreek and honey, then treat it further as needed until it is healed.
des aigues de l’oil	of eye fluids
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit.	We have described the appearances of the fluids in the division, and what is necessary for piercing them; act according to the health.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	You should seat the patient between your crossed hands, away from the light of the sun, and hold the healthy eye tightly with one hand; then place the paper of the affected eye in your left hand if it is the left eye, or in your right hand if it is the right eye; then take in your right hand, if the eye is the left one, the instrument called "almagda", or in your left hand, if the eye is the right one; then place the tip of the instrument next to the cornea at a distance of one hair's breadth from the white part of the eye towards the inner corner near the tear duct, and gently insert the instrument called "almagda"; turn your hand until it pierces through the white part of the eye, and feel when the almagda reaches an empty space; the length of the almagda should be perfectly equal to the distance from the plumule to the end of the black part, which is the cornea; you will see the bone on the paper through the clarity of the corneal tissue, then place the instrument where the fluid is and express it out one way at a time.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	If the water flows now, the patient sees before him and the instrument in his eye.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	After resting briefly, if the water rises again, apply force with the instrument, and when it is firmly placed and it does not rise, gently turn your hand little by little; then add a small piece of silk gem to the water, and lift the eye from within.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	Then place behind the eye plugs made of wool soaked in rose oil and an abundance of egg white, and tie with a healthy eye.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	We, and those of our time, apply it mixed with egg in abundance.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if almond oil cannot enter the eye due to its hardness, for there are some people who have too hard eyes, then you must take the instrument called "alberit", of which here is the form:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	And pierce then the conjunctiva only, and do not go too deep, but proceed delicately, then insert almond oil as we have said; and at the completion of the work prepare for the patient a resting place, where he can sleep on his back in a dark spot; and be cautious of all movements, and give him light foods, and let him not move his head neither to right nor left, and bind him according to his disposition until the third day; then release him in that same dark place, and test his sight, and show him some things, and then bind him again until the seventh day; and it is not necessary for you to do this during the time of treatment or immediately after incision, but it is necessary to postpone this, because the fluid rises quickly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	If abscesses occur, that you should loosen the eye before the seventh day, and direct it to him who alleviates abscesses; and when it is appeased, then loosen the sight and place on it a patch for some days, and let it be in a dark house.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	And then leave the house little by little, and return to his normal routine; and know that no disciple should interfere in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And one came to us who was from the Iraque, who told us that in their country people make an almagda puncture, through which they draw off fluid, but nevertheless I have never seen such a thing in our land, nor have I read about it in ancient books; and perhaps it is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And these are the likenesses of the forms of almonds, for those who do not recognize them; and they should be properly of brass:
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en III angles ague.	And let the front ends of these be of the same fineness, and the rear in three acute angles.
de la char sor le neis	of the flesh on the nose
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	Sometimes flesh on the nose grows in various ways, some of which resemble many-footed scorpions; and there are such cases where the flesh is raised with a reddish hue, and there is smooth skin of good color.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	In the case of this flesh that is smooth and not raised, you should have the patient sit between your hands facing the sun; work his nostrils, apply a lancet to those parts of the flesh, and draw out the filaments; then continue as much as you can with the fine sharp spatula until you know that all the flesh has been removed.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout I des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	And if there remains anything that cannot be cut, treat it with the finest instrument gently, so nothing is left; and if pus overflows from an abscess, treat it as appropriate; and if these are malignant abscesses, act quickly and cauterize until the blood is clotted and all flesh is removed, then apply a soft and clear lotion or vinegar.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	If the nostril is operated on and moisture reaches up to the palate, know that it is healthy; and if moisture does not flow as appropriate, know there is flesh adhered to the bone above, which cannot be cut: then you must insert a thick linen thread, tie knots at intervals of one finger width or more, and place the patient's head in a position so that one end of the thread goes through the nostril into the mouth; many times children are taught this at school, and it is an easy thing for those who want to do it; then hold the end coming from the nose with one hand, and the other end coming from the mouth with the other hand, and pull them out alternately by undoing the knots which are in the thread.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	Do this until you know that the new flesh has corrupted the old tissue, then pull out the thread, wipe away the blood, and moisten the thread in Egyptian ointment, and put it back into the nose as before; do this for three days or more, until the ointment corrupts all that remains of the flesh; and then place a silver chain in the nose for several days until it is healed, and if there is need for drying medicines, use them; and this is the form of the instrument to purge the head, through which oils and medicines are dripped into the nose:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait I mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	Whether it is made of silver or brass, it should resemble an open lamp, like a chain, and the tube should be the same; and if you wish, make a closed chain, and let the instrument be full for purging the head; and have a handle at the top to hold when heating the oil or any liquid.
de la char sor le neis	of the flesh upon the nose
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	Many times a disease called "telul" arises on the head of the nose and grows until it becomes large enough to be noticeable; therefore, you must cut it at the beginning and remove all its roots, then apply the cautery or burning medicine over it. If one delays cutting it until it is large, beware if it is hard, reddish in color, and slow to respond: do not touch it with iron because it is a deeply rooted abscess, for when it is cut even once, much harm comes to the patient; but if the abscess is soft to the touch, not red in color, and you see that all of it can be cleanly cut, then empty out the patient without fear and cut it away, and treat the area with drying and constricting remedies.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	When the skin is cut and sewn
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	Know that when solutions for continuity come in one of these cartilage works, there is little benefit, except in some men.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then it is necessary that when this happens to anyone, you check if the wound is fresh with all its blood; and then join the two lips in one seam, then care for it until it heals; and if the lips are already separated from both sides, you must scrape all parts of their core until they bleed, then bring together the two lips in a seam, and bind them, and put powder on powder made from dragon's blood, and ground incense; and place the powders under a piece of strong plaster or another adhesive plaster, and leave it until it comes off by itself, then treat with ointment until it heals.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The method of suturing is that you bring together the solution: either by needles, as we have said in the suturing of the abdomen; or by thread, as I have told you.
des apostemes des levres	of abscesses of the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	In some people, there is a hard abscess on the lips, resembling grains of wheat, smaller and larger; then you must turn the lips, cut into each node, grasp it with forceps, and cut it in each part; then fill the area after incising with powdered vitriol until the blood stops flowing; then clean the area with rose water, and treat the wound with dry substances until it is healed.
de la char des gencives	of the flesh of the gums
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Often a piece of flesh grows on the gums that the ancients call "albulus"; you must hold it with forceps and cut it at its root, allowing the blood or pus to flow; then apply vitriol powder ground up, or other powders that constrict and dry; if this flesh returns after cutting, which often happens, cut it a second time and cauterize: it will not return after the cautery; these are the forms of instruments for cutting.
des sordens	of filthiness
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	Sometimes there are gathered at the roots of the teeth inside the mouth between the gums, crusts that are ugly and rough; and sometimes the tooth is black or yellow or worm-eaten until corruption reaches the gum and the tooth becomes foul-smelling; you must seat the patient between your hands, and hold their head in your lap, and remove the teeth or crusts thoroughly, so nothing remains; and thus clean the blackness, greenness, yellowness, and other stains, until they are clean; if you extract what needs to be removed at first sight, it is good; if not, start again on the second day and third, until everything has been cleaned out; and know that teeth require various forms of instruments for removal, depending on the work that needs to be done, because the tools used to remove teeth between the teeth are different from those used to remove them by extraction; and these forms and others should be prepared with you.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	It is necessary when you treat the tooth of its pain that you delay drawing it out as much as you can, for one must not do this; for it is a very high substance until there is no excuse for pulling it.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	Then when the patient is compelled to have it drawn out, you must be certain about which tooth is causing pain.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	Many times the pain constrains the patient, and they believe it to be in a healthy tooth, so they have a good tooth extracted; but the pain does not leave them by this means until the bad extraction is corrected. And when you are certain about which tooth is causing the pain, you should char around the tooth for about one span very strongly to protect the gum from all sides; then move it with your fingers or small pliers little by little until it is well loosened, then secure the pliers firmly; and hold the patient's head in your lap between your knees, and hold them still so they do not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	After extract the tooth straight without breaking it, and if it does not come out easily, take one of these instruments and push on each side gently, and move it as you did first.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	And if the tooth is pierced and damaged, you must fill it with cloths where the hole is; and gently extract it with pliers so that it does not break when extracted; and carefully work around the gum to loosen the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	And be very careful that you do not break it, and leave part of it behind, which would return to the patient causing greater pain from the root than before.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	And be careful that you do not act as the ignorant practitioners do, who in their haste and boldness sometimes break the tissue, and do not follow what we have described; instead they cause at times severe illness due to the roots remaining or because of the tissue they break, as we often see; and when the tooth is extracted, clean the area with wine or hellebore and salt; and if bleeding persists, which often happens, fill the area with ground vitriol; and if that does not help, cauterize it.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The shapes of the instruments used to extract teeth first should have long points and thick handles, so that they do not double back when you pull out the tooth; and these are the forms:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And they should have thick parts so that they do not bend when pulling, and they should be made of well-forged iron, and should have teeth to hold the tooth.
de la racine des dens	from the root of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou ij.,	When the root remains after extraction, it is necessary to place cotton soaked in butter on the site for one or two days.
tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	until the gum softens, then you can insert the forceps called "algefri," which resemble a bird's beak; and they should be made inside like a file, and this is the form:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not want to come out with these pliers, then you must uncover the flesh all around the root, and place the instrument that is called "althali," which is known as a scalpel, of which this is its form:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	And let it be firm and thick so that it does not break, and if the root jumps out through this, it is good; if not, then help with all the instruments, of which the forms come next:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait II rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if one helps with this instrument that has two prongs, of which this is the form:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other iron instruments which are mentioned before in the context of teeth, and of this instrument that resembles large pliers, of which this is the form:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	And let this instrument be such that it cannot break, and know that many instruments of bone are; and also other instruments which are not mentioned; and the wise masters subtle find by themselves their instrument, according to what their work and the illness shows them, for there are such illnesses where the ancients did not teach any instrument because of the diversity of some, or if one breaks of the carriage or of other bones, it may rot, so seek among the instruments that are needed, which I have told you, and help with gestures, of which here is the form:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And let them be large and well-constructed to hold the bone so that it does not escape, but can hold and remove it; and then restore the place with medicines appropriate for this, and if there is putrefaction in the bone and it is small, then remove it with all this instrument:
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a I petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When the tooth does not appear according to its natural position in the body, and its form is ugly, especially in maiden women, then you must know if the tooth has grown after another tooth and is not in the right place, and cannot be filed or polished: then split it; and if it grows out of line with the tooth, take this instrument here which looks like a small beak, and let it be sharp iron.
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And cut it a little at a time over several days due to the hardness of the tooth, and so as not to move the others, and if it appears that you can file it, then file it with a file like this one.
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	and it is like the file used to make needles; and file the tooth a little at a time over several days lightly, so that it does not move until it breaks off; then smooth out any rough edges with a plane for all files, and if the tooth is too sharp and cuts the tongue, you must file down the roughness until it is even, so that it does not cut the tongue or impair speech.
quant li dent lochent	When the teeth grind
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	When the front teeth grind, either by percussion or falling, and the patient cannot press upon what they chew without defecating, and you have treated them with constrictive medicines but to no avail; then it is necessary to restrain them with a gold thread, for silver wire becomes green and rots, but gold never moves; and let the wire be neither too thick nor too thin, according to the quantity of space between the teeth; and if you wish to straighten the teeth, take the thread and loop it double between two healthy teeth, then place the knot between the damaged teeth, if there is one or more, carefully until you reach a healthy tooth on the other side; then continue covering until you return to where you started, and gently but skillfully tighten your hand so that nothing moves; and let your binding be at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	Then cut the ends of the wire with pincers, and join them together, and place them between healthy teeth so as not to touch the tongue; and then leave it tightly bound for as long as possible, and if they come loose or the thread breaks, tighten it again with another piece of thread; thus it will remain and serve in this manner throughout its time, and this is the form of the teeth and the arrangement of the two healthy teeth, and of the two bad ones, as you see:
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And when a tooth falls out, place another fresh tooth in its place as we have said; and do not involve anyone who is not wise and experienced, and sometimes one makes the form of a tooth from the bone of a cow's knee, places it where the deficiency is, tightens it as we have said, and it remains and serves for such a long time.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	To cut the ligament of the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	There is a time when this ligament that comes from under the tongue exists since birth; or due to an accidental wound that has healed; and the procedure is such that you work on the mouth of the patient, and hold their head in your hand, then lift up the tongue; then cut the nervous ligament broadly, until the tongue is detached from its attachment, and if there is hardness or a knot, which is due to the sudden healing of a wound, insert a hook and cut it broadly in that manner; be careful not to make too deep an incision, for the artery lies below; and when you have finished, lift out any pus with rose water and myrtle juice, or cold water, then place under the tongue a pad of linen; and change this dressing every night so that the wound does not close up.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	And if bleeding occurs, place over the area vitriol ground up; and if the blood weakens him, then cauterize with a lentiginous cautery, which is good for this purpose; then treat it with other treatments until he is well.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see it as a black or hard color and the patient does not feel it, do not touch it, for it is a chancre; and if it inclines towards blenorragh and there is moisture, then apply lancing to it, and cut it with a fine spatula, and free it from both sides; and if his strength fails you in your work, place on vitriol ground up until it cools down, then return to your work until you treat all the force; then lift the area gently and carefully, and treat it with other treatments until he is well.
des apostemes de la gorge	abscesses of the throat
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	At times, lumps come into the throat which are called "godath," and these are properly referred to as the two tonsils, and when you treat them, as we have said in the division, and if they are not healed, be careful: if it is a hard abscess with a small sensation and of dark color, do not touch it with iron.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	And if it is red and the base is swollen, do not touch it with iron, nor for bloodletting; but leave it until it turns black, and then you will remove it, as it would break by itself; and if it has a white color and the base is delicate, prepare the instrument to cut, but first see if the abscess is resting and has subsided.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	Then have the patient sit before the sun, and his head be in your sight, and work with his mouth and grasp him by the jaws between your hands, and press the tongue down with all the instrument, which is of this form; and it should be of silver or fine brass as sharp as a knife:
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	As you press the tongue with all this instrument, and you see an abscess, take a lancet and insert it into the almond area, and pull out more than you can; and draw some things from the tissue with it, then cut along the instrument, which is of this form, resembling forceps; and yet the ends are curved, one end opposite the other, and they are very sharp, and it is made of iron or steel:
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this instrument at hand, cut it with pliers, here is its form:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les II amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les II amandres igament.	And let it be cutting on one side and named on the other; and when you have cut one of the glands, cut the other in the same manner, then after the incision, gargle the patient with hot and soothing water, and if bleeding occurs, gargle the patient with water containing pomegranate peels or myrtle leaves, and similar things, until the blood is stanched; then treat it until he is healthy; and sometimes other abscesses arise in the throat besides the two glands, so cut them as you would the two glands equally.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	And I treated a woman who had an abscess that was born inside her throat, which is to say the tonsillar abscess; and I found it almost completely closing off the entire throat so that the woman could not breathe through the blocked passage, nor eat or drink, and she would have died if she had remained in this state for one or two days.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	And the abscess was so high that it had risen two fingers' width through the two passages of the nose.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	I hurried then and inserted a lancet into one nostril, then pulled it out forcefully, removing a large amount of pus; then I did the same on the other nasal passage, stitched up her mouth, and pressed her tongue; after that, I inserted the lancet into the abscesses, removed some part of them, but only a little blood came out; thus, the throat conduit was unclogged for the woman, and she now began to drink water and then wine, and I did not stop cutting into this abscess over a long period; the abscess grew back quickly and filled up the space that I had emptied until it became very large again; then I reinserted the lancet and cauterized inside her throat: thus it remained without growing anymore; and I left these parts, and do not know what God did for her after me.
de l’uve	of the eye睑户 kvinde<|im_start|><|im_start|><|im_start|><|im_start|>
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	When rheum descends to the eye and it is swollen and elongated, it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is detached, large and round, it is called "eye".
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	When it is treated as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not help, and you see that the diffuse abscesses are subsiding, and they are subtle, then you must cut them; and those that are round and assembled and are not elongated; and if they are bloody or of a dusky color or black, then you should avoid cutting them.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	For there is great danger to the patient.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	Therefore, when you see it, according to the manner that I have said, regarding its blueness and length, make the patient sit before the sun, and press the tongue with the instrument of which we have made mention previously; then pierce the onion in the eye, and draw it out from below, and cut it at I of the II instruments that I have mentioned in the incision of the II almonds.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And you must not cut beyond the excess that is over the natural limit; for if you cut more, it will harm the voice and speech; and after the incision, use what we have said about the incision of the II almonds, and treat it until it heals.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	And if the patient fears the cutting, then you must use skill in the cautery to calm their fearful sense.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	And the method of the cautery is acute ague.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	And it is that the patient place his head in your lap, and then press the tongue with the instrument we have mentioned in the chapter on cautery, and cover it with vinegar-soaked cloth, so that it is neither too thick nor too clear; and around this implement, here is its form:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés IIII jors ou V Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place on the head a cloth where the medicine is applied, as much as would fit on a spoon, and put the instrument over all the medicine onto the eye; and let the patient lie on his side so that saliva and mucus flow from his mouth into the medicine without it going down his throat; then hold your hand over all the medicine and press it onto the eye for half an hour until you see it absorbed and the irritation of the medicine subsides. And if you wish, take cotton and wrap it around some instrument, moisten the cotton in the medicine, and apply the instrument with the cotton to the eyelid, so that the cotton sticks to the eye; do this often as needed for the cautery to be complete, then leave it to dry, and after four or five days remove it. If you need to restart the cautery with the medicine, start again, and after the cautery wipe around the eye with cotton wrapped in butter and clean what is around the medicine; and rinse it with cold water, and gargle until he is well.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en I pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait I estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This cure is more effective than incision or cautery; if it is treated by fumigation according to this method, take calamus and hyssop and origanum and rue and chamomile and wormwood and similar herbs, and gather them all in one pot or some of them, and add water, and boil; and the pot should be well sealed with strong clay, and inside the pot there should be an instrument made as follows:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	And it should be made of silver or copper, and place one end in the mouth of the patient until the vapor rises to the affected area through the vein, until the affected area is necrotized; then repeat often, until the affected area dries up, and beware that you do not perform this at the beginning of the onset of a hot abscess, for many things may happen; and do not do it except during the decline of a hot abscess.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	And if this instrument is not present, take a chain and place inside the head an eggshell so that the mouth of the patient does not become too hot; for the eggshell does not let the vapor weigh down the mouth, and this is both good treatment and safe.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou I morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge I fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren I estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Many times a fish bone or some other thing gets stuck in the throat; therefore, you must extract what you can see, and press the tongue with sunlight all over the instrument so that you can see the object moving; and for what is not clear and remains in the throat, you should make the patient vomit as if the food is cooked in the stomach; perhaps this will expel the stuck thing through vomiting; or have the patient swallow a piece of sponge, or a piece of wool, or a lettuce root, or a dry bread crumb; tie a thread to the sponge and then have it swallowed; when it reaches the spot, it will stick to the object, and then pull out forcefully; if these methods do not work as we mentioned, take an instrument made of lead according to this form:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	And let the instrument be curved at the tip so that it may more easily enter the throat, and hold the tip upwards; and beware not to touch the epiglottis, nor push the bone in; and move slowly that the patient may place the instrument, for if he is moved when the thing is sharp; if you push down, do so evenly along the entire length of the instrument.
de la sansue de la gorge	of the blood from the throat
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	Sometimes the blood is treated, as I said in the division, by curing it with medicines; and when this does not help, then examine the patient's throat in sunlight, pressing the tongue with the instrument that I told you about.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	And if you see the blood, draw it out completely with a small hook or with fine forceps.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	And if that does not work, take a hooked cane and insert it into the patient's throat, then place a hot iron on the hook of the cane, and do this repeatedly.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	And if the patient is to be treated with water all day.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	Then take a full bottle of cold water and pour it into the mouth, allowing it to be swallowed, and move it with your hand frequently; and as soon as the blood feels the water, it will fall.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	And if it does not fall as we have said, then fumigate the patient with asafoetida using the instrument I mentioned for the fumigation of grapes; do this many times, for it will fall without delay.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	And the method of fumigation is that you take one pot which has live coals, and cover it with a perforated lid, in which there is an aperture for the instrument's tube; then pour your fumigation into it, and have the patient place their head at the end of the tube, and close their mouth so that no smoke escapes but goes only to the blood; and now the blood will fall out, and if it does not fall, restart the fumigation many times; and allow the patient thirst, and eat salted and sour things, and do not drink water; and then by this governance it will be necessary for it to come forth.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	And the form of the instrument with which one treats the blood, when it can be seen, resembles curved tongs for entering the throat; and it has the appearance of a bird's beak, and there is roughness like a file, so that what it grasps, it cannot let go; and here you see the shape:
li chapistres des apostemes	the chapter on abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	There are many types of abscesses, according to what the memory brings forth later in this book, and they differ in perforation and size; and this is in two ways, one of which is in its form itself, and from those it holds moisture.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	And the second way is according to the places where they are in the body.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	for abscesses of the head are different from those of the fundament, and abscesses in soft tissues are different from those that occur in joints, and each has its own judgment in treatment.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	And there are abscesses that one must not pierce until the boil is dead according to its completion; and there are others that should be pierced when they are hardened, and do not die off according to their completion, such as those near joints.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	For when abscesses come near joints, and it is left until it is thoroughly rotten, by chance the ligaments and nerves of the joint may be corrupted, which is the cause of contraction in that limb.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	When the abscess is near the principal limb, and if you delay puncturing it until it is dead, it will harm the principal limb; when it is near the fundament, puncture it as soon as it dies; but do not pierce an unripe abscess before complete digestion, except for one near the fundament, so that it does not rot completely, become elongated inside, and cause a fistula; and cannot heal in the long term.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	And you must know the time for puncturing an abscess that is dead according to its completion, and this is when the pain has subsided, the fever has abated, there is a decrease in pain and redness, softening at the head of the abscess, and other signs; and it is necessary to perform the puncture where the abscess depends most, and where it appears mellow; and the puncture should be long on the body, and if the abscesses are on the hands or feet, in joints and nerves and arteries, and in all places equally where there is no thinness.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	In cases of bleeding, according to that member.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	And when an abscess is in the flesh, it is better to wait until it is confirmed to be fully digested before performing puncture, as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	For if you puncture it before that time, the body of its venom will be elongated, and it will be full of much filth; and by chance its lips and depth may harden.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	And if there is an abscess that should be punctured according to the width of the body, according to what the limb requires.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	And you should treat small abscesses with small punctures; and large abscesses with large punctures, and many incisions according to the size of the abscess; and for such abscesses that require cutting deeply, and excising; when they become as hard as leather and are softened, it is necessary to do as with boils: and there are some that are cut into three angles, and there are others that are cut like the leaf of myrtle, as in the case of arm abscesses; and there are those where a round incision is made, and other types of cuts and similar excisions.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	Those who have a superficial and small abscess should be thoroughly punctured by you; and when the abscess is large, and it has collected much pus, and you pierce it, do not extract all the pus at once, but extract some of it; then stop up the abscess until the next day, then extract something again; do this gradually over many times, until all the pus comes out; similarly if the patient is weak in constitution, or a pregnant woman, or small children, or old men who are feeble.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	For the pus sometimes spurts out suddenly with the release of the pus, which might cause the patient to die, and you would not hold yourself responsible for it.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Avoid this chapter with great caution, and when you have punctured your abscess, clean the wound and check if the abscess wound is small; if it is a simple incision, then apply linseed or old cotton dressings; and if there are large abscesses with many openings, then place a dressing in each opening so that they come together; and if you have cut into the skin around the abscess, and you have sewn it up, then fill it with dry lint or linen shreds without moisture, and tie it for three days; then remove it, and treat it with ointment until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	And if bleeding occurs during your work, then administer cold and soothing water, and wet the cloth, and apply it to the bleeding area repeatedly.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the bleeding persists, administer treatment and care, and use the powders that I have mentioned earlier in this book. If it is winter and the area where the abscess is located is very nervous, then you must place tents and cloths moistened with wine and hot oil; and if it is summer and the area is fleshy, then you should apply cloths wetted with water and oil, or with cold wine and oil, until the third day, as we have said. Then open the abscess and wipe and treat it properly until it is healed.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	And one must know universally in the treatment of abscesses: I have told you how one should proceed with the treatment of abscesses, and here is the chapter.
des soros	Of sweat
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	For small abscesses on the head come in various forms that are like the webbing of a goose's foot, and there are many similarities.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	There are some that are fatty and have moisture like pus; and there are others that are hard and stony to the touch, and there is no doubt unless the artery opposes it.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	And the work on the waist is such that you must test all the instruments called "entromissoire," of which the form follows hereafter, as to what it contains.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	For if it contains moisture, then he cuts it from above along its length.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	And when the moisture is emptied out, then scrape without leaving any part of the skin that contained the moisture, for it returns quickly if anything is left behind; then soak cotton in Egyptian ointment, if it is available; if not, use water and salt, and apply to the wound, and leave it until the next day; and this will heal what remains from the night.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then restart with the cotton as before on the second day, and continue on the third day, until you are sure that nothing remains from the night; then treat the wound with appropriate ointment until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	And if the abscess is in fatty tissue, cut it according to this form, lengthwise; and pour on your ointments, and peel it all around, and apply all your care to draw out from under the skin where it lies; and if an artery obstructs you, do as I told you afterwards.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	And do the same for an abscess if it contains stones, cutting and curing as I have told you.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	And when cutting into a stony abscess and moistening it, it is easier because they have little blood.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	And if some of these abscesses are in the head where there is no moisture, and among these were the abscesses that I cut from an old woman's head; and I found the abscess like a hard stone, rough and white, and could not break it; and if one had struck any part of it, they would have as easily made a wound as with a stone.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	In other abscesses coming to the head, whether those that come to the heads of children and at the roots of the ears, the incision should always be made as low down as possible, so that the pus may exit; and treat them as is appropriate.
des scrophules	scrofulas
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	This type of abscess often occurs in the neck, and sometimes under the armpits, and also in other places on the body, and they are very painful, and grow one next to another.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	And each scrofula is properly within its own area, as the knot and the head abscess are, as we have said; and there are many varieties of these scrofulas.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	There are some that contain moisture, and there are others that are malignant and do not wish to obey healing.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	In the one that you see has good disposition to touch, and is similar in color to the skin, and soft on all sides and is not hard against the neck arteries or veins, nor deep; then it is necessary for you to cut above it, and peel the skin from each part, stretch the two lips of the wound with forceps if you need them, as we have said regarding abscesses on the head; and make small cuts and be sure not to cut the nerve or vein, and do not let the scalpel be sharp or cutting too deeply, so that your hand does not slip, and do not see too far ahead, lest you cut what you should not.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	And if you cut the vein or artery, and it does not allow you to work on it, put in the wound vitriol ground up, or some powders that staunch blood, and hold the wound; and leave it until the abscess is calmed, and the wound softened, and then begin to treat it.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	And when the blood is clotted, then return to your work, until you complete it; then seek with your proper instrument if there remain any small scrofulas, and cut them out and clean them.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	And if there is a large vein at the root of the scrofula, then it is not right that you should cut this scrofula at its root, but tie it off with strong double thread, and let it fall away without harm; then fill the wound with old cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, and then treat it.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	And if you cut out the whole scrofula, then you must bring together the two edges of the wound and suture them now, since there is no excess tissue due to the size of the scrofula.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	It is necessary for you to focus on cutting the root of it, extracting the pus, and suturing as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For scrofulas that contain excess tissue, pierce where it appears to be most decayed; and treat the puncture as previously described, allowing for drainage, then administer treatments with ointments and similar remedies so that what remains of the corruption decomposes; and when the wound is thoroughly cleansed, cure it with healing ointment until it is healthy.
de squinance	of squinting
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The ancients spoke and wrote about the treatment of the throat; but I have never seen anyone in our land who performs it, and this is their writing of their words.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en II amandres.	For those who have squinting, it is necessary that the slit in the throat which is called "epiglottis" be removed; and one should not help them with this, because all the veins and the flesh of the patient are affected by hot abscesses in the mouth, or in the throat, or in both glands.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the illness is in the windpipe, it is necessary to cut the epiglottis to avoid the danger of strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige; et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	It is therefore necessary, when we wish to cut the epiglottis, that we make a small incision across III circles or IV, between the II circles or according to the size of the incision on the surface, not in the cartilage; and those parts are suitable for the section of the epiglottis where there is no flesh, and the vessels are long from end to end.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit; et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix; et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	And if the master is fearful, he should stretch the skin of the neck for its entire length, then cut through until he reaches the trachea; and avoid the blood vessels, if you see any, and then cut the surface as we have said; and it is demonstrated by the section of the phlegm in the trachea which flows out from the place that is ruptured, and by the loss of voice; and leave the wound open for a while.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les II levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the hour has passed for which strangulation is feared, bring together the two edges of the wound of the heart, and suture entirely without the cartilage; then administer medicines that promote flesh growth until it is healed.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Albucasim states that one should not do this until the throat is completely obstructed, and the patient is judged to be dying, and death approaches.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort; et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee; et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	Then cut the epiglottis because the patient cannot breathe, and he breathes through the wound, thus saved from death; and for this reason the elders commanded to leave the wound open until the malice of the illness passes, which takes three or four days, and then they command to sew up the wound and clean it until it is cleaned; and I will tell you what I saw.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon; et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	I saw that a young lady took a knife and stuck it in her throat, and cut part of the veins there; and I was called to cure her, and found her as if dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I uncovered the wound and found the blood that had come out, and I saw clearly that she had not cut any vein or main artery of her throat, and the flesh was issuing forth from the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee; et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition; por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	I hastened and stitched the wound, and treated her until she was healed; and nothing happened to the lady but that she lost her voice for a time, and returned later to her senses; therefore I say that in cutting the epiglottis there need be no fear.
de la grosse gorge	of the large throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes; et est selonc II manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	This abscess is called a "hernia of the throat," and it is a large abscess in the shape of a bean, and it occurs frequently in women; and it exists in two manners: natural and accidental; the natural one does not have a head.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere; et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire: se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point; et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And the accidental one exists in two manners, of which one is similar to our fatty tumors, and the other manner is similar to an abscess that comes from a vessel; and there is fear, and it should not be treated by cutting except in the case where it is small, and you prove and search throughout the interior: if you find it as our fatty tumor, and it cannot be drained through any vein, then cut it out, just like one cuts out tumors, and remove all its covering if there is any; and examine thoroughly, and treat it as necessary until it is perfectly healed.
des nous	from us
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances; et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	We have many ways, of which I will describe all the similarities; and now it is necessary for me to speak about all the differences that exist between us and them.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that after the fever and heat persist until the boiling is past, and the putrefaction is completed; then the fever and heat rest.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros; et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	With us there is no heat or fever or pain, and it contains a swelling, which is its own sac and matches the color of the skin, and begins like a pimple, and grows large; and they are similar in appearance, either hard or moist, and many colors are as I have said in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	It is necessary when you come to the treatment of the nose that you first examine and inquire about all the instruments which are called "entromissoire", according to how their form will appear in the chapter which comes after.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme; puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	And the manner of investigating abscesses of the nose is that you take where it is most moist in the abscess, and press with your fingers little by little, until you know that the instrument has pierced the core, according to the size of the abscess; then remove the entromissoire, and be careful not to use excessive force.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes; et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout; et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	If moisture flows out when it runs, whatever color it has, proceed as I have said for other abscesses; and if after the entromissoire no moisture comes out, know that it is fatty, then cut it in a cross shape, and take it with forceps, and lightly peel it on each side and be careful of the coat where it lies so you can draw it out whole with the nose; and if you cannot draw it out whole, then remove it piece by piece until nothing remains.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois; et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	For if anything remains there, the inflammation returns repeatedly; and if a little remains and the blood does not grieve, apply the wound with some corrosive powders and cleanse the wound, and place hot compresses to ease the abscess, and treat it with other methods until it is healed; and if the inflammation is severe, sew together the two edges of the wound, and treat it as one who generates flesh.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet II jors ou III, tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	And if the vein resists or another issue arises, hurry and apply a place treated with broiled vitriol, and leave it for two days or three until the wound becomes rotten, and let the blood boil; then return to cleaning what remains of the inflammation.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule; et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule; et sont de III manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	See here the forms of instruments used for probing, and they are of three kinds: large, medium, and small; and there are three square ones called "albaret," and one called "breb," which also come in three sizes: large, medium, and small, to encircle abscesses from fistulas; and they are like the needles used to sew sorceries, and are made of brass yellow, or iron, or silver, and those that are yellow are more valuable, and for encircling the curves of fistulas, black lead is more effective; and they come in three sizes: large, medium, and small, according to the width of the openings.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi; et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	The forms of hooks are of many similarities, as you see here: large, medium, and small; and there are hooks that have two curves in three ways likewise; and there are hooks that have three curves, and they are also in three ways; and there are hooks that have two curves, and hooks with only one curve, and they are in three ways; and all these are necessary in their place.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf; et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes; et sont de III manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois; et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus; et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	The tip of these for cutting is sharp, and there are some that cut only from one side, so as to peel the skin, so that when opening an abscess, neither the vein nor the nerve is cut; and these intramural ones have alembics suspended by handles, so that the patient does not feel them during the incision of abscesses; and they are in three ways: large, small, and medium-sized, as you see; and one uses them only in soft tissues such as legs, arms, breasts, and similar areas; and sometimes one makes another instrument small, resembling the rind of a citron, according to this form, which stops bleeding:
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	and it is sometimes placed at the site suitable for cutting veins, and arteries, and sometimes follows this large form:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme; et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	Sometimes the testicles of some men swell when they begin to be corrupted, so much that they seem like women's breasts; and remain ugly and swollen, and whoever wishes to treat them must proceed according to this form from line b to g:
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures; de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.; puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif; et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	Then scrape off the fat and apply medicine that promotes flesh growth to the wound, then bring together the two edges of the wound into a seam, and treat it until it is healed; and if the testicle hangs down due to its size being like women’s, make two incisions above it with similar cuts; so that one end connects to the other at both ends, as shown in this form from line b to line g; then scrape off the skin between the two edges, remove the fat, and proceed as we have described for suturing and powders, and what is necessary for treatment until it is healed; and if it is not healed, or the incision has not been fully made because the patient does not want to rest, or due to excessive bleeding, you should fill the wound with cotton soaked in a caustic ointment; leave it until it consumes the remaining flesh and fat, then treat it until it heals.
des apostemes des asselles	abscesses of the buttocks
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	These abscesses that appear under the buttocks are hard forms of scrofula with sides, and there are some that contain moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Those that contain moisture should be incised according to this form, from line .b. to the line .g.:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when all the pus in the abscess is drained, fill the wound with old cotton, and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton, and treat it with ointment appropriate for healing until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscess resembles a scrofula, then incise it as we have said for scrofula incisions, and if the wound produces pus, then treat it with cauterization as we have said before.
de la routure de l’artere	Of the rupture of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme; et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont; et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans; et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	When the artery is ruptured and the skin above it is sealed, abscesses often occur; similarly, this happens with a swollen vein and an abscess. And when you recognize it as being due to the artery, the abscess will be long and deep; and when you feel it with your fingers, you can sense its firmness; and when it is caused by the vein, it appears soft and diffused; and it is foolish to cut this abscess, especially when it is under the armpits, at angles, on the neck, and in many other places, and it is very large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc; puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte; puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples; puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme; puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient; puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit; puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil; et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus; puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez; puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	It is necessary to avoid treatment with iron, and especially for those who are affected by swelling of the artery, make an incision above the skin longitudinally; then work around the veins with hooks, and carefully separate the artery from the tissues until it is exposed; then insert a needle underneath it, piercing it through to the other side, and tie off the artery with a double thread in two places as I have taught you for extracting the two arteries in the temples; then prick the area between the two ties with an intermediate instrument so that blood comes out which was inside, and free the abscess; then treat with a poultice until the ligature falls off; if the abscess is due to swelling of the vein, use your hand to mark the part of the abscess on all sides of the skin, then insert the needle underneath where you marked it with your hand, pierce it, and tie one thread double so that you pull it from the other side; then tie off the abscess as I have said in two places with both ends of the threads; if you fear that the thread might break, place another needle all along under the entire length of the first incision through the abscess, and secure the threads in four places; then cut the abscess until excess matter comes out, then cut away any excess flesh and leave what is tied up; then apply a moist cloth soaked in wine and oil, followed by applications and ointments until it heals.
des apostemes des ners	abscesses of the nerves
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	Just as abscesses occur in the artery and vein, abscesses also affect the nerves when they are injured, or from excessive labor, and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor; et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur; et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction; et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	And this happens more often in the shoulders and elbows, and at all places where there are joints, and these are severe abscesses, and their color resembles the color of the skin, and they cause intense pain; and when they are pressed firmly, the patient feels pain, but it is not throughout the body, but rather near the heart; and it does not move forward or backward, nor up or down, and those that occur in joints should not be cut with a knife: for fear of causing contraction; and those that occur on the head or forehead, make an incision through the skin to the spatumile.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine; et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the abscess is small, hold it with pliers and cut it at its root; and if it is large, suspend it on a lancet, then skin it, remove it, and close the wound with stitches, treating it until it heals.
des grosses boces pendans	large hanging mouths
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans; et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	Sometimes it happens in the belly and nowhere else, and it is called a "fungus" by its resemblance to mushrooms, and the root is subtle, and the mass is large; there are small ones and very large ones; I saw a person who had two of them in their belly that looked more like fungi than anything else, and there was no difference, they were white, had fine roots, and were split open, and moisture corroded them quickly.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine; si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	I weighed them and found in one eighteen ounces, and in the other six ounces, and when working with incisions you must look to see if the patient is moist, and the color of the artery is white and moist and has a delicate texture; then cut it with a broad spatula, and have the cautery by fire ready at hand.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer; et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors; et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	For when cutting there are often excessive hemorrhages, and if the blood flows too much, then quickly apply cautery; and if you see the patient frightened and afraid of the iron incision, take a well-made linen thread, tie it around the artery as we have said, and leave it for two days; then restrain it, and do not stop tying the linen thread until you cut the artery, and proceed carefully; and if the roots are thick, be cautious about cutting them directly because of the risk to the abdomen, but you can safely cut half of it, then cauterize so that it does not regrow; then treat the wound, and be careful not to cut the tendon which is red in color and has poor sensation and is attached by ligaments.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For this is an embedded abscess, and I will come to the treatment of ulcers next.
quant li boude ist fuer	when the swelling subsides
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit; et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	If the appearance of the swelling comes from a cautery on a wound or a cut on the surface, and it is on the belly and there are some boils, as happens in other ruptures, whether due to blood that flows from veins or arteries according to what precedes, or due to gas; and if this is from a rupture of the surface and an issue from the belly, then the color of the abscess resembles the color of the skin, it is a light matter without pain, and clear in various issues.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if this is due to an issue from the intestine, then it is more diverse, and when one presses on both sides, it distends, and then returns, and perhaps it becomes hard, and greatly enlarges at the entrance of the bath and with much labor.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit; et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	And if it is due to moisture, it is a light matter, and clearly apparent when you press it with your hand, it does not resist much; and if it is due to blood, it becomes evident through these signs of large and hard abscesses, and they are fixed according to a certain quantity; and if it is due to windiness, it is soft upon touching, and the work consists in observing whether the appearance is that of arterial or venous blood, or windiness.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	It is necessary that you leave the treatment.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	For there is doubt and fear about it, as I told you in the chapter on abscesses, concerning the artery and the vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude; puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine; puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz; puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine; se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre; et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit; et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier; puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi; ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit; et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	And if the appearance is that of the intestine or the bowel, it is necessary to command the patient to hold their breath, and lie completely straight, then incise all around the swelling; then have him lie supine between your hands, then go around the area you marked throughout the span; then extend half of the abscess above to the large hook; then bind it tightly with a strong thread or a strong silk cord, so that the skin is drawn tight; then work on the extended part of the abscess over the bandage, and place your index finger inside to find the intestine; if you find it caught in the bandage, release it and bring the intestine out of the belly; and if you find the bowel, take it with a hook and cut off the excess; and if the artery or vein opposes, proceed gently around, then return to your work and take two needles, place two external threads, and put the two needles crosswise to pierce where you need to; then stretch the abscess in four places over the needles, and if necessary, remove the needles when they have done their job, leaving the area until it has become soft and rotten, then cut away the dead tissue; or cut it off when it is thin and rotten, then treat it as needed and heal the abscess as we have described; then draw out any blood or moisture that you find, and treat the wound appropriately, and seal the area.
dou chancre	of the ulcer
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	We have said in the division about the similarities of ulcers and how one should treat them with medicines, and how one should avoid treatment with iron; we say that an ulcer begins in a moist environment, and great caution is required in its cure. The ancients stated that when ulcers are in places where they can be scraped out as in the case of ulcers found in the breasts, on the thigh, and in similar areas, one should completely remove them at their onset; but when they are large and old, it is not appropriate to approach them, for I have never seen anyone heal such cases.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide I boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the treatment, when it is in a place where it can be removed as we have said, is that you purge the patient of black bile if necessary; then make the patient fast if there is obvious overfullness, then position the patient properly to carry out the work; then apply your instruments around the ulcer and remove all hair from around it completely without leaving anything behind; let the blood flow freely until it stops on its own, and press firmly with your hand or some object if the bleeding continues against incising an artery or vein; then treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
de ydropisie	of hydropsy
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer: lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	We have already described in the division the appearances of hydropsy, and how the gathering of water is formed, and the signs of each appearance, and the cure which is made by medicines, and that which is cured by iron: this is called "eclites" alone; and one should not touch with iron in these two appearances: namely tympanites and yposarche, for it is a fatal thing; therefore when you treat this appearance of hydropsy which is called "eclites" with medicines, and the cure does no good, look to see if the patient is weak, or if he has another disease besides hydropsy, such as coughing and diarrhea and similar things; then do not touch with iron, for there is doubt; but if you see the patient of great strength, and he has no other disease than hydropsy alone, and he is neither too young nor too old, you should act thus: lift the patient straight up in your hands, and let the assistants press the belly by pushing out the water to the lowest part of the thigh, then take the spatumile according to this form:
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	And let there be cutting from two sides.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier; puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu; puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	With a point and make sure it does not penetrate so far that it can reach the intestines when inserted; then observe if the edema is directed towards the intestines: if so, you must cut above the navel three fingers' width below the ribcage; and if the edema is due to liver disease, your incision should be on the left side of the navel three fingers' width; and if it is due to bile, it should be on the right; it is not advisable for the patient to lie on the incision so that excess fluids do not flow to a weak area; then perforate the skin with the instrument and introduce it, lift your hand throughout the space between the skin and muscle as when flaying at the quantity of one fingernail or around this size; then puncture the tissue until the fluid comes out in the proper place, which is where the water resides, then draw it forth, and insert this instrument whose form follows:
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus; et II d’autre part, et I d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	And it is similar to a thin silver chain, and it is of iron or reed light, and has in the middle part one small hole; and on the side, three holes; and two on another side, and one on another; and the head is cut like a feather, and this is the form of the incision which the writer cuts the quill:
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort; mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit; fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	At the top is the alembic, so when the instrument comes to the liquid, it now descends on the instrument; empty then half or a third of it, for if you empty more than necessary at that hour, by chance the patient may die due to the resolution of his spirit from the weapon, or he falls into fainting, or approaches death; but empty according to the quantity of its strength, and according to what the conditions of the patient's strength signify, and his pulse; then draw out the instrument and retain the liquid, and it is now retained by the heart which plugs the hole that is above the syphon, of which I spoke, that you pierce according to this manner; then reinsert the instrument another day if you see the patient suffering from it, and extract a small quantity of fluid; do this for some days, and be careful not to overdo it but leave just a little bit of liquid.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	And if you doubt about the patient, and leave much fluid in him, then treat with burial or hot sand and by much sweating or bathing and in the sun, and make him abstain from drinking; and treat with drying medicines until he is well, and cauterize on the stomach and liver and spleen after the extraction of the fluid, as I said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	about the stiffness of the penis
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	Sometimes children are born who have no opening in the penis, or the opening is small, or it is not in its proper place.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	It is necessary to pierce it immediately with a very fine spatula according to this form:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	Then place a fine cloth over the hole, and bind it and keep it thus for three or four days, and when he wishes to urinate, remove the cloth, let him urinate, and then replace the cloth; and perhaps none may be needed, for the urine that comes forth does not leave it closed.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	He whose hole is small should be treated with the cloth of flax as we have said, and it will enlarge.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	Those who do not have the hole in its place are deformed, for some are born with the hole at the head of the penis, so they cannot urinate unless they lift their penis up; and they cannot copulate because the matter cannot reach the testicles, and this is a bad illness.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the method of the work is that the patient lies supine on his back, then place the staff under the head and hold it as thick as a goose's neck, so that the hole fits exactly in the middle, as it should; and be wary of blood loss which often occurs, and if it happens, stop it with what stops blood, and treat the wound until he is healed.
des pustules de la verge	pimples on the penis
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a I oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many times these blisters appear on the penis, and they have an ugly appearance; there are both malignant and non-malignant ones; it is necessary that you open them with a fine lancet, clean and treat them all, then apply cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment; then cure them with diafinicon ointment until he is healed.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	And if the ulcer is malignant, of putrid color and pus-producing, then you must apply cautery to it.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	When you have cut it, and if the ulcer is deep in the flesh, with part inside the skin and part outside, then you must remove the part of the ulcer that is inside first; and when it is adhered, heal it from the outside.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	For when you heal it all at once, the edges of the flesh are not certain to join properly, and blackness and corruption come into the flesh and in the groin; so it is necessary to remove everything that is black and corrupted, then apply a plaster made of pomegranate bark and vinegar, then continue healing until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	And if bleeding occurs, then apply the lunar cauterization according to this form:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars; et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	The cautery helps with two conditions simultaneously: namely, bleeding and corruption; and if the head of the penis is corrupted and retracted, then you must insert a lead tube into the urethra through which the patient can urinate. And when hair grows on the head of the penis, which happens to those who have not been circumcised, whether from a wound or an abscess, then you should scorch it with a sharp instrument until the ligaments are loosened and the head of the penis is freed entirely; and if this is difficult to describe, then you should scorch it slightly on the top of the penis and skin with a spatula; then carefully separate them and place a fine strip of wet linen between them.
de la circoncision	Of circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Circumcision is not like the separation of continuity as other wounds are; nevertheless, when we perform this work by our will, and especially on children, it is necessary that we do the best work, and the least harmful to health.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancient ones did not speak of circumcision for their children, because they did not use it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired through experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor I dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a II toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	For I have seen the majority of masters and seniors who perform circumcision around the foreskin, and forcefully, and in one quick motion; it is dangerous because there are two layers, and by chance one might cut the outer layer while leaving the inner untouched.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	Now it requires cutting, and the pain is doubled, and in the cleaning of the wound there is no certainty about the tip of the member; and in the cleaning of the nail by chance the iron may slip, and run the work, and many times they are born such that they do not need cleaning and I have seen it.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	From the cleaning that is done with force to the entire length of the thread I have found the goodness of the experiment, for the force cuts precisely both above and below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien; et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge; puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	For when you press your hand, cut evenly in one continuous motion; but the thread must be tight around the skin. And the manner of the first work is that you make the child, if he understands, think that you are not doing anything harmful by wrapping the thread around his member just once, and then cheer him up in every way possible; then hold it straight between your hands, and retie the threads under your feet so the child does not see them or any of the instruments. Then place your hand on the member and breathe over its head, and lift it upwards until the head of the member is exposed; then clean thoroughly from the accumulated dirt, then tie a knot with double thread below the knot, and tie it at the bottom to another point; hold it firmly between your two fingers at the second knot in the pouch and under the index finger. Cut between the two ties, then lift the head of the member quickly and bring it up; let the blood drip slowly, for this is best; place powder on top, cover with a piece of cloth glued together with a beaten egg yolk mixed with rose water, and good fresh oil, leave it like that until the next day, and treat him as needed until he is healed.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The form of the instruments for cleansing is as follows: the two heads should be blunt and should have edges that are as wide as the shaft evenly.
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	The error in cleansing is when the pus inside flows to the incision; then it is necessary that you extend it to your nail, just as one would for an abscessed area; and cut it evenly, and if you cannot hold it to your nail, then hold it with forceps, and then cut it.
Et s’il trespassent III jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	And if they have passed three days, and the part below the shaft is swollen, then wait until the abscess is sufficiently subsided, and gently scrape it; cut it as much as you can without harming the shaft, for this will do no harm.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Treat the area of a fresh wound with powder, which we have discussed in the chapter on powders, and if it affects the heart excessively, and it goes beyond measure, it will not harm; treat it as we have said until it is healed.
dou retenement de l’urine	from the retention of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division; et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e; et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	The retention of urine is due to the obstruction by a stone, or coagulated blood, or bladder inflammation, or dead tissue, or similar things, as we have mentioned in the division; and if the urine does not flow freely, and you see that the retention is caused by a stone located at the neck of the bladder, then it is necessary for the patient to be seated on their knees; place their feet on their back, and stretch their belly above the part behind the back, and have the patient pull in their abdomen as much as they can; this will constrict the neck of the bladder and force the stone upwards, thereby allowing urine to flow freely; if it does not come out as we have said, and the patient feels severe pain, then you must administer extraction using all the instruments known as "syringe," which has the following form: made of fine light silver threads like a bird's feather; its tube should be half a palm in length, and it should be thin at the tip.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede; puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine; et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	And the method for urination is that you take a double thread and tie at the top a pouch of wool or cotton, and put the end of the thread into the syringe; then cut off the excess wool and push it up to the top of the syringe, then anoint the syringe with oil or butter and egg yolk infusion, and have the patient sit on a chair, and lubricate the bladder and penis with moist oil, olive oil, and warm water; then gently insert the syringe into the penis until it reaches the base of the penis, then bend the penis towards the body; then push the syringe forward to the bladder, and the patient will feel the emptying sensation coming from that point, which should not deviate from this order unless where it is guided by it is twisted; then stretch out the thread all the wool bit by bit, and the urine follows along the wool, then pull it out, and let the urine flow freely; and repeat with the syringe until the bladder is empty, and the patient feels relieved.
des maladies de la vessie	diseases of the bladder
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When pus or blood comes to the bladder, and putrefaction is assembled there, and you wish to administer liquids and medicines, use all the instruments which are called "clepsydre," and this is its form:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus: II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est; et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	It is closed and has III openings: II from one side, and I from the other, as you see; and the place where the medicine enters should be such that it stops up well the tube without addition, so that moisture can be drawn out and inserted when needed; and when you wish to administer medicines into the bladder, put the head of the catheter in the moisture, and draw with the drawer which is inside; thus you will draw the moisture to the catheter, and then firmly push back the drawer; then the moisture will enter and reach the bladder, so that the patient feels it; this is the form of the subtle enema by which one administers an enema to the bladder: it is as follows:
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie; et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	It is of silver or lead, and the head is higher; and behind the chest where the cord falls; then take a sheep's bladder and put in the liquid with which you wish to use for enema, then tie between the two breasts tightly with strong double thread, and heat the pot of that liquid over fire; then place the tip of the enema in the rectum, then squeeze your hand on the bladder gradually, until the patient feels that the liquid has reached the bladder; and if you do not have a bladder, take a piece of parchment, make a circle, and pierce it roundly around; then tie a strong thread through these holes, then join the circle as one joins a sieve, and put inside what you wish of oil and water and liquid, and attach to the instrument; and do as you did with the bladder, by squeezing your hand gradually until the liquid reaches the bladder.
de la piere	of the stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have already discussed in the division the methods of stones and their extraction along with medicines; and I have stated the difference between a stone formed in the kidneys, and all the signs, and in which stone one should operate for cutting; and in the bladder, and in the penis; and I will tell you clearly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont IIII ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I say that the stone which is formed in the bladder happens more often to children, and this is a sign that urine jumps from the bladder similar to sharp gravel; and it appears hairy, and the patient's penis itches, and he can urinate many times, and then it becomes difficult; and with much of these jumps the foundation fails; and healing for children until they are four years old is easier, and very hard in the elderly, and moderate for young adults, those who are between youth and old age; and the cure is lighter for those who have large stones than for those who have small ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	And when we come to the treatment, it is necessary first to clean the patient with an enema, to draw out all the feces that are in the intestines.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	For it sometimes obstructs in seeking to remove the stone.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche dedens; se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	Then take the patient by the feet and raise him up and move to the rear so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, and sometimes comes out from a high place; then make him sit between your hands prepared, and his hands should be behind his thighs so that the bladder is entirely inclined downward; then seek it and touch inside; if you feel the stone in the space, hasten now to cut into the stone.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	And if it does not fall upon touching from all sides, then moisten your index finger with oil from the left hand, if the patient is female, or your middle finger, if the patient is a fully grown male; and put it in his anus, and seek the stone, and when you feel it with your finger, pull it to the neck of the bladder; then press upon your finger, and push it out where you wish to cut.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	And instruct the minister to press the bladder with his hand, and tell him to spread out his right hand over the testicles, and with his left hand remove the skin which is underneath the testicles in the area where the incision will be made; then place the spatula cutting instrument, which is its form:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans; par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	And make an incision between the testicles and the anus, not in the middle but towards the left side of the navel; and let it be straight over the stone, and both sides should immediately reach the anus, and let the cut be wide at the top and narrow inside according to the size of the stone, so that pressing may cause the bottom part near the anus to open without effort; and note that there are some stones with angles and edges: these are difficult to remove; and there are others below, resembling a thorn, round, from which removal is easy.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole; et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	For him then where there are angles and margins, make the size larger; and if it does not jump, you must clamp with pincers which are like a file at the top, to move the stone so that it does not escape; or you put under the instrument curved at the top; and if you cannot manage it thus, then enlarge the hole slightly, and if the blood decorticates, clamp it with vitriol; and if there is more than one stone, first push out the largest into the bladder neck, then cut above, then draw forth forcefully, and the smaller ones after if there are many.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	And if it is very large, then it must be watched over, and a larger wound made.
Car II choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces; et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	For two things happen to the patient: either he dies, or the urine comes immediately where the flesh cannot heal; but still strive to draw it out, or cut with pincers piece by piece; and when you have completed your work, fill the wound with incense and aloe and dragon's blood, and bind it, and place over it a moist cloth in oil and wine, or in oil and rose water and cold water, to soothe the hot abscess; then lift the patient onto his shoulder, and do not loosen the bandage until the third day.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you release it, wash the area very well with oil and water, then treat it with diafinicon ointment and basilicon ointment until it is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit; puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	And if abscesses and corrosion come to the wound, and clots of blood in the bladder, which cause retention of urine, which is recognized in this manner: put your finger into the wound and extract that blood, for if it remains there, it will corrupt the bladder; then wash the wound with water and honey and wax, and help it in all ways you know until it is healed; and every time you treat it, tie the two thighs together, and apply medicines to the site.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	And if the stone is small and it is in the passage of the penis, preventing urination; then treat this as I say thus, that you cut it many times, but spare the cutting by this treatment.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	I have already tried this method.
Pren I foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a III angles fichiees en I tison:	Take an iron fork in the shape I describe and attach it with three prongs to a torch:
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	Then take some thread and tie it around the penis below the stone so that it cannot move back into the bladder; then gently insert the fork into the penis until it reaches the stone; and turn the fork with your hand against the stone bit by bit, until you can pierce the stone from the other side; urine will soon come out, then press your hand on what remains of the stone inside the penis.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides; et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	It is immediately broken, and the stone passes with the urine, and the patient is cured; and if you cannot do this for some reason that prevents it, tie one thread below the stone and another above, then cut the penis straight through the stone between the two threads, then extract the stone, untie the thread, and clean the congealed blood in the wound; and treat until he is healed.
de la piere des femmes	of the women's stone (kidney stone or similar condition)
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por III choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	It rarely happens that a stone occurs in women, and if it does happen at any time, the treatment is difficult, and it is forbidden for three reasons: one is that perhaps the woman is a virgin; and the second is that we cannot find a knowledgeable woman who will expose herself to doctors, especially when she is chaste.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere; et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	And the third way is that by chance one cannot find a woman well knowing in this art of hands; and the fourth way is that the stone of the woman is more firm than the stone of the man, so it must be cut deeper, and there is great fear. And if necessity arises to this, then you must take a midwife well knowing, and at all costs find one, and if you do not find one, by no means seek an ordinary surgeon; and present her a basin wise in women's life, or a woman who knows part of the art, and command that she does what you command regarding the inquiry about the stone; and look very well whether the woman is a virgin: then it must put her right hand at the fundament and search for the stone; and if she finds it, constrain it under her right hand, and recommend that she puts her right hand where the patient's sore is, and seeks and presses with her left hand strongly on the bladder.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite; puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	If she finds it, she must move it gradually from the entrance of the bladder down to below, until it reaches the root of the thigh; then cut above the stone at the root of the thigh opposite the middle of the rectum where it is prepared for movement and feel the stone in that part; and do not move her foot above or below the stone, and make the incision small at first; then push the knife into the incision, if you feel the stone enlarge the wound until the stone can come out, and know that there are many types of stones: namely small and large and rough and smooth, long and round, and those with edges.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	know the signs to understand the outcome.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre; et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	And if the blood flows, place powdered vitriol at the site and hold it for an hour until the bleeding stops; then return to your work until the stone is out, and have the instruments I told you about for extracting stones from people to help in your work; and if the blood flows again, and this is from the artery that has been cut, place powder on the site and use lint and bandages, and do not restart the procedure, and leave the stone and do not try to extract it, as the patient might die; then treat the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of the blood is appeased, and the swelling subsides, then return to your work, until the stone has been expelled.
de hernie carnouse	of flesh hernia
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit I autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	Aqueous ramus is nothing other than a collection of moisture or white matter, which is separated from the heart of the testicle, containing the egg; and it is called "white matter," and sometimes it is properly in the membrane of the egg, so one thinks that it is another egg; and this occurs in the skin of the testicle between the white matter we have mentioned; and this does not occur without pain.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the generation of this aqueous humor is due to weakness that affects the testicles, and this matter spreads.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus; et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	And sometimes it comes from percussion on the testicles, and this moisture has many colors: where its color declines to yellow, or is without redness, or black, or aqueous white, and this happens more often; and these are the signs to recognize this assembly, for if it is in the white pus as we have said, then the abscesses are abundant, I put long like the shape of an egg, and do not appear the testicles, for it has moisture all around.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef; et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	And if there is moisture in the proper tissue, then the abscesses are abundant with part of an egg, and for that one thinks it is another egg; and if the moisture is between the skin of the testicles and the white pus, then one feels it well; therefore when you wish to know the color of the moisture, then examine thoroughly all the intervening parts, as the form was described above.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to what comes after the introitus, judge what is inside.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz; puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions; puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir; puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue; et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when we treat it with iron, the patient should be bled according to our power and the fullness of his body; then lay him on his back upon something slightly elevated, and place many cloths under him; he should sit on his left side, and instruct the assistant to sit on the right, and extend the rod along one of the two ribs from the navel down to the groin; then take the sharp knife and cut the skin between the thighs longitudinally until reaching the area near the testicles, making your incision perfectly straight when cutting through the skin until you reach the white tissue, and peel it carefully as much as possible; then make a wide perforation in the white part filled with fluid, and drain all the liquid out, and place your fingers to close the wound once the fluid is drained; do everything precisely piece by piece with great care so that if not done properly, the fluid may return; if the testicle jumps from its position during work, then replace it back into its original spot upon completing the task on the white tissue; then join together both sides of the scrotum to form a seam, and treat it like other wounds until it is healed.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	And if you find the egg corrupted by some other illness, then it is necessary to tie off the veins that are suspensory, fearing the loss of blood; then cut the cord completely suspending it, and extract the egg, and treat it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset; et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	And if the abscess is formed in two parts together, know that these are two roots; cut the other part as you did the first equally, then wipe away the blood, and place linen soaked in rose oil in the wound; and put on another piece of linen soaked in wine and oil over both cords, and cover with doubled cloths, and bind it securely according to this form:
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier; et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers; si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	Then take two cloths, and wrap them with linen rags according to this appearance and sew them together at the waist of the breeches, one extending under the buttocks up to the back, and the other covering the groin area; and both ends should be secured in the belt loop; and sometimes this root is treated with cautery instead of iron cutting, so take a small knife-shaped cautery, cut into the skin around the cords, and heat it as we have said, until the white pus-containing surface is exposed; then take the cautery according to this form, and puncture that surface at the edges, and scorch it with this hot fine cautery:
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille; et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	And cut in all ways that you can, until everything is clear; and guard against the fire touching the eye; and know that this work is safer; and move carefully to prevent blood loss, and handle the operations delicately; and if anything goes contrary, such as an abscess or bleeding or other things, then treat what opposes you according to what was said before.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit; pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer; puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee; et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	And if the patient is fearful and does not wish to wait for this work due to its horror, then administer perforation as I tell you; and when you are certain by the signs we have mentioned that aqueous matter is there, make the patient sit on a raised seat; then puncture the abscess in the part below throughout the entire area, making the perforation long along the body; and let the openings be wide so that all the fluid can flow out freely; then place cotton over the area, bind it, and allow the remaining fluid to drain; if the white cloth does not allow the fluid to exit from the wound opening, then you must insert a feather or the instrument used for treating hydropics, as shown in the form above; enlarge the hole of the wound, and know that the fluid will return after about six months or close to it, and when it has collected again as before, thus the patient will pass his days.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the testicles
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse; et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	Know that in the section of this branch there are many fearsome conditions, for which it seems better to leave it as is; and I will tell you about the work and similar cases of the abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	I say then that many abscesses occur in the body, and especially in the testicles; and this is for a variety of reasons.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion; et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief; et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	This is known to be due to sour superfluity and fever spread to the testicles, or from impact; and the color of the abscess corresponds to the color of the skin; and there is no pain, but it is a serious abscess; and sometimes an abscess may be green, fearful, and stony, and of dusky color, and occasionally comes from obstruction of an artery or swelling of a vein.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois; et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	When it is due to an artery, it is known by the hot disposition of the abscess when you press it with your fingers; and it should not be touched.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars; et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	One who is affected by a swelling of the vein is known by its disposition and expression upon touching it with the fingers, and one can easily treat this condition similarly to others; and you should cut the groin artery, then place the egg upwards, and draw out the white substance, and release the suspensory ligament from all parts of the egg.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope; et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	If the egg is already solid with these new tissues formed, then it is necessary to draw out the egg and cut it; and if it is in the white substance or within the vessels, then it is necessary to release all of this area and cut it roundly.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the birth of the flesh is at the rear, then you must cut it all away, and extract the eye, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your work is complete, apply the wound with moistened wool in rose oil and wine, then treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the testicles
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait; et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	This is an abscess wrapped in a wrapping similar to a boil, with the softening of the testicles, and the patient suffers greatly when it moves; and the treatment for this disease is as dangerous as the previous one, yet we will tell you how to treat it, according to what the ancients did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment; puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples; puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief; puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues; puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions; car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz; si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	It is necessary that you make the patient sit on a raised seat, then put the suspensory of the scrotum down to your hands, covering all the vessels which are near the penis, and hold them firmly, and stretch them forcefully; then cut with a broad sharp spatula across the vessels, until they are exposed, and then skin from each side as we have said in the extraction of arteries that are in temples; then insert a needle where there is double thread, and tie it at the first place where the vein has come, and tie it again to the other end; then cut them straight through the middle according to the length of the body, and drain out the corrupted moisture; then treat the wound as with other ones where flesh buds fall off nourishing one of the scrotum; for by this there comes no harm, and if all the vessels come together at a point, it is necessary to draw the scrotum to all the vessels; so that the testicle does not lose its nourishment because of cutting the vessels, and they dry up and cannot be helped.
de la routure dou syfac	of the fracture of the cheekbone
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions; et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses; et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement; et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	The occurrence of this rupture is through a section that comes from the cheekbone, or an extension over the belly in the area of the groin, because the intestines descend from that fracture to one of the thighs; and this rupture is either from the cheekbone or from its extension, and these two manners come from many causes: by impact, jumping, lifting, or carrying heavy loads, and similar things; and the signs when it comes from an extension of the cheekbone are that they occur little by little over a long time, and do not happen suddenly; and the abscesses are equal up to the bottom because the cheekbone presses on the intestines.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs when it is from a section of the cheekbone are that they cause sudden pain at the beginning, and the abscesses appear differently, close to the skin, because of the exit of the intestines and the body withdrawing from the cheekbone.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And sometimes the intestines descend with the hernia, and are trapped inside, causing great pain for the patient, especially when they are constricted.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these iron treatments there is fear, because of which one must avoid them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir; puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes; puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc; puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir; puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars; puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille; et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement; et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz; puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz; puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars; puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne; et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi; et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant; puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	And the method of work is that you instruct the patient to push back the intestines into the wound with his hand if they can be retracted; then tie a bandage around his neck between your hands, lift the thighs; then extend the abdomen above, and cut all the skin from the groin down long; then insert hooks under the flaps of the waist according to what you need to open the wound, and make them such that the testicles can come out; then peel off the fatty tissue that is underneath the skin of the groin until the hard white fat tissue is uncovered on all sides; then insert your index finger into where the testicle lies, between the hard white fat tissue that is under the skin of the scrotum and the second layer of fat, and separate what is behind the testicle from the second layer of fat; and then move with your right hand inside the abdomen of the scrotum, extend the hard white fat tissue high to your left hand, lift the testicle up along the waist; and instruct the assistant to lift the testicle up and release what is tied at the back; and ask if any part of the intestines are wrapped around the hard white fat tissue, and if you find anything, put it under the abdomen below; then take a needle with a thick thread made of ten strands, and insert it into the rear part of the fatty tissue, which is behind the skin of the scrotum, after the waist, cut the threads that appear from the strands until there are four strands left; then arrange them one above the other in the shape of a cross, and tie up the fatty tissue about which we have spoken, which is under the skin of the scrotum, with a strong thread on two sides; then wrap around the threads of the strands tightly on both sides so that no worms that cause abscesses can enter the wound; and put back the bandage according to the first long bandage by two fingers of its length, and after these two bandages leave the fatty tissue under the abdomen one finger wide; and afterwards cover all the rest according to the roundness that the scrotum bears; then cut in the part which is under the skin of the scrotum until you reach the vein and the bowel, as we have said before; then apply moistened linen dipped in oil on the wound, and place back the bandage as instructed.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And sometimes the white skin we have mentioned is cauterized after the incision, out of fear of bleeding.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece; puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	For this happens often, and let the ligament heal by itself until it falls off; and if it delays in falling off, then soak it with hot water, and apply what we have said until it falls off; then treat the wound with another method until it is completely healed.
de hernie carnouse	of flesh hernia
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this case, I have never seen anyone dare to treat it with iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz; puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the ancients said that it is done like the condition involving the intestines, in such a way that you bind the vessels, above the waist lightly on top; then cut into them, and treat the abscess as we have described, until the vessels release; and treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres; et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent; et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert; et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere: et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois; et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac; et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre; puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines; puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	Sometimes a rupture occurs in the groin area, as we have said, and it is apparent; and no part of the intestines descends to the genitals, and if they do descend, it is an emergency that requires immediate attention at all times; and still, if it remains too long in this state, the wound or rupture will worsen until the intestines descend. This happens due to the extension of the groin area where the rupture occurs, as we have mentioned, because it becomes stretched, then softens and swells up visibly; and treatment for this is through cautery, as we have previously discussed; and sometimes it is treated with an iron in this manner: and that when the patient lies supine on their back between your hands, you cut around the swollen area of the rupture about three fingers wide; then extract the tissue beneath the skin carefully, then take the needle and place it over the visibly affected area of the groin; press firmly onto the abdomen, then sew up both visible sides of the groin wound over the head of the needle, sewing one side first and then the other; then remove the head of the needle without cutting more of the tissue or stretching the skin any further, as I have told you in the treatment of intestinal prolapse; then treat it like a regular wound.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when you cut the threads, then disinfect and treat the wound until it is healed.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The suture is constrained, and there is no appearance of it in the rupture, and the cauterization is cold in this place, and closer to salvation.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	of the softening of the skin of the genitals
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a III costures ou IIII fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	The skin of the genitals often softens in some men because the tissues inside become softened and appear milky; and when one wishes to treat it, make the patient lie on his back, then cut the softened skin over the natural skin; then join the two lips with a suture, and if you wish, sew off the excess softened skin along three or four sutures firmly; then cut between the sutures, and treat it as other wounds until it is healed, and remove the thread.
dou chastrement	of the chastisement
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	You should know that castration is condemned in our law, and for that reason I would prefer not to speak of it in this book; yet it is necessary for two reasons: one is that the physician must know how to respond when asked about it and how to treat it; and the other is because we often need to castrate certain animals to help us, such as goats and sheep and cats and other beasts.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	I say then that castration is performed in two ways: either by traction or by cutting.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	In the method where we perform castration by traction, we make the animal sit in hot water until the testicles become soft and hang down; then grasp them with your hand until they are retracted and you no longer feel them.
Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Of the castration of animals: it is necessary that you geld the beast, and press the skin of the testicles with your left hand, then tie the suspensory bandage, and cut each one at a single stroke when they have been well flayed; and leave some of the fat under the skin and the subtle fat which is on the vessels; and this method of castration is gentler than that which is done by traction, because in traction there may be left behind some part of the testicles, due to which the animal desires lust; then treat the wound until it is healed.
des hermofrodites	Of hermaphrodites
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	Hermpheidry is according to two manners in men: one is such that between the two testicles it has an opening as the figure of a woman's body, where there may be hair, and sometimes encircles the urine.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	And the other method is for women, and place upon the belly as with a rod and two eggs.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	And the treatment for a man and a woman is that you cut away the adjacent tissues and treat them as other wounds; in the second method, for men whose urine sprays over the skin of the genitals, there is no specific treatment.
de la tentigene	of the tension or strain
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	Tentigene is a tissue attached to the genital area, so much so that it is too deformed to look at; and some women have it as large as a hand, and this is its treatment.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	You should stain the excess of the tentigene with your hand or fingernails and cut it lightly; do not go too deep that blood comes out, then treat it as you would other wounds until it is healed; and for another tissue that grows at the entrance of the vagina, remove it, and sometimes it may bleed, and it resembles a quill, hence they called it "quill disease" by the ancients.
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	It is necessary that you treat it as we have said about tendinitis, and care for it until it is healed.
de erratique	erratic
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	It is erratic when the nature of a woman's body is not perceived, or the passage is small; and it is natural by birth, or accidental due to illness that has come upon her; or it is caused by flesh adhering, or from fine or thick phlegm, and formed in the belly, or ribs, or within, wherever it may be; and it prevents conception, childbirth, and perhaps menstruation; and knowledge of this is gained through examination.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	If the obstruction is close to appearing, then I desire it to be removed by your hands or straightaway.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	If it is a subtle syphilitic sore and it is near the two buttocks, hurry, and do as follows: place your two fingers together, and have the woman lie on her back with her legs spread; then stretch out the two buttocks fully, so that the subtle sore is exposed, and be over the suppositories; then take linen, and moisten it in oil, and put it on the area, and lay the woman face down each day, so she cannot move.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	And if the sore is hard and thick, then you should cut it with a scalpel similar to a myrtle leaf.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the suppository is flesh-based, suspend it on a needle and cut it; and have medicines that constrict bleeding, such as vinegar, dragon's blood, incense, mixed with plenty of egg white; then dress the wound with a strip of cloth wide enough so the wound cannot close; and thus treat it for an extended period, and dress the wound with a piece of dry linen; then continue treatment with other methods until he is healed.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	And when flesh is wounded in the marsh, it should be treated according to this method, except for embedded abscesses.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	For in the case of an embedded abscess in the marsh, one should not attempt to lance it.
des emorroides	for hemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	Hemorrhoids are openings of veins that often occur without cause, and when hemorrhoids become old, they harden; and I have already mentioned in the division their appearances, and the signs, and here I will say those that can be cured.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	I say that when hemorrhoids and hard lumps are perfectly formed in the marsh area, and they do not respond to sensation, then treatment with a cautery iron is not appropriate.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	Those who have the mouth of the boil, which can be felt, are those who can be treated by draining.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	Therefore, you must place the woman in a cold house, then stretch the altar with tongs, and cut it at its roots; then apply medicine to constrict blood flow, such as oak bark, dragon's blood, and incense, and similar things; then keep her feet against the wall for an hour, then immerse her in cold water; if bleeding occurs, have her sit in a decoction of sumac, pomegranate rind, gall, and similar substances; then take oatmeal, mix it with honey and oil, and make a poultice to apply on her back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	And if the bleeding stops, that is good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	If not, have the patient lie down and apply cupping to the back and breasts without injuring them; then take flax, and mix it with juice of plantain or agrimony with old wine, and apply it to the area.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the abscess has rested, treat the area with ointment until it is healed; and what is called "albathir" is red, and resembles a hard head, so it must be lanced as I have said about the thulul; then continue to treat it until it is healed.
des apostemes de la marris	for abscesses of the flesh
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	Many types of abscesses occur in the flesh, such as cankers and stone-filled abscesses and herpes and carbuncles and fistulas and hemorrhoids and hot abscesses, and many other diseases that I have mentioned in the division.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	It is therefore necessary for me to speak in this treatise about the hot abscess that comes in the marrow, which is not of the kind that bowe collects; and if you wish to know the work of iron, look to see if the abscess is sharp at the beginning of its arrival, and full of heat and fever, and becomes red if you can see it.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	Then do not hurry to pierce it, but let the abscess die down until the pain is eased; and then have the patient sit on a chair, and give him two small chairs where he can recline, and support his back and bring together his legs behind the thigh; and let his thighs be spread out, and place his arms under his knees, and tie them securely with a good bandage; then give him some medicine towards the right side, and administer the instrument used for treating the mouth of the marrow, which is described below; and it must be that when you wish to use this instrument, you insert its tip first to determine the depth of the marrow so that what enters into the instrument does not go deeper than necessary, and does not hurt the patient; and if the instrument is larger, it should cover the depth of the marrow with cloths so that the instrument does not cause pain; and it must be placed at the top of the instrument, and you should hold the instrument.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.	And when the abscess is open, and it is cut with a gentle hand, one must then slice off the top, the spatumile layer; and when the pus is emptied out, you should place in the wound moistened cloths soaked in rose oil or green oil; place the cloth towards the wound at the depth of the flesh, and above the flesh and on the finger use clean wool moistened with water or mallows boiled; then treat after two days of ointment application as needed, until it is healed; sometimes lift the flesh and the wound by enema of water and honey, and then with water in which roots of lilies and plantain are boiled for a long time; then return to the ointment treatment.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	And if the wound is placed in the flesh, you must avoid treating it with iron, but treat it as we have said in the section.
de l’enfantement	of childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	It is necessary first for the midwife to know the natural figure of childbirth, and the signs are when you see the woman pressing downward, and desiring to smell the air: then the child hastens to come forth; at that time you know that this childbirth follows the natural course, and the passage is under its head, and the afterbirth with it; and when you see these signs, it is fitting to press lightly on her belly so that the child comes out quickly; for as soon as it descends by its head, the afterbirth comes with it, and the mother is cleansed of her superfluities through proper care; and one who arrives otherwise does not come naturally.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	For it sometimes comes upon its feet, and comes forth with the body or the buttocks, and the hands, or it may come out on her belly, or from below, and is turned about by chance onto its neck, and in other evil positions; so it is necessary for the midwife to be wise and subtle in these matters, and wary of error and deception, and I will show you all the figures how one should help them.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	If the child comes out naturally on its head, and the woman gives birth with difficulty, and her strength is weak, then have her sit on a stool, where women usually hold; and prepare for her an ointment from oil or fenugreek cooked, and then apply between her two cheeks the small spatula which here is the form:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.	and cut the second membrane, and slice to the nail until the moisture inside comes out; and press the woman's belly so that the child descends, and if it does not descend, then it is necessary to enema the woman with fenugreek musilage mixed with sesame oil; then have her inhale and sneeze from condii, and keep her mouth and nose closed for an hour: now the child will come out.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	And if both hands issue forth, it is necessary that you reset them gently bit by bit; and if they cannot enter, place the woman on a chair, and raise her feet up high; then lift the chair off the ground, and hold the woman so she does not fall when lifting; and if the hands still cannot enter, and the child dies, cut the hands with the knife that is placed here before, extract the child, and reset them equally.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	of delivering the child onto its feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut; et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz; puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	When the child comes out on its feet, it is necessary to press it upwards; then turn it little by little until it is straight; then take one of its feet and stretch it little by little.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi; si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	When it jumps up to the thighs, then command it to be caught, and make it sneeze with cold water; if it does not jump out, if God wills.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it does not come out as we have said, then turn it little by little until it is in its natural position.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For then it comes out easily.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier; et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz; et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre; puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	And if it does not come out as we have said, take muscillaginous of altai, and sesame oil, and melted gum, and grind everything in the mortar; then place the woman's nature within this ointment and outside apply this salve, then make her sit in hot water up to below her ribs; when she is moistened below, give her a collyrium of myrrh, and put it underneath, and leave for an hour; then make her sit on the chair, then make her sneeze and hold her mouth and nose, and gently massage her abdomen, for now the child will jump out.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	of the delivery of the child upon his knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc; puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit; et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval; et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains; et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	When the child comes in this manner, place the woman's hands little by little on the ground; then she should lean back on her neck, and let her feet hang down, and lie flat on the bed; and bend her hands little by little, and then hold her hands on her belly, and remove the cushions beneath her, until she is prepared to go lower; and if the child does not come out, take her feet and move them apart, then lift her belly upward, then put your hands in; and bring out the child little by little; and instruct the woman to hold onto you as much as possible until the child comes out.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	of the delivery of the child who comes with one hand hanging out
I covient engignier a ramener la main: s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler; s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment; puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit; et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main; et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	It is necessary for the engineer to return the hand: if it cannot be returned, make the woman stand and walk; if she cannot walk, lay her on the bed, and straighten her legs completely; then apply the massage that I have described; and if she does not give birth, make her sit on a chair, then study how to return the hand; and according to the natural figure of the child, make her sneeze, and command her to grasp tightly so that the baby comes out.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	from the birth of the child on her neck, and have her hands spread out, and her face turned towards her mother's back
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement; et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc; et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	It is necessary for the baby to hold her hand, then turn it little by little, and move it gently; and when it is even, apply the natural massage of altitude and oil as we have said, then command her to move little by little; and when you have done this, make her sit on a chair, and command her to grasp tightly; and make her sneeze.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	in the same manner for the entire second part
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie; et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes; puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois: adonques si istra legierement.	When it comes to applying heat in this manner to the entire second part, cut the second part at your fingernail until the moisture is emptied; and if the fetus can move on its face and neck, cut from the mouth so that it is not obstructed and move the fetus; then place the child inside as it should be, and instruct the woman to grip a few times: then gently extract.
de l’issue des gemelz	on the outcome of twins
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent III ou IIII; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	You should know that twins often give birth multiple times, and sometimes three or four are born; and this is not a strange thing, it happens occasionally.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom; je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude; et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	Two are strange things, and do not live, if one can name them; I know that they multiply, and are separated by the surface which divides them, which is attached to the bud; and sometimes they issue as naturally as other fruits, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait; et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	And if they issue painfully, then treat them as we have said, and let the nurse be subtle, and do quickly and gently what she does; and act as it is necessary for their health.
de plusors enfans	of many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient; si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	Sometimes they are formed in the month I or II or III or IV or V or VI or VII, or more up to XV, and are completely formed in the shape of a child according to the measurement of the wise glory, and it is necessary that the nurse knows all this, because similar things may happen; so act accordingly.
de l’enfant mort	of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains; si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort; si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees; et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant; puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges; puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief; si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes; et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide; et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	When you treat the woman of a dead child in her womb, as I have said in the division, and it does not come out, and you are constrained by manual work; then it is necessary to know if the woman is in good health and has no accident that causes fear of death; then it is necessary that the woman be placed on her back, with her knees bent downwards, and her legs raised; and the assistant holds her hands from two sides, so she does not slide down while the child descends; then rub her mouth with oil mixed with musk of aloes and fenugreek seeds and flax seed, then anoint her arms with these oils and these mixtures; then place your hand gently in the oil and mixture, then find a suitable spot where you can apply the hooks, and check if the child is prepared to come down headfirst; then insert the hooks into its eyes or neck or mouth or palate or under the chin or in the nape or near the ribs, and if the descent is from the feet, place them at the wrist and middle ribs; it is necessary that she holds the hook with her right hand, places the curve between the two fingers of her left hand, and gently pushes it all with her hand, placing the hook in any of those spots we mentioned until it reaches an empty space; and this is the form of the hook:
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz; et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	Then insert against the other needle, or a third if you need one, so that the extraction is equal; and then extend it equally by moving from side to side, for the hairs to come out, and let the needles be toothed to hold the hairs, as shown in this form:
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie; et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	And if a part remains, anoint the edge of one of its sides with oil, and press it into that part, and pull out the other part; and if any part still remains, place this needle higher up, and do so until everything comes out completely.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote; puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	And if one hand comes before the other and it cannot be returned for gripping, you must wrap around the finger until it comes out completely; then cut at the joint of the knuckle or at the base, and similarly, you must do this with the other hand, and with both feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue; ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui; et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment; et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer; et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues; et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	And if the head of the child is large and it is narrow in the passage, when there is a fever gathered in the head, then you must insert the spatumile between your two fingers, cut open the head, and draw out the fluid; or you can shave it with the instrument called “almidach,” about which the forms come with the instruments in the chapter after this one; and thus do if the child has a large head naturally; then pull apart the bones with forceps, and if the head jumps forth and is held by the muscle, cut through as far as the moisture that is in the passage; and if it cannot flow out, cut it off piece by piece until you can; and if it is swollen in the belly or under the ribs, then you must pierce it so that the moisture flows.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if the child is on its feet, then the traction is light, and the adjustment to the mouth of the socket is light.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main; et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre; et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris; puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer; et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses; et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	And if it is tight in the belly or chest, then you must stretch it with a sling wrapped around your hand; and cut into the belly or chest until the moisture inside escapes; and if another member has been removed, and the head remains, then put your thumb firmly in the socket, and pull it to the mouth of the socket; then insert one finger or two, and pull straight out; and if the mouth of the socket is narrowed due to a hot abscess that has come there, then do not work on it, but instead administer moist and fatty things; and apply remedies such as plasters, and soak in warm and softening liquids.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif; et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	And if the child is on its side, and you can make it even, then treat it as we have said about the living child; and if one has no power, then cut it into pieces, and leave nothing of the membrane.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris; et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	And when you have done this, treat it as we have said about large abscesses that come with fever; and if bleeding occurs, place it in constricting water, and treat it with other remedies.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut I autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman in whom the fetus in her womb had died, then another was conceived afterward, and that one too was stillborn.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time, an abscess came in her cheek, and it swelled so much that it burst, and began to severely purulate.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called to treat it, and I thought about it for a long time, and could not heal the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I applied an adhesive plaster, and out came one bone, and after some days another.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I marveled greatly, for there are no bones in the abdomen.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	I thought that they were the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point; et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu; et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	I examined the wound and extracted many bones until the woman was at a good point of recovery; and I treated the woman for a long time in this way, and she would occasionally discharge some fluid from the site; and I have not recalled this chapter other than because when masters encounter an unusual thing, they should seek to understand it.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	to return the joint to its place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a II tornans as II chiés des II liiens.	Here follows the form of the binder, which is used in the books; and for two turns at the two shoulders of the two limbs.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux; et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi; et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus; et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	Nevertheless, the horns should be finer than the binder, and made of ebony or boxwood; and the mouth of the shaft should be two fingers wide, and the edge of the wood one finger thick, and in length a palm and a half; and between the two limbs there should be two fittings of the same shaft, which are firmly set on both sides, about half a palm long or a little more; and these two fittings are inserted into the mouth of the joint to open when turning the two horns.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles; et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large; et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes; puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	Another form, more subtle and lighter in appearance, should be made of ebony or boxwood, resembling the forceps; and it should have two heads with attachments, as you see, one palm long and two fingers wide; and when you want to open the mouth with the entire instrument, make the woman sit on a bed, her feet hanging down and legs spread apart, then place the two attachments together in the mouth, holding the head of the instrument below between her thighs; then work your hand on the entire instrument as you did with the forceps equally, according to the size you wish to open the mouth of the woman, until she gives a face as she wishes.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	These instruments are all designed at the top, and their appearances vary widely; and when the doctors have them prepared, the work is done more quickly, and they are more effective for people in terms of their quality.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	Do not despise the instrument because you have not prepared it, for their needs are not excusable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis; et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	When the afterbirth is retained during childbirth, you must instruct the patient to hold her breath, and then make her sneeze by administering something appropriate, and press your hands over her mouth and nose; if she jumps because of this, so be it.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire; toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	If not, take a pot and make a hole in its cover, and place herbs that can open the mouth of the mare, such as camomile, rue, anise, chamomile, savory, and centaury; all these herbs or some of them should be boiled or brewed in water over fire; then put one end of a tube into the hole of the pot, and the other end into the mare's mouth, and hold it so that the vapors come inside the mare; then make her sneeze as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	The second joint jumps quickly.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction; mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	And if it remains after this treatment and does not move as commanded, instruct the patient to moisten her left hand in oil of sesame or muscilaginous of hellebore, and then place it on the area, and seek the second joint; and when she has found it, take it and extend it little by little straightly so that the stiffness does not hinder extraction; but it must be moved gently to right and left, and then drawn; it will come out and release itself.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes; et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire; mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon; si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	And if the joint of the stiffness is tightly closed, we have mentioned the cure of sneezing and fumigation with herbs; and if it does not move despite everything that we have said, do not force pulling; but what is at the mouth of the stiffness must be tied to the woman's thigh, then administer a clister of tetrafarmacos ointment; this will soften and reset it, and it will come out; however, when she passes gas if there comes an unpleasant odor in the stomach and head, it harms the patient.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	Therefore, appropriate fumigations are necessary for these cases: some of the ancients have tested fumigation with cress and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The form of the instrument with which one fumigates the woman to retain her flowers and secondine is as follows:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu; et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	And it is made of glass resembling a tube, and the tip is fine in its nature, while the ends are wide over the fire; and place the fumigation above the coals, and let the smoke be produced until it is exhausted, then begin another.
de percier lou fondement	to pierce the fundament
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac: si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche; puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many children are born who do not have the fundament pierced, but instead it is blocked by a small sphincter: therefore, the midwife must pierce that sphincter at its proper place, and should not use a sharp spatula, being careful not to injure them; then apply wool moistened in wine and oil, followed by ointment until they are healed.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you fear that it will not hold, place a chain of lead in the hole, and leave it there for days, and remove it when the patient wishes to go to chambers.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	And sometimes this obstruction comes from the sudden closure of a wound or abscess; it is necessary to cut that closure: it should be treated as we have said about the lead chain.
de la fistule dou fondement	of the fistula of the anus
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	Fistulas that come from below the anus are nodations, and those that come near the anus to exit or in between the two parts may have one fistula or more; and when this nodation is old, it works, and still retains moisture as white or subtle mucus, and sometimes these fistulas are persistent; they are known by what comes out during defecation or flatulence when the patient evacuates, and perhaps a worm comes out.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	And if there are fistulas that penetrate to the bladder, and halfway down the penis; and reach to the knee joint, and to the root of the thigh.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant: et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	And thus one can know whether the fistula extends to the anus or not: and it is done by inserting your index finger into the anus, and inserting a fine needle of silk or iron into the fistula when there is no curvature.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit; et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit: saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	And if there is curvature, insert a thread of fine linen or horsehair until you feel the thread at your finger; and if you do not feel it, and no evacuation occurs from either flatulence or stool as we have said: then you know that it does not penetrate; hence hurry to treat it.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula reaches to the bladder or to the channel of urine, then urine escapes, and cannot be stopped by medicine.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu; s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement; et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	If it reaches to the joint of the thigh, then the pain comes up to that place; if there is no twisting and the source of the pain is around it, then it will immediately become a boil, and medicine or salve applied does no good; and in these penetrating fistulas there is no cure except for labor, and vanity of foolish physicians who intervene.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre; puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	In the case that is not penetrating and is not old, there is hope for healing by iron, as I have experienced, and it is so that the patient lies on their back; lift their legs up to their thighs, and incline their thighs towards their belly; then insert a probe of linen or lead if there is twisting, until you know where the probe goes.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans; si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	If the patient feels it around the fundament, then you should place your thumb there, and if you sense that the tent has been pierced; and where you feel between your thumb the surface or flesh, then know it is perforated; do not work on it as it cannot be healed.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc; et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit; et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil; et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	One says always that some can be well healed, but this happens rarely; and the help one gives is to heat the cautery finely according to the width of the fistula, as was said before; and insert it entirely hot into the fistula, until it reaches near the fundament; and do this two or three times, until you know that the unhealthy tissues are burned, which appear like a feather quill; and then treat with tents moistened in butter, until these unhealthy tissues disappear, then treat with an ointment that heals flesh and binds.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If he is thus healthy, it is well.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez; et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur; si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente; et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	If that cannot be otherwise for him to be healthy; and if the fistula enters, but does not reach the deepest part which is at the foundation, and there is a thick covering of flesh or fatty tissue between the anus and the fistula; when you see the fistula under this covering of the heart area, cut it from the beginning of the fistula, then push forward through the fistula, and apply the cautery afterward until it reaches the head of the fistula; then the fistula will be released and fall out. Afterwards, clean away the damaged flesh that looks like a feather quill, leaving nothing behind.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if the blood fails you, and congeals between you and the work, then cauterize it with fire or with a hot medicinal agent.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor; puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe; puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	For the fire cautery unites two good things: that is to say, it burns away harmful substances, and stops blood and dries up moisture; then treat with bandages soaked in butter or crushed herbs until the wound oozes pus, and thus the burned flesh comes out in the pus; then heal the wound with hardening ointments applied as plasters.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it is restored, it is healed and does not return.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if a fistula comes up from the deepest part of the fundament, and is distant from the body, then pierce it there at the fundament, and inquire into its extent.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres: ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit; puis le cure, si com nos avons dit; par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé; puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues; puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	If you feel the bandage, and there are two layers of tissue or skin between it and the deeper tissues, where it is close to piercing through, do not act hastily without faith and hope, by following one of the three methods: either cauterize as we have said, or cut it down to its base, or if you can place a bandage and treat it as initially described; but do not go too deep, that you might cut into the tissue holding the fundament, and allow natural healing to occur as intended; then treat it as we have said; perhaps it will heal, or remove the covering after cutting around the fundament, either by bandage or with another instrument designed for this purpose; then clean the diseased flesh in the wound as much as you can; then study how to restore the wound and divert the fistula away from the fundament: this is a lighter thing for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	And sometimes there are fistulas in this manner: and when you insert the probe into the fistula, and it is at the bottom of the foundation near the skin above, then take a probe perforated at the tip according to this form:
Et i boute I fil tort en II, et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And you wind the thread in a spiral from one to two, and insert the probe along the entire length of the thread into the fistula until it reaches the tip.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement; et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II; et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent; puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	If it is perpendicular at the edge of the foundation inside, then remove the thread from that opening, so you place your finger on the foundation; and pull the end of the thread, and join the two ends together, and hold them to each other, and leave it for one or two days; and tighten it occasionally, until the thread matches the flesh between them and they heal; then treat the wound until it is sealed and healed.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not open, pierce it in all ways that you can, if it is not too deep.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it is not appropriate to make an incision too deep for the discharge, and then treat it, as we have said, until it is healed.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans; et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	The form of the spinous process where one makes the fistula is very sharp on one side and cutting; and not so on the other side, because one should not cut what should not be cut, as you see here:
des emorroydes	for hemorrhoids
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors; et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz; si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines; et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot; et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere; ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement; cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere; et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	Hemorrhoids are of two kinds: some are inside the anus, like grains of resin, and there are small and large ones, and they contain blood, either one or several; others are outside the anus at its edge; but those that are outside have little moisture, and sometimes contain a bit of yellow water or a bit of blood, and their color is like flesh. The treatment for those inside the anus is to instruct the patient to sit in baths until the hemorrhoids swell out and become visible; then grasp them with forceps at your nail, and cut them off at their roots; if the forceps cannot hold them due to moisture, take a probe or cotton or some piece of lint, and extract them with both hands, then cut them, and apply warm powder suitable for cauterization; proceed as described in the chapter on cautery, and treat further until they are healed. If the hemorrhoids cannot be expelled from the anus, administer an enema of a harsh and rough solution to clean what is inside the anus so that it can come out easily. When the patient sits down, if the filaments have come out of the anus, treatment is easier; grasp them with your nail or forceps and cut them off, then treat as described until they are healed, and be wary of cutting with iron.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc; puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose; et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	So you must treat the sutures in this manner: take a twisted thread and put it on a needle, then draw the thread from above and make the needle pierce from another side, and twist both ends of the thread under the needle, and let them be wide; then tightly pull the thread, then tie the knot, remove the needle, and do so for all others, leaving one to drain excess blood; then place a moistened piece of cloth in rose oil or cerate on the foundation, and place it over the foundation, and instruct the patient to rest; then leave it until they fall off, and when they have fallen off, treat them with ointment and other remedies, until he is healthy.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	from the dryness of the bowels or foundation
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Often there is constipation of feces in the intestines, and by constraint of nature, and when the illness is old and medicine does not help.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient; et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	You should cut with the point of a spatula or your fingernail into the surface, without allowing it to become moistened; then treat it until it is dry as needed; and if it cannot be dried, then shave it more forcefully than before, until it bleeds much, and becomes scabbed over; then treat it until it heals.
dou fremit	with trembling
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont; et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	A formice is a small scabby appearance on the body, and it spreads very quickly; and sometimes it is found in cold areas, and one feels it like being dead from trembling, and it comes throughout the whole body, and more so in the hands than elsewhere.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor; puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	And the treatment is that you take a quill from a goose’s feather or a strong vulture feather, and place this quill on the boil so that the circles perfectly surround the boil; then turn your hand around the entire quill until you cut all around the boil, and place it properly, and scrape out the boil from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you wish, do this with a thread of linen or iron according to this form, and let it be fine underneath and drawn over:
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	do not pierce it, to hold the threads in place and to press them. And if you wish, cauterize the boil as it is described in the chapter on cauterization.
de la forme dou clistere	of the form of the enema
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	Sometimes an enema is made of silver or sorrel, or of molten silk or barley; and sometimes these instruments are made small and large, according to the needs of those who receive them.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Those who administer treatment to children and those who are weak and in pain use small instruments.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The form of the small and large enema is as follows, and the belly is bound in this manner:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I; et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre; et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	and there should be a space where the belly is bound as you see, and the end inside should be perforated; it should have two holes on one side and one on the other; and the belly into which the medicine is placed should be made of an animal bladder or parchment, and should be perforated all around with small holes, and there should be a space of one finger between each hole, then insert a strong thread through these holes in a helical manner, and secure the belly as if it were a drum; when the medicine is inside, tie it to the instrument with a strong thread beforehand, then administer the enema; this is the form of the circle:
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement; puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	And let the medicine not be too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head with a douche of oil or oak bark, or something similar, then pour it on gently; then spread the patient's fingers in both hands together until they are fully open, then remove the douche, and lift the patient's legs against the wall, and if the medicine wants to come out, let it flow as much as possible; and if he sleeps a whole night, it is greater help.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you administer an enema in a case of diarrhea and the medicine comes out quickly, repeat it until it stays.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	And if the hemorrhoids are at the fundament or an abscess, then the enema should be as fine as for a child; and this is the form of the fine enema in which the skin is stretched:
des plaies	of wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	We have already discussed in the section the treatment of wounds; now we will tell you about the treatments and medicines according to their completion.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds vary according to how they are made, and according to the places where the wounds are made, and from what they are made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses; ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres; et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	The things by which wounds are made are from falling stones and cuts from swords, knives, lances, staves, arrows, or similar objects; they are made in different parts of the body, such as a wound on the neck, head, foot, belly, liver, and other limbs; and I will tell you the treatment for each wound, starting with simple head wounds, because memory will come into its chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree; et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	I say that when a simple wound comes to the head and the bone is not broken, be careful if it is from falling of stone or similar things, and the skin is completely torn and the wound large, and you doubt the development of hot abscess: then I make it immediately heal with cephalic treatment directly if there is little blood coming from the wound, and let the dressing be contrary to the injured part; and avoid the patient overloading on wine and heavy meats.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char; et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice; et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés; et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if he does not want to heal it, then reduce his meat intake, and let him drink no wine nor eat flesh; and put on the wound, should hot abscesses come, cotton moistened in rose oil only, or in styptic wine; and if there is no hot abscess, place on the fresh wound that has not been exposed to air, powder which I will describe a little later; and if it has become irritated by exposure, then apply some ointments until it heals.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large like a sword cut and similar ones, and the edges cannot be brought together by tents, then sew them together as I will say about belly wounds, of the suture.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	If the wound is exposed bone, and it is flabby, and only holds together at one point, then cut it; then treat the wound with medicine, and restore hard flesh in place of skin, and instruct the patient to eat thick foods, such as brains and boiled wheat, as well as porridge, and similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure; et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil; et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	And if you find putrid skin in the wound that adheres not to the bone, then cut out all the putrefaction and apply a poultice, then treat it; and if there is an artery or vein in the wound that cannot be staunched with medicines, tie off the artery; and if you find it dislocated, ligature it with a thread; and if this does not help, cauterize it.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if these wounds are small and simple, the treatment is light; it consists of applying this powder that seals as though the wound has healed.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon II parties; chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc; et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And the method for the powder is as follows: take one part of incense; two parts of dragon's blood; three parts of quicksilver, and mix the powder finely, then apply it to the wound, and press it firmly until it adheres well and joins with all its blood; then bind it tightly, and do not loosen it if it does not swell; for one should not remove the medicine until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And sometimes one uses quicksilver alone when there is no incense or dragon's blood available, but the wound must not be allowed to close.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre; mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe; puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the burn has moved the wound, especially in winter, do not apply this powder; but put on some digestible ointments, or make a poultice of barley flour with water and honey until it runs fluid; then treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz; et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	And if the fracture of a bone comes with the wound, and it is small, then extract it with fine forceps; and I will tell you hereafter about fractures of the head.
de la plaie dou col	of the wound of the neck
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If the wound is on the neck and it is simple, there is no difference between it and that of the head, but if the nerve of the neck or the artery is cut.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire; et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres; mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	If it is the nerve, then there is no other remedy but to leave the treatment alone and not apply anything constricting, for it harms the nerves and makes them retreat; and do not put on the wound anything cold, because the substance of the nerves is cold, and their continuation is with the brain, which is the highest part of the body; but let the medicine be warm, such as hot water washed in sweet water, and rose oil mixed likewise in sweet water, and copper leaf washed similarly in sweet water, and other mineral stones according to this manner, and moist ointments.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, then sew and ligature with bandages, then treat it until he is healed.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu; et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est; et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel; et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier; et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue; et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	And if the wounds are deep and filled with pus, then incise them at the lowest point; and if an artery is cut, and bleeding occurs, then stop it, ligature it, and cauterize if necessary; and if the spine of the throat is cut, or the esophagus, and the path for food is blocked, then sew the esophagus onto the cartilage of the throat, but do not touch the throat but put it back in its natural position; and then bind it carefully, and leave it alone for a few days, then treat it with drying ointments until he is healed; and if the wound has made an impression on the bone, then curette it; and if there are pieces of bone, then remove them all if you can, and those that you cannot have, let them be as long as the wound heals and becomes disinfected; and if the wound is fresh, then apply the powder that I mentioned.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there is bone in the wound and there is an abscess, then treat it as I have said in its chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	of the wound from a spear or knife
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz; et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide; mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor; et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors; si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne; et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	If it is a wound from a spear or knife, and the wound is deep, then check if there is air swelling in the wound where the patient's breath goes: you will know that the wound is fatal; and if it is not deep, but fresh with all its blood, do not put powder on it at first hour, nor bind it because of the blood that does not clot deeply, and return to the heart, killing the patient; instead apply a drawing ointment, and bandage it twice a day. If you have no ointment, place old cotton in the wound to absorb the moisture, and make the patient rest on the wound for three days, or four, or more; so there will be no spasms, nor bad heart tremors, foreign objects intruding; and when you see good signs, then know that the wound is safe.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	Treat it then with bandages and other treatments until he is healed; and if she cannot heal him, and you work on it, then know that there is an abscess; treat it as one should.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant; s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez; et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions; et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	And if the wound is from a sword or knife cut, and it is simple, whether on the front or back, treat it accordingly; if it is large, sew it up; and if it is small, powder it; and if it is pressed into the bone, with pieces chipped off, then clean the wound, and remove any protruding fibers if they are loose; and if they are not loose, let the wound drain, which will ease the extraction; and judgments for other wounds on other limbs are as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	of the rupture of the abdomen
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis; de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus; et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut; por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres: les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies; et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	The rupture of the abdomen is great and medium and small; from the large wound sometimes the intestines, or the nerves of the intestines, protrude, which requires an internal examination; and the suturing is more difficult, and sometimes a smaller wound is worse than a larger one because if you do not place the intestines back immediately, they swell quickly upon feeling the cold, and thus enter less easily, and for this reason a smaller rupture is better, since you can more easily return the intestine to its place compared to other wounds. And know that the rupture of the abdomen occurs in four ways: two common sutures occur with abdominal surgery, and the suturing of other body wounds are similar but distinct; yet they are more specific to abdominal surgeries, and I will explain each one separately and clarify them.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres: ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	I say that when the wound is small, and some part of the intestines protrudes, and it is a difficult thing to replace, this can be done in one of two ways: either because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestines are swollen due to cold.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere: moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee; et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	And when it is cold, warm it in this manner: moisten a sponge or a piece of linen in hot water only, which you cook with vinegar and rue and spikenard, and rinse the intestines until the swelling subsides; and sometimes use wine that constricts to do so, and it should be mild enough to reduce swelling.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose; et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes; et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait; et c’est li estrumens por le fendre: si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	And when you see the swelling depart, moisten the intestines with water in which aloes and mallows have been cooked, for this gradually opens the entry; and if it cannot enter, make a small incision in the wound with the instrument used to cut hemorrhoids; and the first treatment should be such that one does not need to cut unless there is great necessity; and here is the instrument for making the incision: cut inward along the curvature but do not go outwards, and you will see its form here.
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestines protrude, put them back in place according to their natural form if you have the power, for that is better.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief; et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre; et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	When the wound is large, and it is in the back part of the belly, you must make the patient lie on his back, and raise his legs higher than his head; and if it is in the front part of the belly, raise his head and feet higher than the middle parts; and similarly, if a rupture of the abdomen is in one of the two parts, place your attention so that the wounded part is raised higher than the other; and thus you must treat what I say about large and medium wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres; et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort; et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble; puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille; puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte; et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer: por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes; et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure; et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee; et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien; et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras; et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi; ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	In small wounds, apply what is appropriate to you, then have a needle ready in your hand that covers the entire wound and brings together the edges; this is the common method of stitching, and it involves taking one or more needles according to the width of the wound, leaving two fingers' breadth from the beginning of the wound, and inserting a strong thread through the needle at that point; then pierce both sides of the skin with the inner side of the siphac tissue, so that you pierce it throughout this part, and bring together the four edges; then strain a double thread around the needle on both sides, then join the two edges of the wound gradually, leaving two fingers' breadth again, and insert another needle there; tie the thread as you did with the first needle, and continue doing this according to how many needles are needed until the entire wound is held together; the needles should be medium-sized between fine and coarse, because too fine needles cut through all the flesh, and too thick ones cannot enter properly: therefore they should be medium-sized; it is also not advisable to insert the needles too far from the flesh and skin as they may damage the wound before suturing; then trim the ends of the needles so that they do not hurt the patient when sleeping, and place bandages or cloth on the needle ends to keep them in place, and leave them until the wound is healed; this method of stitching with needles is more suitable for small wounds. The second type of suture is common, and it involves bringing together both sides of the skin and both sides of the inner tissue at one needle with a medium-strong thread; when you have pierced all four edges thoroughly, reinsert the needle back where you started in the way clothes are sewn; leave a distance between each stitch as wide as a finger's breadth. This suture is well-known to people, and I stitched a wound that a man had on his abdomen which was cut by a knife, the wound being more than one handbreadth large, with intestines protruding two palm lengths, and it was located in the middle of the belly.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	I returned the intestine to him after it had been outside for twenty-four hours, and the wound was sealed up until fifteen days, and I treated him, and he became well.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle; et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines; et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	And the physicians had judged that he would die, and it was a miracle; and I did not treat him with ointment, for I was in a place where none could be found, nor any medicines; and I placed old linen on the wound twice a day, and washed it with honey water until he was well.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture: pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens; quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer; et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	Now I will tell you the two proper methods of suturing: take the needle, and pierce from the outer part to the inner; when it has pierced the thickness straight through, place the head of the suture where you have inserted the needle, and make it pierce again from the inner part outwards; and the understanding of this suture is that you sew as tailors do with fur, and leave once the suture on one side, and take it up on the other, until the entire suture is complete.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere: fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac; puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac; puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit; et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	The second method of stitching, which Galen describes properly, is as follows: they join the two parts naturally together and bring one end of the suture to the other end in such a manner: pierce with a needle at the nearest point of the margin, piercing that place only, leaving both ends of the suture; then turn the needle and pierce from the outer part to the inner part through both ends of the suture; then pierce one and the other from the outer part to the inner part in two other points of the margin on the opposite side; this is the most effective method of stitching and the most common.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune; et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies; et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	Galen says this and some people attest to it: one should stitch the belly with two needles, each having thread; and you must insert one needle from one side, and the other from the opposite side, in the manner of those who sew belts; and note that when the rupture is inside the belly, the stitching is more difficult than for other areas of the abdomen.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies: et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe; et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach; puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	The judgment of the wound is like the judgment of other wounds: and it is that when you find the wound fresh with all its blood, as if the burn had moved it, place back the intestines and sew; then apply healing powder to the flesh, and if the burn has moved it, place any ointment that is present until the wound drinks; then stitch the wound, and let the edges be sealed together and the margins; then treat the wound as you would others, until it is healed; and if you have no medicines, put on old cotton as soon as it begins to drink pus, twice a day until it heals.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples; et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles; et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine; et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	For you do not need other medicine in many cases where the wounds are simple; and if you doubt that the wound will affect the principal members, it is necessary to moisten light wool in warm oil or rose oil, and place it around the angles, and inside the armpits; and if pain or putrefaction occurs in the bowels, which often happens, then administer an enema of boiled black wine, especially if the putrefaction reaches the intestines; and pierce inside, and know that when it is the large intestine, it heals more easily than the small.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	The intestine called "jejunum" cannot heal when it is pierced, and this is because of the smallness of its veins that are there, and due to the subtlety of the entire body, and the proximity of its nature to the nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres; et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres; puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	And if the spleen jumps out of the wound, put it back as you would with the intestine while it is fresh; and if it has become old and blackened, then tie off the area that is black so that no more blood comes out, for there are veins and arteries there; then cut what is between the ligament, and let the two ends hang from below the wound until they dry up to facilitate extraction when the spleen falls out, and the wound will close.
de la routure dou boueil	Of the fracture of the eye socket
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance; et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez; je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	When the intestines are punctured and the wound is small, it can sometimes be repaired in some people, for I saw a man pierced in the abdomen with a lance; and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and it became inflamed and developed into a fistula, from which excretion and flatulence came out; I applied treatment as best I could, and continued to suture until he was healed, and the tissue closed.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre; et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans; et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere: pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus; et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise; et cout la plaie.	And when I saw it closing, I feared the patient would have pain in his abdomen; but he had none, and remained in better condition, eating and drinking. And some experienced practitioners say that when there is a small wound in the intestines, it should be treated as follows: take clamps with large heads, then bring together the edges of the wound, and when the clamp opens its mouth, place it on both sides so that it holds them together; then cut off the head, and this remains firm so that it cannot come loose, then place another clamp in the same manner as before, until the entire wound is covered; then sew up the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere: pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure; et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance; et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	If the head of the intestine is burned and causes no harm to the patient, then it can be tied with a thin thread that matches the intestine of an animal in this way: take the tip of this intestinal thread and strip it bare, then wind a fine linen thread around its tip, put the thread on a needle, sew through the intestine, and pull it tight at the wound; and this method of stitching is no different from according to the path of trust and hope; if the wound is large and wide, especially when it is in one of the major intestines, there is no remedy or healing except for delicacy.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	of fistula wherever it may be
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	Know that any wound or abscess, when it becomes inflamed, is generally called a "fistula," and especially when it is covered and retracts inward.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil; et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse; aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez; et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes: c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors; ou por sa malice; ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char; ou il i a trop de bowe; ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit; ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure; ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence; ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature; ou il i a voinnes ou os: et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	And fistula is according to truth an abnormal swelling hard and white, where one does not feel pain, and it is also hairy like the feather of a bird; and sometimes it appears clear liquid, and other times thick; sometimes little, and other times enough; and I have already spoken in the division of wounds that every wound which is not healed, and there is no flesh, except for by one of the IX causes: to wit, because of the smallness of blood or body; or because of its malice; or because there is hard flesh inside, near the edges, which does not allow new flesh to grow; or there is too much liquid; or the place is rotten, and the matter is of bad quality; or the medicine used in treatment was not good; or because the corruption resembles pestilence; or due to the property in the region being slow digestion, and delayed healing, swollen by nature; or there are veins within the bones: and I have already shown all these causes, and the signs, and the cures of medicines in the division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	Now I shall instruct you on the treatment of a fistula which is performed by manual work.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors; car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez; et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	Know that fistulas can occur in all parts of the body; for there are fistulas that come to the large veins, and arteries, and nerves, or on the surface, or in the intestines, or in the bladder, or in some ribs, or in the spine of the back, or in any joint of the hands or feet; and some affect the principal part of the limb and similar places.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance; et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier; et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit; et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie; puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent; et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens; et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons; et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	And all fistulas of this kind are difficult to heal, and there is nothing but labor and ignorance; and if there is any fistula that does not reach the places I mentioned, and you have confidence in its treatment, and wish to know it, take a probe made of iron or steel, if the fistula is straight, then probe it; and if the fistula is curved, use a delicate probe made of lead, for lead can bend around the curvature; and if the fistula has multiple openings and you cannot properly explore it with probes, then inject through one of its openings, as moisture will flow from one opening to another, and clean it; then carefully press your hand to determine whether there is bone or nerve, and feel thoroughly, and ask the patient well about the pain they feel when you press and where they feel it; once you truly know where it is, and if it is far from a joint, a nerve, an artery or vein, or in any of the places I have mentioned, then treat it as I have said, and remove the diseased flesh inside; and continue to cure until it heals; and if the fistula is deeply straight, you must cut directly into it as much as possible, then place moistened probes with bitter medicine deep within, so that the excess matter at the bottom corrodes away; then apply healing ointments for new tissue until it is healed; and if it does not heal by this method, cauterize it as we have said, and if the bone has been corrupted by the fistula, cut it out.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit; et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font: si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu; et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If a vein or nerve does not trouble you in the principal limbs as we have said; and if the bone is exposed, and there is corruption and blackness, then treat it until all the corruption is removed, then heal the flesh until it is healthy; and if it is not healthy, and returns to its state before, know that you have not gone deep enough: uncover and seek until you are at the bottom, remove all the corruption, then restore the place; and if it is thus healed, it is well.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir; si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature; et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un; et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	If not, know that the corruption is too deep for you to reach; there is no other remedy than leaving it to nature; and if there is a small corrupted bone that you can pull with forceps, then extract it with an appropriate instrument, and if there are many bones, pull them all out without leaving any; and if moisture impedes you, and there is neither error nor fear, cut away the flesh and let the bones be exposed.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os; et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie; et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os; si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez; et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	And if you cannot remove them at once, place over the wound something that promotes putrefaction, and leave it until the flesh is rotten around the bone; then the bones will be more easily removed. And if it is a large bone, such as from the leg or thigh, cut away only the corruption until all the black matter is gone, then restore the wound; and if there is much of the corrupt part reaching to the marrow, you must scrape and cut it out completely up to the corruption, and then cure it until it is healed; and I will tell you of a fistula that happened in a man's leg so that you may take an example and aid in your work.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir; mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors; et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors; et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	There was a young man around thirty years old who had pain in his leg from something that came inside the body, such that the matter reached the leg and it swelled with a large abscess, and there was no reason to let it burst; but due to the physicians' folly, they operated until the abscess opened and much matter flowed out, turning into a fistula, and many openings appeared through which all sorts of bodily fluids leaked. Many doctors treated him for two years without any success in their art, until I was called upon. Upon seeing his leg and the medicines used to treat it, as well as what was flowing from the openings into large quantities; his body had turned red and he had a yellowish complexion.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	I set a tent in one of the holes, and then searched all the holes, and found that one came against another from all parts of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens; je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai; et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder; et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu; mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	I then hurried and cut into one of the holes until I discovered part of the bone, and found it corrupt and perforated, with corruption reaching to the bone inside; I treated what appeared to be the corrupted bone, thinking there was no further corruption beyond that which I removed; and began to heal the wound with astringent medicines over a long time, but could not close it; then I started again, and cut into the bone as before, finding continuous corruption in the bone, which I treated and removed, and tried to close the place; but I was unable until I cut around one palm's width of the bone, down to its marrow, and then healed it with medicines; and it quickly became healthy and closed, except for needing further work due to the patient’s weakness, which could not endure, and out of fear of death for him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	For the evacuation of blood often happens, but he was entirely healthy, and in place of the bone grew hard flesh, and he was well disposed with no harm or contrary effect at all, neither going nor coming.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere: pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut; et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char; et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue; et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	And if the bone is broken in any part of the body, it must be treated in this manner: take some linen, and pull it at the end of the visible bone, and have someone stretch it upward; and place another thicker piece of flaxen cloth over the skin covering the bone, and extend the end so that you draw the corrupted flesh inward, and uncover the skin where you wish to treat, so that the dressing does not hurt the skin; and put a cautery or some wood under the bone to cut away the corrupted flesh; and it is necessary to continue treating until corruption can be seen and felt, and treat again.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute; puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit; et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part; et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper; et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert; et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire; et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce; et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument; et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies; si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	And if the bone is corrupted and it does not appear, and the corruption is in the middle or a part of it, then uncover all the flesh; then place an ember underneath, and then cut across the corruption from one side to the other, as we have said; and if the corruption is at the joint, then cut off the corrupt joint, and sew up the bone on the other side; and if the corruption is between two joints, there is no remedy but cutting; and if the corruption is in the finger of the hand or foot, it is very strong that thing, but nevertheless you must inquire about that corrosion, how it appears to you; and clean it in all manners as you can, but let not the vein or nerve hinder you; and know that the instruments for cutting these bones are many, according to the setting of the bones and their appearance, and their thickness and fineness, and their size and smallness, and their hardness; and therefore it is necessary to prepare each kind of work its instrument; and know that your work will show you the tool that you need, according to the knowledge of this art and the testimony of the manners of diseases; so think about the tool that you need according to what is required.
dou feu	of fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer; et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre; et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	The head may rot from within or due to external factors; and when you have treated that corruption with the medicine, and it does not improve, then it is necessary to amputate that limb up to where the corrosion comes, so that the patient escapes from death by this means, or from the greater malice of losing the limb; and the signs are that the limb turns black, as if it were burned by fire, and rots afterwards, for the corruption spreads from limb to limb, and takes over the entire body; therefore hurry with amputation, and if it is due to a venomous animal bite, such as sea scorpion or wyrm and similar, if the corruption reaches the head of the arm, then cut it off, and do not give it space to reach the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras; et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut; et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe; et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet; et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil; et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort; et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers; puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	And if it comes to the hand, cover at the joint, so that the corrosion does not reach the arm; and if it reaches the arm, cut with a knife; and if it passes the knife, death is certain, and no remedy works except for its quantity of virtue; and do exactly this when the corruption reaches the foot: if it comes to the first joint, cover after the second joint; and if it reaches the foot, cut the entire foot; and if it ascends to the leg, cut at the knee joint; and if it reaches above the knee, there is no other means than letting the patient die; and the manner of cutting or sewing the limb is that you tie it from above and below, and one minister holds down one of the ligatures, and another minister holds up the other ligature, then cut apart the flesh between the two ligatures to a breadth of one span, until the bone is exposed; then cut or sew, and place a piece of linen on each side so that the wound does not touch healthy skin and cause the patient further injury and abscess.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet: il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet; et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez; et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions; et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere; et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez; et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	And if bleeding occurs when you work, cauterize the area quickly or apply some powders that constrict; then return to your medicine until it is completed, then bind the injured limb with an appropriate bandage, and treat it until it heals; and I will tell you what happened to a man in my practice: he suffered from a blackness that seemed like a burn caused by fire, and this corrosion first appeared on his foot’s toe, spreading throughout the entire foot; and when the man saw the corruption, he hurried to amputate his foot, and was healed; and after some time, the corruption returned to his hand’s thumb, and he came to me, and I applied substances that would repel the matter after purifying the body, but could not stop the corrosion; and he wished that I cut off his hand, which I did not want, hoping to repel the material; and I also feared that if I were to amputate his hand, he might die, for his constitution was weak; and he despaired completely, returned home, and hurried to amputate his hand, and was healed; and except for this case where another approach was taken when necessary, there is nothing more to say.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe; et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz; et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»; mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»; et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz; et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	Sometimes an abscess occurs in the flesh and remains so long that it accumulates a large amount of pus; then it bursts and drains, leaving the flesh behind, like a vessel; and the skin above is as thin as fine cloth, and does not extend to the bone or nerve, and such a condition is called "sain," and is not called "fistula"; but if it extends so far that it reaches the bone completely, then it is called "fistula"; and the skin is such that you cut around all of that skin, and likewise when it is thin, like fine cloth; and it does not matter for its corruption.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi: regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite: prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel; et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus; et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant; fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor; et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez; et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet; ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain; et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin; ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens; et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez; et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	And if you trust that the skin will heal and the corruption is not complete, and the skin is thick with flesh, cure it with a clister (enema) as follows: check if the breast is swollen, and the pus inside has an unpleasant odor, then administer an Egyptian medicine enema made thusly: take myrrh, oil, and litharge in equal parts, heat them in a vessel over fire until they turn red and become as thick as honey; then take this mixture according to your need and mix it with water and honey, then administer the breast enema, and squeeze the opening; let the medicine stay inside for two hours, then expel it gently; do this repeatedly until the breast is cleansed of its foulness; if the patient cannot tolerate it or the Egyptian medicine, use water from ashes instead; take ash from grapevine wood, pour water over it, filter it, and administer as an enema until you know that the breast is well cleaned. If neither the Egyptian medicine nor the ash water can be used, then administer an enema of honey and wine with a little litharge powder mixed in; or use an enema made from honey and vinegar where the honey has properties to cleanse and wash while the vinegar aids in healing. After doing this, if you trust that the breast is well cleansed, administer an enema that causes flesh to grow, such as using a poultice of diaphoretic herbs mixed with rose oil and wine; or use certain medicines and ointments whose properties I have mentioned when discussing ointments. If the opening in the breast is small, and the tube for the enema cannot enter, widen it slightly with an iron tool and apply a patch of Egyptian ointment or basilicon ointment until it is widened; if the wound is too large, sew around it leaving only one place where the enema can be administered, and if the pus-gushing hole is above, cut it lower down.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char; et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe; et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain; puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois; et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste; et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez; et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	For when the boil is deep, it does not allow flesh to regenerate; and if you cannot cut the breast as you wish, prepare in such a manner that the boil runs downward to the lowest place where it is. For when the boil is deep, it does not allow flesh to regenerate, and if you cannot cut the breast as you wish, prepare in such a way: that the boil flows slightly downwards, and leave nothing of the boil behind; then take consolidating medicines to put on the healthy tissue, and stretch a linen cloth covering all the healthy tissue; then cut at the strong points the hole in the breast somewhat larger than the first, then spread ointment under another piece of cloth according to the size of the opening, and place it over the opening in the flesh to ease the boil, and do not remove the large cloth for several days; and that which is on the opening of the breast, take often to remove the pus, and examine what comes from the boil, whether it is venomous or foul or moderate, or digested or undigested; and be wary if the patient feels pain or numbness, and whether there is an abscess or not, and when your medicine has been applied in such a manner and you see the nature rising to the opening of the flesh, know that the healing has begun, and health approaches; then untie it in the morning, or on the third day, and when you unbind the wound, change the other cloth, and renew the ointment.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the stomach throws up undigested food after many days, know that the stomach does not settle.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	And if subtle poisons affect after a long time, do not despair of health, for health is near.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire; et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie; et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine; pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance; puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu; et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire; et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use; et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens; si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	For there are people for whom meat delays healing in their wounds, and others do the opposite; and if undigested food vomits from the stomach after many days, know that the stomach does not settle; and if digestion is slow and prolonged, apply medicines that are dry in substance but moist in virtue, such as a diaphoretic ointment, for it contains much vitriol, and this is the final remedy; prepare a diaphoretic ointment using rose oil, and rinse it with equal parts old wine; then thicken it and use it; and similarly, when diaphoretic ointments are not available, take murre, aloes, and incense, grind them together, mix them with honey on the fire; then spread a cloth dipped in this mixture over the stomach; sometimes administer aristonogogue longus and roots of celestial lilies, which resemble flour made from fennel and centaury; use these individually or as a compound: grind them into powder, add the honey I mentioned, and apply it; if the condition persists without improvement after treatment, then know that corruption is deep-seated, affecting bones, hard members, or ligaments; treat it with fistula cures as we have described previously.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	of the abscess of the nail
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois; et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute; et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	Panaritis is an abscess that arises from under the nail of the hand or foot, or occasionally on other fingers; and when it ages and is not attended to, a painful abscess develops, spreading and pus flows until it reaches the root of the nail, and possibly spreads completely; and corrosion comes up to the bone, causing severe pain, and the head of the finger becomes swollen, and its color changes.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	When you treat it as we have said in the section, and the treatment does not help, then you must cut away all the excess that remains of the nail, then cauterize the wound afterwards.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne; et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	The cautery is a great aid if the bone is sound and the nail is healthy; and if the nail presses into the flesh, and it begins to hurt, and becomes swollen, then you must place the blade under the nail that hurts the flesh, and lift it up, and cut away that flesh carefully and lightly, and put the remaining flesh on medicines burning and corrosive to remove everything; then cure with ointments until it is healed.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner; et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier; puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor; et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	And if the corrosion is in the bone, then cut it away and draw out pus, for as long as the corrupted part of the bone remains, it cannot heal; and if you see that the bone is corrupted, then cut it off at the joints as previously mentioned, then cure until it is healed; and if it is pierced and infected, and he feels great pain, then first cleanse it thoroughly; then carefully trim the nail with a sharp instrument by cutting across, and be careful not to cut into the flesh beneath the nail, for the patient would feel too much pain; and if this happens, place something on it that soothes.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	the pain of the stiffness of the hand
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	The second joint that is born in the hands of some men is entirely flesh, and sometimes it has bones, and at times there is a nail, and some of them are born at the root of the joint, where the birth is in some ways different for the fingers.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet; la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere: taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	Those who are born with any knot in the finger do not move, and those who are born at the joint of the finger may sometimes move; the size of one who is entirely flesh is so small, in this manner: measure it from its root with a broad spatula.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	Those who are born at the root of the joint are difficult to treat: be careful when cutting them.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	In the one who is born or should be at the rear end, you must first cut away the flesh roundly until reaching the bone, then cut the bone in a single stroke suitable for that person, then treat it until it is healed.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The swelling that comes to the two together comes by birth, or by inflammation of a wound, or by burning with fire, or by similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz; puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent; ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	You must cut away that swelling so that the parts can be repaired according to their natural forms; then place between two cloths or moistened linens in rose oil so they do not swell again; or you may place between two pieces of fine cloth until the area is sealed as it should be.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	If firmly comes to any of his two with the palm, cut that soldering as it is appropriate.
des vils	of evils
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors; et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	Veins are thick, swollen, filled with melancholic superfluities, which occur in many parts of the body; and this happens more often in the legs of those who walk and work and carry loads than in others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	It is therefore necessary that you administer enema cleansing at times, and then treat with basilic.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir; et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	The iron treatment is according to two methods: one is that you cut them and draw out the black blood; and the other method is that you open the vein and draw it all out.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil; puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir; et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire; et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	The treatment is as follows: first rise the leg with hot water very strong, until the thick blood becomes thin, then lift the patient's leg from above the thigh to below the knee; then cut a vein in one place, or two, or three, of a small size, then raise and draw out black blood to your hand, from one side to the other, as much blood as the strength of the patient can withstand; and then bandage it, and command him to feed on foods that cause black bile; and begin again the evacuation and bleeding when the veins are full, and this benefits the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes; et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville; puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent; et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche; puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers; puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope; et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse; et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide; et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The method of raising a vein is as follows: lift the patient's leg if there are many hairs, then place it in a bath, and raise the leg with hot water until it becomes red and swells the veins; and if you do not have a bath, warm it by fire, then cut along the vein from the long part to the knee head, or at the part below the ankle; then work the skin with an awl and scrape the vein on each side until it feels rough when touched; and one sees it red and black, and when it enters the skin it looks like a white cord; then raise it underneath, as you have done, and smooth it with another awl, as you did before; then cut another incision or more if needed, then lift it and cut at the toe joint, then draw it out and lift it to the second incision; then pull out vein by vein until all is drawn out, then cut it; and if you cannot pull and lift it, insert a needle along one strong double thread, tie and pull, place another underneath, and move your hand back and forth until it comes out; and be careful not to cut it, for if it cuts, it cannot be pulled or lifted, which is harmful to the patient; and when you have completely treated it, put wet wool in wine and rose oil on the wound site; and treat it until it heals.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	And if the vein is constricted and twisted and wrapped together, and it is not straight, as we have said, then you must cut it sharply, but do not sever it; and draw it out as we have said before.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne; et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	The form of the knife used to cut the vein is curved and does not have sharp edges so that it does not cut the vein; it has a broad curve, for if it were fine, it would cut the vein, but let it be thick as we have said, and this is its form:
de la voinne civile	of the civil vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor; et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	This vein is found in the legs, in warm parts where no herbs or trees grow, and in dry ground with little moisture; and by chance it may arise elsewhere than in the legs, and this happens due to putrefaction that comes beneath the skin, as it arises within the body like serpents and worms, growing between the skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	And if the signs of the beginning of this vein are such that there comes a very large inflammation in the leg, then the location changes, and the vein begins to come out, just like the root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe; et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue; car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie; por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors; et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	When the vein is open, you must wrap it around a piece of linen from one and a half to two fingers' width, tie it securely, and let the linen hang down the leg. Every time there is a point where it starts to pull away, wrap it around the linen again and tie it; if it is too long, cut part of it but do not cut it at its root until it has all come out completely; because if you cut it, it will go back into the flesh causing an abscess or corruption in that place leading to a bad illness. For this reason, it must be treated bit by bit until there is nothing left on the body; and sometimes this vein when treated is as long as five palms, or ten, and once upon a time it came out twenty inches for me, issuing from a length of ten palms, and when you cut it, it spews forth one row or hole, and pierce it all the way through so that everything comes out; empty the matter inside, and treat the place with medicines to heal corruption for some days, then cure it as is done with abscesses.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	And sometimes this vein is deeper, especially when it appears in the ankle joint, or at the foot, and there is much perforation, and from which it bleeds heavily; treat it as we have said before.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	worms that are born between the skin and flesh
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer; et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre; et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	This disease is called in our land "the cattle disease," because it often affects oxen, and it is a small worm that is born between the skin and flesh, and travels throughout the body moving up and down, and one can feel it well as it moves from limb to limb, until it penetrates the skin where it goes, causing pain; and it arises from putridity of certain humors, such as when worms, serpents, lice, and ascarids come from the belly; and there is fear of its malice, because as it travels through the body, if it ascends to the head, and reaches the eye, by chance it may enter and destroy the eye; and this happens many times.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait: si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire; et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit; et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer; et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	When you see it needs to be opened and drained, one cannot do so forcefully: therefore, you must bind the area above and below with a strong tight bandage, then cut over it and drain it forcefully; if the pus is deeply embedded in the flesh and you cannot find it, cauterize it with fire until it dies down; and the greatest harm it causes is that it can corrupt the eye, as we have said; and if you see it approaching near the eye, hold firmly below the eyebrow, then cut over it, and drain it forcefully; and the patient must use purgative medicines to clear bad humors and avoid consuming foods that cause putrefaction.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	of the pain that comes from gas or windiness
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	This disease is called "vakirir" in our land, and it is a pain that comes to certain limbs, and then moves from limb to limb; and I have seen what I tell you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais; et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre; li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais; puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	I was called to a sick woman, and she showed me her arm, where I saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm; and shortly after, I saw it rise as quickly as a worm to the shoulder, faster than anything, like quicksilver when it flows from one place to another; the pain departed from that spot and settled in the shoulder, and then a short while later spread throughout her body until it reached the other arm; then she told me that it kept circling around her body, as I had seen.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I marveled greatly at how it moved from limb to limb, for I had never seen this disease behave in such a manner.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme; et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte; et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	However, I have often heard that some wanted to move pain from one place to another, but I did not want it, as I saw in the woman; and I thought this was because the woman had a dry body, and veins exposed, so this windiness appeared constrained; and they do not appear according to this reason for those who are fat, and who have moist bodies and veins covered.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer; et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	And when you want to treat this disease, and the patient feels that pain, if it appears as we have said, lift it above and below quickly, and then apply heat until that windiness is constrained at its place; and cauterize the area; and if you do not see it with your eyes, cure it through those who expel winds, such as fetid pills, serapin pills, and similar others.
des saiettes	of arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	Arrows are diverse according to their appearances and according to the parts of the body where they strike.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees; et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces; et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	The diversity of arrows is such that there are those with large points, small points, barbed points, and fixed points; and those with two angles, and some with tongues, and others with pieces; and when an arrow strikes any limb, it does so in two ways: either striking a principal member, such as the brain, heart, liver, spleen, lungs, intestines, bladder, and similar members.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent: si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions; et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	When it strikes any part of these members and the signs of death, which I will tell you next, become apparent: then you must be wary about extracting this arrow, for death often follows in many circumstances; and when such bad signs do not appear and the arrow is not deeply embedded, extract it and treat the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole; et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix; et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char; et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	And the sign of the brain when an arrow hits and pierces the bone, and penetrates the dura mater which is over the brain, is when there is scotoma and coma and vertigo and redness in the eyes, and inflammation and redness of tongue, and spasm and disturbance of understanding, and vomiting of phlegm; and by chance it issues without strength from the nostrils, or ears; and by chance loses speech and voice; and flows from the wound white moisture like pus, and also as a stream of flesh; and if these signs appear to you, then hold yourself ready for treatment, and draw out the arrow if it is within.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide; et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope: saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	The sign of the arrow when it hits the heart is that it is near the left mammary region, and feels as if it were fixed in a hard thing, not an empty one; and by chance the arrow moves like pus, and forms black blood, and coldness and cold sweat come, and syncope occurs: you then know without doubt that death is imminent.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of the arrow that wounds the throat is that without much foam blood spouts from the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient changes color, and sighs loudly and seeks cold air.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	And if the arrow falls in the cover of the hip, it is near the small ribs; and he throws up a large quantity of phlegm and suffers great pain and sighs; and all his shoulder members move.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the arrow hits the stomach, by chance something of undigested food may spurt from the wound.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if the arrow hits the belly, and no sign of it can be found through the intestines, there is no hope for healing, nor for extracting the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	And if the arrow falls into the bladder, and the urine jumps out and comes to leak, and the patient feels great pain: know that the wound is mortal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other limb, such as the face and neck and throat and shoulder and joint and spine of the back and forearm and thigh and legs, and similar limbs, are safe according to various positions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in the nerve or artery, and it is not venomous, as I will tell you what happened to me, do as I say.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis: je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	It happened to a man that an arrow fell in his helmet at the root of his nose: I examined it, and extracted it from the other side under the ear fat, and he was safe without harm.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	And he pulled out an arrow that had struck the fat of the eye below the membrane below, and the arrow was buried, and barely could they reach but the tip towards the shaft, and the arrow was large for a Turkish bow, made entirely of light iron without barbs; the patient was safe, and no ill accidents befell him.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles: je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	And he pulled an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and the arrow was Arabian with barbs: I seized the barbs, and carefully extracted it, and the Christian was safe.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit; et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition; je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	And he pulled an arrow from the man who had it embedded in his belly, and I thought he would die; but after thirty days had passed, there was no change in his condition; I cut around the arrow, probed it, forcefully extracted it, and he suffered no ill consequences.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus; et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	And if you wish to treat a man who has an arrow embedded in his back, and the wound is sealed over; and the arrow remains inside him, and he does not change any of his natural dispositions, nor finds harm in any of his natural functions.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie; et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	And if you wish to treat another man who has an arrow shot into his face, and the wound is sealed over; and it remains thus without him suffering great pain; and many other similar cases.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	And I treated an arrow in the head of one of the king's princes, which was embedded between his ears, and it was slightly inclined to the right side; and the arrow was completely bent. I was called for treatment three days after it happened.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	I found the wound very narrow.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie; et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	I examined it thoroughly with great care, and felt nothing; yet he experienced pain and soreness behind his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast; et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	I thought it was from the tip of the arrow. I applied a poultice that prevents swelling to the area, so as not to allow the place around the arrow to swell; and the spot where the arrow was became visible.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	I applied the poultice for several more days, and reopened the wound again, and the patient remained in this condition for a long time, until he felt the arrow inside his nose one day; and then he told me about it.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu; puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement; et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir; adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	I applied a corrosive medicine to the wound for several days until it was open, and then examined it, feeling the tip of the arrow lodged in the spot; I continued to apply this medicine around the opening of the wound until the head of the arrow became visible; after about four months, I opened the wound so widely that I could fit pincers inside, but it would not come out; therefore, I did not stop trying and inventing various instruments until one day I was able to grasp it with well-made pincers, as described at the end of this chapter, and then removed the arrowhead and closed the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer: je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	And the doctor judges that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored: I repaired it then, and the wound was sealed, and the patient was completely healthy.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre; mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	I have told you about the quality of extracting some arrows, so place your care on what I do not say, for books cannot encompass everything; but wise masters compare well with great things, and with what is present and lacking, they find new work, and new instruments, in the descent of strange things that happen in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres: ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part; et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	I say that arrows exit from the members where they are lodged in two ways: either at the place where they enter, or from another part; and those that come out through the place where they entered are penetrating arrows, and sometimes come out immediately.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue; et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor; et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	And if it does not come out now, leave it until the surrounding flesh is putrefied and the opening enlarged; and also if it is embedded in the bone and cannot be removed, leave it thus for several days, and soften it each day; and then it will come out, and if it does not come out, perforate around with a very fine point until the flesh around it is widened, and then remove it.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	And if the arrow is embedded in the bone of the head and goes to one of the ventricles of the brain, and some of the accidents that I have mentioned become apparent to the patient: do not remove it, but leave it for several days until it is even, because if the arrow reaches the brain tissue, death will follow.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	And if the arrow is embedded only in the bone and does not reach the surface, and the patient remains for several days without any adverse event, then devise how to extract it.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is deeply embedded and cannot come out, administer terebinth around it, as I told you; then treat the area until it is healed.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente; et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble; et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans; et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire; et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	And if the arrow is lodged in a place on the body where it cannot be seen, search throughout the tent for it; and if you feel it, extract it with any suitable instrument; and if you cannot due to the tightness of the wound or the depth of the arrow, and there are no bones, nerves, or veins, cut until the wound is large enough; and remove the arrow if you can, and if it has grooves by which it holds fast, remove the flesh that is embedded on both sides as much as possible, then break or bend the grooves so you may extract it; be careful not to break the arrow, making extraction more difficult.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot do it at once, leave it until the area around the site is healed, then pull it out, for the extraction will be easier.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre; et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	And if the flow of blood opposes you, then treat it as we have said in its chapter; and beware of cutting the nerve and vein, and place a guide so that you may draw out the arrow without danger, whether quickly or slowly, firmly or gently; and position the patient according to how he was when the arrow struck him, for this is the greatest aid there can be, and if you cannot, then place him as the signs show.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment: taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	The arrow that comes from another part, where it reveals some part of itself, or the skin is swollen in such a way that it can be seen or felt clearly: cut then above it until pliers can grasp it, and then extract it; now do so immediately.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is held in the bone, turn your hand around until it enters the bone, and widen the bone, then pull it out.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer; et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust; et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	And if it cannot come out, leave it and then restart the extraction until it comes out; and if the shaft of the arrow is there, push with all of the shaft; and if the shaft breaks, and you wish to administer a probe, use an instrument head so that the point of the arrow enters into the head of the instrument; and then push firmly, and if the arrow is stuck, use an instrument with a sharp end to ease the extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	And if the arrow is embedded, it is necessary that you cut all the flesh around where the wound is, if you can, and then treat the wound as required.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope; et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est; et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if the arrow falls on the foot or in the belly or bladder or in the side, and it is near, and you can cut above it; be careful not to cut the vein and the nerve, then extract it, and then stitch the wound if necessary; treat it until it heals.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The shape of the pliers used to treat arrows is similar to the beak of a bird, and see here the form:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	And there are many kinds: large, medium, and small, according to the size of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	The shape of the piercing needle is also like the quill of a bird, to pierce at the tip of the arrow, as shown here is the form:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	the form of the tongs for inserting and extracting is as follows:
des voinnes dou cors communes	of the common veins of the body
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir: II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»; et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans; et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»; et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis; et les II guindeges qui sont ou col; et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»; et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	There are thirty-one veins from which one can bleed to become healthy, sixteen of which are in the head: two large ones behind the ears, called the "herbech"; and the two arteries visible in the temples; and the two veins in the tear ducts of each eye, called "aspires"; the vein on the forehead; the vein at the top of the nose; the two jugular veins in the neck; and the two veins under the upper lip, which are called "augeherich"; and two veins below the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras: l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»; et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	The veins from which one usually draws blood are four in each arm: the first is the cephalic vein, and it runs along the left side, and the barber people call this "vein of the head"; and the middle one is called "faste," and it consists of the cephalic and basilic veins, and the barber people call it "vein of the heart"; and the basilic is on the right side, and they call it the "vein of the belly," and it runs along the ulnar bone, and this is the vein from which one usually draws blood, which appears clearly on the arm.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains; et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei; et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	And the savatelle is the vein that is between the little finger and the ring finger, and it has two branches; and in the leg and on the foot are three veins: one is below the bend of the left arm vein, and the second sophene which is at the right ankle; and the vein called "nesse," which is at the other ankle; and in the other leg there are three veins below those.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine; et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief: quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche; puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues; puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee; et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	The salve applied to the veins behind the ears helps with chronic catarrhs and migraines; and concerning the properties of this salve, as I tell you, is that you raise the patient's head, and rub the area where the veins are with a rough cloth; then bind the patient’s neck with a bandage such that the two veins become visible behind the ears in two places: press them with your thumb at these spots, and where you feel the pulse below your thumb, incise there; then take the lancet and puncture beneath the vein up to the bone, then lift your hand along the entire length of the vein, and cut through both the skin and the vein well twice its width, letting out as much blood as you wish; then bind it tightly until it is healed; and I have already mentioned incision and cautery in the first book.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz; et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis: et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement; et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche; puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit; puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton; et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	The bloodletting from the two veins that are in the two temples is valuable for treating chronic migraine, severe headache, habitual ophthalmia, and persistent tears in the eyes; and the qualities of this bloodletting are as I say: it is that the patient compresses his neck until the two veins become clearly visible; then feel the pulse below your thumb, and afterwards open the vein with a lancet; lift the vein upwards on your finger above, place the lancette underneath, and raise the vein up, and cut it, just as you did in the other two veins, and let the blood flow according to necessity; then release the patient, and put the hand on the vein for an hour, then apply cotton; afterwards tie it firmly, and leave it until it is healed; we have also spoken about their coagulation and extraction at the beginning of the book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor; et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere; puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	The vein of the forehead is worth as much as the cephalic vein for treating old face diseases and headaches; and its quality is that the patient strains their neck by twisting it until the vein appears swollen; then take the instrument called "digger", which here is its form:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues; puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	And place the point on the vein, and press with your hand or something else, and let the blood flow according to the quantity you desire; then release the patient's neck, and tie the vein until it is healthy; sometimes one performs this work with a broad flame.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	However, it is not appropriate for the flame to be too sharp; and the incision should be sideways, because the bone is close, and by chance the flame might break when it is fine.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice; et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant; puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	The salve of the two veins that are in the two canthi helps with the eyes, and for tinea, and redness, and ulceration in the eye, and diseases of the face; and the quality of their salve is that the patient strains his neck by twisting some ligament as before; then applies the salve, and let it be made thick, a little long like a flame a little wide, for there is no flesh.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if the flames are fine, it may break; then let blood flow, as much as you need, and then bind with cloth, and bind well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree; et c’est li forme dou flaime:	The salve of the vein of the nose is good for fever, and for violent sores, and for diseases of the face, such as migraine and redness that comes in the face, especially when it is old; and the quality of the salve is that the patient strains his neck, then pinches his nose with your left hand, and take a fine long flame, and insert it between the lips in the space which is between the two nostrils, because the vein does not appear well inside, and the blood will now begin to flow; do not go too deep, and let the blood flow according to your need, then bind it for one night, for it restores quickly; and this is the form of the flame:
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit; et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est; puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	The salve of the two binders helps in the tightening of the groin, and at the beginning of mixing, and in many diseases, and in impetigo, and in corrosions, and herpes, and esthiomenes; and the quality of the salve is that the patient tightens his neck under one and the other, as we have said; and let the master be standing over the head of the patient, and the patient sit on a chair, then apply the vein from the long slightly widely, then draw some tempered blood, as much as needed; then treat similarly in the other vein, then untie the bandage, and tighten all veins moderately, so that the patient does not strangle; and leave it until morning, when the wound is healed.
de la sainie des leivres	of the salve for the liver
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The salve for the veins of the lips above helps with sores in the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and splits in the lips, and nostrils, and around them.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit; puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires: cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	And the qualities of the salve are to have the patient sit before you, and hold his neck as I said; then turn the lip, and look at the two veins, one on the right lip and the other on the left, and recognize them by their black color, and by the small black veins around them: so cut both of them, and if you do not know them, and are in doubt, then cut the largest of each side, and likewise do for the two veins that are above and below, because it is the same manner.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	Remove the tongue from the socket
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche; et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire: saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	The surgery of the veins that are behind the tongue follows the surgery of the cephalic area, which is at the constriction of the throat, and for diseases of the eye, and for diseases of the mouth; and the qualities of the surgeon are such that the patient urinates into your hands towards the sun, and you lift the tongue, and look underneath on each side there is a black vein: therefore treat one and the other, but do not go too deep, for below are the arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres: ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»; et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	The veins of the arm that are commonly treated are operated on according to two methods: either by cutting with a broad flame-shaped blade, or with an olive-shaped fine blade like cutting knives, and it is called "anesil"; and they are wide and fine according to the width and narrowness of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The form of the fire flame is very renowned, and it is as wide as you see:
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble; et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	And it is necessary to open veins that are full of thick visible blood, and which contain thick and turbid blood; and this is the form of the olive-colored flame:
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	and it is more finely pointed, and is used to treat fine veins, where there is fine yellowish blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre; et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	The basilic vein, which is one of these veins, helps with diseases that affect the throat, and the neck, and the chest, and the abdomen; and it is necessary for the physician to bleed carefully, and to avoid the artery that lies beneath.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit; et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	And if he cuts the artery, and blood begins to flow out, it must be staunched, as I have said; and it should not be pricked with a flame but cut as before.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre; ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement; et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	And if the basilic vein does not appear clearly, then you must separate it and change another one; or take a little from it, or open the vein in its place on the arm: it appears clearly; and cut with a flame as before, as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz; puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil; et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	And if you wish to know the location of the puncture, then it is necessary for you to separate the arm, touch the place until you feel the pulse; then mark the spot on the bone, and bind the arm, and cut the vein with a flame as before; and be careful not to hit the artery when you see the area swollen, because that is the artery: avoid it then.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere: haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient; se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see it rising up like the urine of a child, and the blood is red and thin, know that this is arterial blood: hurry then, and place your hand lengthwise, then remove your hand if the bleeding stops, which often happens; bind the arm, and leave it thus, and do not move the patient; and be afraid, and do not move the patient until he is healed.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	And if the bleeding is not stopped, and it affects you, and no medicine is present, then cut the artery if it appears, for its end can be found; and stop the bleeding.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor; se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc; et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	And take the bark of a fig tree, and cut it, and take one of the halves and bind it well until the next day; if the bleeding stops, that is good; if not, treat it as we have said with powders that stop blood; and the bandaging should not be difficult in many positions due to the small area of the wound, and the strength of the binding of the arm.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit; et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner; et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	The vein in the middle helps by drawing blood from the head above and from the body below, because it is composed of the basilic and cephalic veins, as we have said; and it is necessary for the surgeon to protect himself behind the nerve that lies underneath, and if he pricks too deeply and finds the nerve, it swells and his hand becomes paralyzed, and perhaps he cannot operate anymore; and this nerve appears very often, and if it does not appear in some people because of its subtlety, then you must heal it with anesthetic instruments; and avoid the nerve as much as possible.
Et se il a voinne entre les II ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if there is a vein between the two nerves, then make an incision along its length.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz; et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	The cephalic vein helps by drawing blood from the head and assists the eyes; and it is necessary to operate on it by making an incision in the olive branch or the myrtus branch, because it is the safest of all veins, as there is no nerve or artery underneath it.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence; et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	However, it is necessary to choose the most gentle spot, and do not cause any pain even if it must be done for the first time, and one can repeat; and by chance, the area may swell in some people when it is done for the first time, but it does not cause any pain.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of the salve is according to your thought.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir; et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique; et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent; et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	The first thing you must know about bloodletting is that it should not be done except to maintain health and to prevent future diseases; and one should bleed in one of the three veins which are on the arm: namely, cephalic, basilic, and median; and bleeding should occur at the beginning of spring, autumn, and winter after eating, when signs of repletion appear; and it is best to perform bloodletting on the first or third day, two or three hours after dawn.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens; et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	The physician who treats diseases has no fixed time for treatment, but whenever the need arises day or night, at all hours and in all seasons; and it is not right to treat children until they are fourteen years old, nor women carrying a fetus from the fourth month until seven months.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez LX ans.	And one should not treat the elderly who have passed sixty years of age.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz; ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques; et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors; puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir; puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit; et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses; et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans; et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on; puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	And when someone wishes to be bled, in whatever manner it may be, they should cleanse their intestines with a gentle enema if there is much retained feces so that the veins do not draw harmful excesses from the intestines; and one does not bleed those who are too full of food, nor drunkards, whether male or female, until they have sobered up, nor hydropics. Do not bleed after colic pain, vomiting, diarrhea, excessive sexual activity, labor, staying awake, fasting, or anything that exhausts the body by deed or substance; then carefully purify the humors if the blood is thick, through food and drink and medicines if you have the skill. Then enter a bath, unless something prevents it, to refine the blood; then bleed from the vein of your choice near the third hour as we have said; and keep yourself free of work, pain, lust, and similar things that day; be happy and joyful, and let the barber stand higher than the person being bled, and rub his arm two or three times, then loosen the binding moderately because if it is too tight, the blood cannot flow freely. Then feel the vein with your hand until you can see them swelling and feel their pulse; then moisten the lancet tip with a little old oil, place your left hand over the intended bleeding site, so that the vein does not rise when pricked.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus; et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	For there are veins that behave like strings to the surgeon, and some of them are full of airiness, so when one applies flame, it draws back from the flame, and thus one cannot open the vein; and if one works on the vein, the wound is too narrow. Therefore, it is necessary for surgeons to be cautious in these matters.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if the vein is opened the first time, it is good; if not, then start again a bit below that place quickly, provided the area is not swollen.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras: par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait; et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement; et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	And if the area is swollen and the patient is frightened, leave it for one or two days and do not bind the arm: perhaps a soft abscess will come; nor enter the bath, then restart the bleeding if it pleases him; and if the opening is small, apply the flame directly to that opening quickly, so that the area becomes swollen; for this often happens when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile; et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc; et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	If you see the place swollen, do not reopen it again, and put a poultice of oil on it, for it lightens the body of blood, and in this spot the poultice of oil is soothing; and thus administer the poultice of oil each time you treat the veins to stop the flow of blood; and also make triacle and apply it when you place it on the spot; it delicately thins the blood when it is too thick.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre; et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie; et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	And if there comes a large abscess, which often happens, especially when the treatment of veins is not frequent enough or when the opening of the vein is small, then hurry and place on the spot a sponge moistened in warm water and vinegar for a little while; and it must be done after the blood flows from the vein, and if some blackness or greenness remains at the site after several days, it does no harm; and if you wish, apply something of aloes or myrrh mixed with juice of calamint, mastix, or similar.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And many times an abscess and swelling occur at the base of the thumb: put your hand on it, and if you find the spot soft upon pressing with your hand, then that swelling is harmful.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai I emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Avoid putting anything of what we have said above, for it may cut into the artery; but apply a dry poultice to harden the area, then treat with another method until it is healed.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And draw out the blood from each according to the quantity of its virtue and the color of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	For if the blood is black, let it flow until it becomes red; and if you see it thick, let it flow until it becomes thinner; and if it is too warm, allow it to cool.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges; et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant; et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	And for the one who is full and strong, and needs bloodletting, make a wider incision, and let the flaps be wide; and for the weak, do the opposite, and it is necessary to bleed them gently and frequently, and one should bleed them by cutting diagonally, not vertically; and this method of bleeding prevents loss of blood and injury to nerves, and is worth more than long or wide incisions.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	And for the one whose body needs nourishment before bleeding, give him moist bread in pomegranate juice; if he is heated, let him bleed three or four times. And if he has a cold constitution, let him eat moistened bread in musé syrup, or aromatic honey syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chickpeas, and well-scented syrup before bleeding.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	And if he faints after losing a lot of blood, then it is necessary that he drink broth made of meat, and aromatic syrup, and use other things that we have said in the section or chapter on syncope, for the evacuation of veins.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he wishes to bleed his arm and be bled again, then when he is weakened by excessive bleeding, it is necessary that he be bled a little at a time according to the quantity of his continuing strength.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine VII houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And who wishes to bleed his arm after the first bleeding, and he has a strong body, should be bled seven hours after the first bleeding, or after the ninth hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And who wishes to be bled from another site should be bled on the second day or the third.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson; puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens; et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus; ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz; mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	For there is much blood within the body that is already heated and causes fever; so it must be drawn in large quantities, and widen the passage until it flows freely; then when you have fulfilled all the conditions for safety, place your hand upon the pulse as it bleeds, lest death come to the patient's aid, which often happens when barbers are negligent; nor should you press firmly when you wish to release the arm a second time, and the passage is closed; nor if it is curved, extend the arm quickly, for that would be worse; but leave it until it bleeds freely the second time; or prick with the tip of flame, until the blood which has congealed in the vein's opening issues forth, and place a small poultice wetted in water on it, and press lightly upon it.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein is swollen, let it be and do not bind it, until the abscess is alleviated.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if it is necessary to draw blood a second time, do so from the same vein, or from another vein, or from the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein on the arm is bled in place of the head vein because it is well-composed.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges; puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc; et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez; et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit; et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	And the method of bleeding is that the patient puts their hand in warm water until it turns red; then wrap moderately so that the vein appears clearly, and bleed now through its width, not lengthwise or crosswise; make the punctures wide, and bleed close to the joint of the hand, and if no blood comes out, put the hand back in warm water again, and let the blood run freely in the water until you have enough; and if this is done in summer, do not bathe the hand in warm water more than necessary, for it should be done more in winter than in summer; and bleeding from this vein is safer than any other veins because there are no arteries or nerves nearby.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere: estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie; et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	The salvation of the right hand is worth for all diseases of the liver, and this is the manner: pull out the hand, and put it in hot water, until the veins are swollen, if one can see them; and if the salve crosses, and if you cut it through entirely, it does not harm anything; and do not go too deep, for the nerves are under completely bare of flesh, and then put the hand back in hot water, if the blood is congealed in the wound, and no blood can come out.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have drawn as much blood as is necessary, apply oil and wax to seal the vein quickly, and do this for each incision.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The treatment of the left hand is worth for the disease of the spleen, and do it exactly as I have told you for the right.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	The salve of the sophene is worth for all diseases that are below the body, such as diseases of the legs, retention of urine, disease of the thighs, and old diseases of the calves and legs, and similar illnesses.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains; saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	And the qualities of its salve are such that the patient immerses their foot in hot water, and rubs it on the vein until it breaks, and ties it above the joint of the foot; and the vein is at the ankle, and from above the foot there flow many veins; apply it then to the largest vein, or at the ankle, for that is most effective.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you apply it to the foot, beware of the nerves that are below, and apply it across as if cutting; and let the flame be calm.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if the blood cannot come out, place the foot in warm water, and let the vein be opened well.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz; ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	And if the incision is necessary the first time, do it slightly higher for the second time, as the place is salty; do not worry about nerves, as we have said, and thus do the same incision on the other foot equally.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The site for the sciatic vein is at the ankle on the side, and its incision relieves hip pain when it is due to hot blood.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant; et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	And the quality of its incision is such that the patient enters the bath, and applies pressure above the ankle for IV digits by twisting, because otherwise the vein will not appear; and if it does appear, incise it in all ways you can, including crosswise; and beware that you do not cut it short, as the site is deep, and it responds well to many people.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners; et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	And if you do not find it, then apply a poultice to the spot on the back of the foot near the little toe, and be careful of the nerves; let the blood flow as much as you wish, then loosen the bandage, and put cotton on and bind it tight; it is now healed.
des sainies de ventouse	suction treatments
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc II manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Cupping instruments are made of horns, or wool, or glass; and cupping is performed in two ways: either by drawing blood or without drawing blood.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu; et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col; et II autres en II costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton; et li ventouse des II espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies; et les ventouses emmi les II bras; et les ventouses des II jambes; et les ventouses des II chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne; et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	And this cupping without drawing blood is done in two ways: either with heat or without heat; and the cupping that involves drawing blood and extracting blood is performed at fourteen locations on the body, of which one is at the top of the head; another is around the neck; two are on each side of the neck; there is a cupping spot under the chin; and cuppings for both shoulders; and cuppings above the kidneys; and cuppings in the arms; and cuppings on the legs; and cuppings on the ankles; and this type of cupping does not draw much blood, only from small veins scattered throughout the flesh, and thus it does not weaken a person as bleeding from a vein would; and it should not be administered with heat or without heat in any disease caused by congestion, until all parts of the body are emptied.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens; car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief; et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz; et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc; et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	And if by necessity of illness it is necessary to use cupping, or by habit, we bring this each hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and in between and at every time; for there are such people who, when they need cupping, feel a heavy head; and there are those who experience bloating and redness on their face, and on their head, and neck, and darkness in their eyes; and those who see drops of blood in their mouth, have swollen tongues, and cough up blood; and there are some who dream, seeing by night blood and wounds and deaths and similar things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés III houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, especially in the middle of the month, we instruct them to undergo cupping after three hours of the day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors; et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement; et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	The massage of the temples helps with headaches that come from the eyes, and it should not be done after the evacuation of all the body; and this ventilation is instead in place of the cephalic massage, and it is not suitable for those who have a cold constitution to use it, or who suffer from catarrh, as it causes them great harm; and therefore it is not appropriate for elderly people to use it, nor for those who have cold diseases in their head.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who become too relaxed from it may become forgetful, and for this reason the cupping should be placed a bit lower out of fear of forgetfulness.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion; et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	Cupping on the neck is in place of head massage and basilic treatment, and it is useful for tightness in the chest, rib fractures, coughing, and congestion; and it should be done gently, because if it holds too firmly, it may cause forgetfulness or discomfort in the stomach and heart.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	The ventosation between the two ribs of the neck is effective for headaches, ophthalmia and migraine, and in cases of choking, and pain at the roots of the teeth, and it is located at the site of the basilica's treatment; and you must instruct the healer that he should press his hand gently when applying it, so as not to cut the artery, nor cause bleeding.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des II levres.	The ventosation below the chin is effective for mouth diseases, and gum infections, and similar ailments that are in the mouth; and it is located at the site of the treatments of the two lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The ventosation of the shoulders is effective for diseases that come from heat and fullness.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes; et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	The venesection of the arms is worth as much as that of three veins of the arm, because it draws blood from these large veins; and instruct the doctor not to cut too deep, for the flesh there is thin, and near nerves and arteries.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The venesection on the buttocks is equivalent to hemorrhoids of the anus and diseases beneath it, and it should be large, made of brass, as it needs to draw blood well; and if it were delicate, it might break; and thus it causes great wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des II sophenes, et des II chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	The venesections of the legs are very effective, for they draw blood from the entire body, and are useful for treating chronic pains in the thighs, and of the joints, and of the bladder, and reset the flowers; and they are performed at two sites on the shins, and on the ankles, and over time they weaken the body, and can lead to fainting in various conditions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	The method of applying the cupping vessel is to place it first empty, then temper it, and put it quickly, moving it evenly, and do not stop doing this until you see the area red and swollen, and the redness of the blood appears; then apply heat, and replace the cups, and take care in the condition of the body, for there are some who have thin flesh, and clear pores: it is necessary to strike once only, and it is necessary to make large wounds, and somewhat deep; and suck lightly.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir II fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	And if the blood is thick, it is necessary to strike twice: the first time to make the blood flow more freely.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And if the blood is very thick, it is necessary to strike a third time; and when we wish to draw out the blood little by little, we do it only once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif: se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite; et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	And if we lose a lot of blood, we often restart it; and if the blood is thick, then apply force, and the ends should be such that the wound is pierced suddenly, and for those who have thick skin and hard, narrow pores, you should anoint the areas with suction cups using an oil that is stimulating and dissolving: if this is in summer, use violet oil, or sweet almond oil, or cucumber seed oil; and if it is winter, use cress oil, or lily oil, or chamomile oil, or another similar one.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the excess is thick and cold, then use marjoram oil, or balm oil, or anise oil, and similar ones.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	And if the one to whom treatment is given has tender skin and large pores, it is not necessary to apply any oil, but they should be washed after ventosity with rose water, or cold water, or mulberry water, or cucumber water, or porcelain water, or similar.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And those who have much moisture should rise from a bath of myrtle water, or sumac water, or similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans; et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	And those who have large excesses should rise from old wine, or larch water, or decoction of anise or chamomile, or similar; and it is not appropriate to bleed with a ventouse before the bath nor in the bath, but one hour or two after the bath; and do not sleep after the ventosity, and it is necessary for them to walk when they should be ventosed and when they are ventosed.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez; si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses; et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	And watch if the person who is bleeding has a choleric temperament, and if the blood is too sharp and inflamed; then it is necessary for them to take cold things, such as sour apples and endives and lettuce in moderation, and similar things; and eat young birds, and castrated meat, and moist foods.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons; et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier; et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz; et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	And those who have a cold complexion should take syrup of honey, and wine that is between old and new, and eat pigeon, and young birds and small birds and doves; and on the day they will be bled, they should drink more than they eat; and some people should sometimes be given triacle or nutmeg before bleeding, or after, to comfort the principal limbs; and the blood should be subtle, but it is not appropriate for those who are hot to drink it.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre; et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu; et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	The suction cups that are applied without cutting are those placed on the liver, and on the spleen, and for gout, and on the abdomen and buttocks and thighs and hip, because these members do not tolerate being cut on them, and it is only done to draw blood from one member to another, as we place suction cups on the breasts when the veins are congested; to remove the viscosity that is in the member, just as we apply suction cups on the abdomen and buttocks to reduce the swelling; and they alleviate pain where there is obstruction or stone, removing it through their attractive power perhaps from its place; and similarly, they act when applied to the liver and spleen when there is retained gas, these suction cups are administered empty for suctioning only; sometimes they are administered together with heat, and at times filled with tepid water, as in cases of pleurisy, and likewise filling the suction cup with hot water alone, or with water in which suitable herbs have been boiled.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The form of the cupping vessel administered with fire is thus:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre; et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent; car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	And it has two digits wide and half a palm thick, and on the side there is a small hole, as if to insert a needle, and it should be made of brass, smooth so that it does not burn the patient when placed on the limb; and in the middle there is a crossbar of brass or iron for holding a candle, and they come in different sizes according to the diseases and age of those who use them; for cupping vessels for children are different from those for elderly people, and for thin people than for fat ones.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre: empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide; et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse; et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	And one should place this cupping vessel on the limb thus: take the candle of wax or linen and insert it into the cupping vessel through the crossbar inside it, so that the flame is at the bottom of the cupping vessel to prevent it from burning the patient; then place the cupping vessel on the limb, with the opening being the small hole we mentioned earlier, so that when you want to do so, the vapor goes in and removes the cupping vessel; then take out the linen as before, and repeat this often if necessary.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement; et c’est li forme:	In the cupping treatment used for pleurisy, in all acute cases, there is no rod or hole, and it is not applied except when it is full of blood, and it is placed only on the limb; and this is the method:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus; et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans; et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren; et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres; et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues; et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	Cupping glasses are used only in parts where cups cannot be applied due to their small size, such as the lips and gums, and similar areas; and in exposed flesh areas, such as the hands or feet, and other similar places; and the quality of use is that when you find cupping glasses that are in mild cases clean and ready for treatment, take them; put one nut in a mild liquid until they become familiar and have nothing inside; then let it be treated with vein opening and cupping, rub the limb until it becomes red, and place the cupping glasses on it; when they are full and fall off, if it is an area where cups can be applied, apply them, because this is very beneficial afterwards.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint; et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés; et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez; ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant; et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	If not, lift the place of rest, and then with water, very well, and then press it; and if the wound heals too quickly over the flesh without opening, soak a linen cloth in cold water and apply it until the blood is absorbed; and if the blood is excessive, apply ground vitriol or gallnut powder, or similar things, until it is absorbed; or place half a pound of shelled beans on the wound and leave them there until they dry up, now it will stop; and if you need more remedies, take other plasters.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent; et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	And if the plasters do not want to take hold, rub the wound with fresh blood, or insert a needle until the blood comes out, and then apply the plasters, and as soon as they feel the blood, they will dry; and when you see them falling off, sprinkle a little aloes and burnt frankincense powder, or ash, and now they will fall off.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	Here begins the book of fractures
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and is about the restoration of fractures and dislocations.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent; et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin; et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie; et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	Know, dear son, that foolish doctors fall from this chapter because they have never seen any of the ancient books or read a single letter in them; and for this reason science is strange in our land, for I have never found anyone good at it; and I know nothing about it except through the knowledge of ancient books, where I have studied so much that I have treated the science, and by experience, and by the custom of my life; and I have clearly described in this chapter what is contained within it, and have summarized it at the end, and have shown clearly the forms of the instruments that are used, as I have done in these two preceding chapters.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	It is therefore necessary that we say in the prologue of this book the summaries of the speech and the chapters where the wise man puts his understanding, and remains on the truth, so that those who are experienced know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars; ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	I say that when a fracture, dislocation, torsion, or sprain comes to anyone, it is necessary for you to hasten to treat the patient from both sides if nothing prevents it, such as weakness of body, children, old people; or if the time is not very warm, or too cold; and eat cold things, that is to say cold broth, and meat of birds and kid, and do not drink wine, nor eat any fatty meats, and do not overfill yourself with foods that fill the veins with blood, until you have no doubt about a hot abscess, or spreading of matter in the limb; if the patient returns to soundness first from this governance which you have used.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken bones begin to heal, it is necessary to nourish the patient with foods that cause thick nourishment, which are viscous, such as boiled wheat in water, rice, heads and feet of animals, belly of fish, eggs, fresh fish, strong wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For such nourishment promotes healing and the broken bones heal more quickly.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans; mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	And know that broken bones of the old and decrepit do not heal well or mend according to their nature due to the dryness of their limbs, nor those who are too tender, such as the bones of small children; but pay no heed, reset the broken bone with a thick plaster that adheres and joins the limb together, until it strengthens as it was before; and do not remove any part of its work, and for this one must nourish with heavy foods, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And know that fractures are diverse in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the fracture of the head is different from that of the hip, or of the leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all manners of fractures.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there is a fracture that goes to the bone, and another in sharpening, like the shaft of a writing quill.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And there is a fracture with a wound, and a fracture that is just a small crack.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu; et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main; et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure; mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	And each manner has its treatment and proper instrument in restoration, according to what the memory brings forth; and the fracture of the bone is known by its being twisted, and it is clearly evident by swelling, and sounds hollow when pressed with the hand; and when there is no twisting or sound upon touching, and the patient feels no great pain, then there is no fracture; but there may be twisting, or a crack, or a small fracture.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	It is not necessary to move it with your hand, but place the medicines that follow hereafter, and then gently press it now.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne; et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez; puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	And you should know that the fracture that goes into the bone, and where the two parts are disjoined, they must now be placed equally, so that no heat comes to it like in abscesses; and if a warm abscess does come to it, let him leave it for some days until the swelling subsides; then place it equal to what you can gently and wisely, and know that the restoration of this is easier than that where there are pieces; then press it as it should be done hereafter.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main; et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor; et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	And if in the bone with pieces broken, it is held by two parts, whether for hand or foot, or by one hand for a small member, or by two strings, or by one string and your hand; and place the limb according to its natural shape, so that when the parts of the fractured member are separated, you realign all additions in their places as much as you can, and be careful that through your work no injury or pain comes to the patient; and join well the two ends of the bone according to the best forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	And you can feel well with your hand if it seems to you that it is not right: then set it properly, and do not pull it too hard, nor press it as those do who make hot abscesses and limb contractions through their work, as we have seen many times.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere; et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	And when the limb is properly set, instruct the patient well not to move it, neither while awake nor asleep, nor in turning, nor in any other way; and ensure that the limb is securely positioned so that it does not feel any pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor; et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez; et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	For when it feels any pain, it is not properly set, and you must put it in such a position that it does not feel any pain; and be careful that it is placed correctly so that no curvature occurs when it is restored; and the quality of the broken limb depends on what I tell you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	Know that broken limbs are diverse in smallness and in greatness and in form.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz; et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche; puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure; et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet; puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus; puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	For there are small limbs, such as arms and hands: they should be wrapped in soft and fine linen cloths; and those that are large, such as thighs and legs: should be wrapped with wide and firm bandages, because the wide bandages embrace the entire limb, and compress it evenly, so there is no indentation; then tie around small rolls of cloth three or four times according to the limb, and tighten your hand a little on all the bandage, then go above the break and compress less, so that the break can move slightly away from the break; and loosen the bandage little by little, until you take in most of the healthy part, then start another layer, and wrap around again over the broken area; then retighten below the break moderately, neither too tightly nor too loosely, as we said in the first chapter above; then place between the bandages rolls of linen or cloths so that they are all even, then tie everything with a wide strip, and then put your well-made splints on if there is no abscess or swelling.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors; puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	And if there is swelling or an abscess, apply a soothing hot poultice for the abscess and to reduce the swelling, and leave it like this for several days; then incise over your splints, which should be half the width of a palm thick, or made from wood used to make clives, or from strips of palm leaves, and they should follow this shape:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres; et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor; puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure; plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol; car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	but it is necessary that the splint placed over the fracture be slightly thicker and wider than the others; and it should also be as long as is appropriate for the limb, whether small or large; then incise over the splints as you did in the first dressing, then wrap a thread around them, just as was done in the first dressing on the fracture; the tighter above, the looser below; and it is necessary that the threads be of medium thickness, neither too thick nor too thin, and should be made of soft linen; for if the threads are too thick, like those fools who make their dressings with twisted linen cords, and this is a great error, because the dressing cannot be even if it is too fine, and it must not have less than two fingers' width between each splint.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is pierced by the points of stakes after they are driven into their flesh, place cotton plugs or linen strips beneath them so that they do not become infected.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is with the breacher, and the bone is broken, I will tell the treatment for it hereafter.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And you should know that it is not appropriate to extract stakes from all broken limbs on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant; et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	For when the limb is large, it is not appropriate to place stakes except after five days or seven, or more depending on your judgment of a hot abscess that might occur; and here you see the manner of ancient plasters for restoring fractures, dislocations, and twists: take flour from the walls of the mill, mix it abundantly with eggs, apply this preparation neither too thick nor too thin, and use it; this is the common method of a plaster for healing fractures in various conditions, especially for women and children, because it is neither too hot nor too cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana V З.; alechil VIIII З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Another way to make a plaster for restoring fractures, dislocations, and twists: take З of abares and storax and enule and asafoetida and gum arabic and mastic, ana X З.; myrrh and aloes, ana V З.; alechil VIIII З.; and make powder, and mix with honey and egg yolk; if the person's constitution is hot, use this plaster, for it is well composed, and quickly restores broken bones, and suits many people.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.; acaice VI З.; bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Another way to make a plaster for twists: take mastic and bistort, ana X З.; myrrh and aloes, ana VIIII З.; acacia VI З.; Armenian bole X З., and grind well, and mix with water or egg yolk, and administer.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	Another method of plaster for joints and bones out of place, and to ease the pain arising, and the use of the bone, and the fracture: take new wool, and boil it in oil, and apply it to the area.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	This plaster does not heal, but it is good for soothing a hot abscess, and properly relieves the pain.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another method of plaster to heal broken bones: take dried mulberry leaves and herb petals, and grind them together, then make a plaster.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	Another method of plaster for the restoration of a broken bone and to reduce the remaining abscess.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Take root of vervain, chamomile, violets, flour of oats, of each one part; and grind, and mix with wine, and if the member is heated, mix it with moist coriander water, or with water, and use it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	Another way of making an ointment stronger than the first one, when a hard abscess comes to the restoration of the limb.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Take roots of vervain, seeds of flax, rosemary, hellebore, and pennyroyal, and flowers of violets and chamomile, of each one part; and grind, and mix with salt water, or sweet water, or with wine, according to the heat of the limb, and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Hippocrates says in his book that one should not apply anything to a broken limb for restoration other than cerotic made of wax and oil, and nothing else, and he says it should be neither too hard nor too soft.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And Galen seems to suggest that for restoring a broken limb, dry and somewhat warm things should be applied, such as myrrh, aloes, and incense, and similar substances, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another way to make an ointment that is good for injuries and pain: take mutton suet, hair of men's head, feathers of birds, and vervain, in equal parts, grind them together, and make an ointment with it.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor; puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut; et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then he loosens it a little after, and take care if the patient does not feel any pain, nor has moved the bone from its place; do not loosen by hand for several days. And if pain comes to the spot, or itching, without rest or swelling, hurry up and loosen it, and remove the plaster now; and take fine linen, and sponge of sea water moistened, and plunge in water, and lift the area until the itching ceases, and the pain is eased; then let the limb rest for an hour, then put on dry wool, soaked in water or rose oil, and bind it over a bandage, until you are sure there will be no hot abscess; and ease the inflammation of the limb, and remove the pain, then resume the subtle plastering, and a little plaster, but do not press so hard as before; and cautiously until he is healed.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that the abscess is reddened and painful and swollen has been removed from all sides, and you need ointment and linen, then begin again as you did first equally.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII; et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus; adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir; arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure; par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	And if nothing happens to the limb as we have said, do not release it before III days or IIII or V or VII; and sometimes leave it for XX days, according to what you see, until the swelling subsides, and the edges of the wound heal; then bind it tighter than before, and fatten up the flesh, as I said before; and if you see that the area dries more than necessary, understand that no new tissue will form; soak it then with warm water whenever you release it, every third day, and loosen the bandage a little; thus prevents new tissue from forming in the limb, and improves quickly what the foolish doctors do wrongly: they rush to restore movement to the limb. This is harmful, and such practices are fearful, and I see nothing other than patience and proper treatment.
des diverses manieres de brisure	Of various kinds of fractures
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees; car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	There are many kinds of fractures, and various shapes, and the causes are distinct; for there are fractures made by sword strikes, where the collarbone breaks all the bone up to the surface that is beneath the bone, like splitting a staff or pole; and for this kind of fracture it is called "haichure".
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces II brisures grans ou petite.	When the sword strikes the bone from above without piercing it, this kind of fracture is called "absolute"; and the wound from these two fractures is large or small.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is an embedded impact, or a crack from falling on stone, or other similar incidents.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is a break that approaches as far as the membrane beneath the bone, whether it is on top of or underneath the bone, and this wound is either large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»; et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	And if there is a wound in the bone as fine as a hair, and the crack is small, and for this reason it is called a "hairline" fracture; and if the wound is made by being hit with a stone, or falling, or something similar, causing a piece of the bone to break inward, and the place where it breaks resembles how blacksmiths shape metal when they work on pots; then a piece of the bone enters inside.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant; et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	And this happens more often to those who have moist bones in their head, such as the head of a child; and in all these types of fractures, small pieces are broken off like splinters; and I will speak about it at its place.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And we recognize all manners of fractures by the depression above them, and through examination with probes, and by the corrupted flesh that is upon them.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The hair-like appearance is known by this: when the bone has been exposed and rubbed over it, the fracture appears clearly black.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of the fracture, be mindful of the patient's symptoms, and if you see any bad signs, such as vomiting bile, loss of understanding, convulsions, cold sweats, intermittent fever, and eyes protruding and reddening, along with other similar conditions in many cases, it cannot heal without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see any alarming symptoms and hope for recovery, then begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the wounded person first comes to you, and it is in winter, then it is necessary to remove the bone before the fourteenth day from the injury that you may.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is in summer, then hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, so that the tissue beneath the bone does not become corrupted, and avoid the accidents we have mentioned.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset; et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	And if the fracture of the bone reaches to the tissue that covers the brain, then it is necessary for you to split the fractured part as follows: take the head of the wounded person and expose the bone in every way that you can, and around the shape of the wound as deep as you can, and if blood flows from the opening of the wound or a dangerous abscess occurs, provide appropriate assistance, which involves filling the area with cloths soaked in rose oil; then allow the wound to rest until the dangerous abscess is calmed and bleeding has stopped; then begin removing around the bone according to two methods of work: one method is to cut narrowly ahead, and this is the form:
Et puis i boute I autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then make the second cut larger than the first one.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And the second method is to have various cuts of different sizes, some narrow and others wide, with pointed tips, made of iron; and work gently so that you do not injure the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou I cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des III manieres de tareres:	And if the bone is hard and protruding, you must pierce around it, administering cuts with chisels, but not so deeply that they penetrate beyond the skull bone, and the tip should have a margin or circle to prevent the point from going through the bone; and you need several of these, each placed in its proper position on the skull; and this is the form of the third type of chisel:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes I tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	The quality to pierce around the broken bone is that you place one point on the bone and turn it until you know the bone is pierced; then move the point a little way off and do this all around, then with your incisors cut out the space of the bone between the holes, and do this as finely and lightly as we have said, until you draw out the bone in your hand or with any tools that you have such as pincers, forceps; and be careful not to touch the brain or the dura mater.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire; et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	And when you have pierced and extracted the bone, it is necessary to remove any remaining tightness that adheres to the bone with another tool similar to an incisor, but it must be more blunt and finer than the other incisor; and if there remains anything of small bones or scales, remove them lightly with your tools; then treat the wound with poultices and ointments as we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And the other method of work is that which Galen says, who is more skilled; and he praises it greatly, and this is his word.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is necessary first that you uncover a part of the bone where the fracture is apparent, so that when you have uncovered this part, you place underneath the head of this knife-shaped instrument, which has the following form:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz; s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	And do not cut from one side, and the part is beveled on two sides, so that the cutting edge faces the bone; then strike gently with a small mallet, so that you cut lightly around the entire bone, and take great care of the tissue beneath; if it is adhering to the bone, remove it gently, as it can be removed without harm and without fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the break in the bone does not penetrate to the membrane, and the bone is only cut from above, with small pieces, then it is necessary behind that roughness, to remove the scales with a fine scraper of which you must have various quantities, to adapt appropriately for each place according to the work and shape of the fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	Start with large scrapers and then use finer ones, and do not stop until it is well done.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	In each of the other haircuts and fine fractures, you must adapt according to their direction; and this is something that cannot be taught to one who has not studied this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie; puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement; et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication; et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	And if the scalp is exposed, then you must take a piece of linen according to the size of the wound, and moisten it in rose oil, and place it over the wound; then take another double layer of cloth and moisten it with wine and rose oil, and place it on top of the first piece of cloth; do this as gently as possible so that you do not burden the scalp, then cover it with another bandage, but do not tighten it more than necessary to hold the dressing in place; leave it like this for one or two days until the swelling subsides, then remove it and apply medicines such as lily root, wheat flour, powdered frankincense, aristolochia, and similar things; make a powder of these substances and apply it to the wound, and immediately administer cleansing medicines without causing irritation; and be careful that the wound remains clean so that you do not leave any ointment on it or allow pus to accumulate, for when pus forms over the membrane covering the brain, it can cause severe damage to the patient; because when something irritating is applied to the scalp, it can penetrate through.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Therefore, take heed if any harmful accident comes to the patient, as we have said, it is doubtful without doubt.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac; puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if blackness appears other than from the medicine that has been applied, which may have such an effect, then you should take one part of honey and three parts of rose oil, mix them well, and apply it to the surface; then treat it according to appropriate methods until it is healed.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les II parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont II os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	Know that sometimes the two parts of the nose above are broken, or only one part, because they are two bones; and the lower one is made of cartilage, which does not break but may be pushed or twisted, and then heals.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil; et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	And if one of the two parts is broken, you must insert your small probe or needle into the anus, and align that break within your index finger, and outside with the pouch, until the anus returns to its natural shape; do this gently, and be careful that the patient does not feel pain from your work.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the break is in the upper part of the anus and your finger cannot reach the place, then you must align it along a probe slightly thick.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues; se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	And if the break is in two parts, then do as described, and hurry to restore it on the first day if you can; if not, after seven or ten days when the abscess has subsided, then insert into the head of the anus patches of linen if the break is in one part.
Ou tu boutes I autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	When you insert one from the other side, if there is a fracture; and let the tents be so thick that they fill the passages of the nose.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	And some physicians say that the tents should be moistened with butter, and changed each day.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	I do not think that is right, but they should be moistened with a mixture of almond and egg, and powdered millet; then leave the tent in place until the bone is set, and the cartilage hardened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a I souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And sometimes one inserts goose feathers in place of tents, and if there is any inflammation around, and the fracture holds, and the patient breathes through them; do as you wish.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en I poc de dyaquilon.	And if abscesses occur in the nose while you are working on them, apply cerate or moistened cotton in rose oil, or a bit of myrrh.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis; et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu; et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if no abscesses occur, apply a plaster from behind made of linseed meal and powdered incense, cooked with some egg white, then place light plugs, but do not tie up the nose; and if there is a small fracture in the nose, broken into small pieces, extract it with suitable instruments, then suture the fissure, and cure with substances that generate flesh and close wounds, such as plasters and ointments appropriate for this purpose; and if there is no wound inside the nose, treat it with tents, and place strips of wax until it heals.
de la routure de la mandibule	Of the fracture of the jawbone
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jaw is fractured from below, and there is no wound to bleed from, and the breakage is only superficial, and it is not broken in two pieces, except for a small crack inside, one can easily recognize this.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	If the fracture is on the right side, you should insert your index finger into the patient's mouth; and if the fracture is on the left jawbone, then insert your right index finger, gently push the fracture inward, and support it from the outside with the other hand, making it even.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en II, si covient que tu aministres extension de II pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the jaw fracture is displaced in two parts, you must administer an extension of both sides until they are equal.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus I drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And if the movement of the teeth occurs, or fracture, then pull them with a gold or silver or silk thread, then place on the broken mandible wax, and put on two cloths; and place on the cloth a large well-made splint, or a piece of leather equal in length and width to the mandible, and bind it securely as you can, and instruct the patient to rest, and eat light foods.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en III semainnes.	And if you see that the figure changes, then loosen it on the third day and then adjust what has changed; and apply a plaster with mill powder mixed with plenty of eggs or ground cumin after removing the wax; and place light wool over the plaster, and if the plasters stick and the patient's condition does not change, leave it until he is well; many times he is healed in three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if small abscesses come, then treat them as we have said many times.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is a fracture and wound together, examine whether any piece of the bone has been removed; then carefully remove it with appropriate instruments.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, then widen it with flame according to your need.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus I des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have removed all these pieces, and none remain, then close the wound if it is wide, and apply suitable plasters to it, to heal flesh, until it is healthy.
de la forcele	of the strength
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc III manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en II, et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	The collarbone breaks multiple times in front of the shoulder, and there are three types of fractures: where it is broken into two pieces but not displaced, which is easier to heal; where there is a fracture with an open wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies II ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And the procedure is when the fracture is without a wound, that you have two assistants, one to hold the shoulder where the collarbone is broken; and the other to extend the neck towards the affected part; then set the fracture with your hands so that its form is as it should be, and there are no signs of displacement.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if you need to extend further, place under the patient's shoulder a round ball of cloth or wool, and make it as large as necessary; then extend and lift the collarbone, and hold the ball with your hand so that you can set the fracture properly.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule I oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot pull the head of the humerus out due to its position, then the patient should lie supine on his back, and place a medium-sized pillow under the shoulder, and push the shoulder down by the minister, until the bone of the humerus is raised.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	Then align the fracture with your hands, and if you find it fragmented, you must cut into it; gently pull apart the pieces, and if the bone cannot join due to any elevation, cut it with one of your incisors; but place this instrument under the humerus to protect the surface.
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os; et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	And it resembles a spoon and is not bristled, and should be as wide as necessary according to the size of the bone and the strength of the work; and let it have two edges, as you see, one broad and the other narrow, like the outline of the wound you made when you treated the bones; and when you are certain of a hot abscess, sew up the wound, and if the outline is small where you suspect a hot abscess, pad the wound with cloths and bandages according to its size.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille I drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if painful abscesses come, moisten a cloth in rose oil and egg yolk and wine, and apply it.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier; puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant; et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint; et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors; puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	The treatment of a bone fracture, whether it involves cuts or incisions, is that you place the bone with the plaster made from mill powder and egg whites, and put light wool over it; if necessary, place a small ball under the joint. Then take a very wide bandage about one palm in width, place the double cloth and plaster on top of the wool; then take a fine stick three fingers wide and long, wrap the bandage around so that its ends hang down; place the stick over the fracture site, and roll the bandage around the neck, under the healthy joint, and under the affected one. Tighten it from each side, and when you see that the ligament holds the fracture properly, and clearly that the stick does not move off the bone, check it daily, and when the ligaments loosen, re-tighten them; have the patient lie on their back, place a small pillow under the joint at night to lift the shoulder up; this will lighten the force of the fracture by elevating the shoulder, and you bind the arm to the neck for twenty days; then restart the plaster if necessary, keep it tight until it is healed; she is restored in about 28 days or less for some people.
de la brisure de l’espaule	of the fracture of the shoulder
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en xxv, Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	Rarely does the shoulder break either wide or in the middle, and one can only feel it by touch; thus, treat it according to the appearance of the fracture, and reset it according to its natural form in all ways possible. Then place powder from the mill with an abundance of eggs, and use light bandages, and put on two layers of cloth; then place a wide and fine pillow, slightly wider than the shoulder, and if any part of the pillow is uneven where it touches the shoulder, stuff that area with linen bandages so that the pillow lies evenly. Then bind it tightly with a broad strip of cloth so that the pillow does not move from its place, and check the binding every day; and each time it loosens, tighten it again, and make sure the pillow remains even if it shifts out of place, and have the patient lie on their side; and the shoulder will be healed in twenty or twenty-five days. When this period is completed, release it carefully, for it is not a bone that resets easily.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a piece of the bone protrudes and points away from the heart, then cut it off, and do as we have said in the fracture of the collarbone to ease a hot abscess.
de la brisure dou pis	of the fracture of the foot
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer.	The foot is sometimes fractured in the middle, but this happens rarely; however, it often breaks at the side.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	And when it is fractured in the middle, it leans to the side, and the patient feels great pain, and lacks appetite, and thirsts, and may vomit blood, and the movement of the bones can be felt clearly through the skin.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met I cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des II costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en I drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is such that the patient lies supine on their back, and a cushion is placed between the shoulders, then press the shoulders, and bring together the ribs of both sides with your hands, and carefully align it equally in all ways possible until the shape of the bone is as it should be; then place poultices and dressings made of finely ground salt or other light material on top, and wrap them around the broken bone so that they do not move; then tie the bandage tightly to the back, and tighten it appropriately, and check each hour the binding, and if it loosens, then tighten it again; and if it needs to be untied because of corrosion or itching in the area, or pain or an abscess, then hurry, and untie it, and apply a new dressing as needed by the circumstances; then reapply the poultice and tie it tightly until it is secure.
de la brisure des costes	Of the fracture of the ribs
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	Know that the break in the ribs comes from their thick part behind, and at the front they are thin; and people feel this well during examination with both hands.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And the restoration is such that you place the fracture evenly, as is appropriate.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	And then apply the plaster, and bind it with a splint if you need to.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And if the fracture of the ribs inclines inward, then the patient feels great pain and piercing, as with pleurisy, because the bone pierces the tissue; and it becomes sharp points, and quickly vomits a lot of blood, and this is serious illness, and the elderly often suffer greatly from it.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And there are those who say that it is necessary to administer foods that swell the belly, to push out the rupture.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not do this so that abscesses do not occur there if they have not already come.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if they have occurred, then heal them.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And some say that one should place cupping glasses on the area to suck strongly, and this seems reasonable; however, there is doubt whether the cups will draw the excesses to the area due to the disposition of weakness.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And some say that one should cover the area with wool soaked in hot oil, and place tents between the ribs to evenly distribute the layer around it, then treat it as one would for pleurisy, with food and medication.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient feels great pain that they cannot bear from the bone piercing the tissue, and there is doubt for the patient, it is necessary to cut into the place of the broken rib, and put an instrument underneath to protect the surface; then one must saw through the bone lightly, and then sew together the two edges of the wound if it is large, and treat with plasters until it heals.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if hot abscesses come, place cloths soaked in rose oil on them; and treat the area as needed for an abscess, and let the patient lie awake on their side where it is necessary, until they are healed.
de la brisure dou col	of the fracture of the neck (or collarbone)
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	Sometimes there is a fracture of the neck bones, and it can happen that they bend; and also at the spine of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	And when this happens to someone, and you want to know if they will be well or not, pay attention if you see their hands soft, swollen, and dead-colored, and cannot move or extend them, and when you prick them with a needle, they do not feel it.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	Know that it is fatal in many cases, and if they can move and feel well when pinched and pricked, know that the joint of the bone is safe, and that the patient may be cured, if proper care is applied.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	And if a similar thing happens to the spine of the back, and you want to know if they will be well or not, pay attention if the feet are weakened, and if there are symptoms that are like those in the hands, and on the back there is bloating and involuntary evacuation; and when one turns them over onto their stomach, there is also involuntary evacuation.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	And when he is lying on his back and wishes to sit up, he cannot.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	Know that it is deadly; do not labor in its treatment.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if these accidents do not befall him, then the matter is lighter.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the treatment is that you should apply it if there is a hot abscess, using rose oil or boiled egg oil until it subsides; then place one of the comforting and drying plasters on it, bind it with a cloth, and instruct the patient to rest; and do not let them sleep on the part where they feel pain until they are healed.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if any bone should break, it must be treated on the chest; remove the bone, then stitch together the two edges of the wound if it is large, and treat it with an ointment that heals flesh until it is healed; and if the head of the bone is broken, which is called the "head of the knuckle," place your left thumb inside it and align it as best you can with your other hand, then apply the plaster and bandage if needed; then compress it, and if there are any loose bones, cut them out and treat the wound until it is healed.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	of the fracture of the hip bone
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	It rarely happens that the bone of the hip is broken, and if it does happen, there may be a slight shortening at the head; it fractures lengthwise, and inclines inward, causing pain to the patient in that place, and bruising, and swelling where it is broken.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And the restoration is such that you extend your hand above, until you are above the break; and feel where the fracture is and its shape; and if the fracture is only at the head, make it equal so that it has a natural appearance.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the fracture is lengthwise, where it inclines inward, make the patient lie on their belly until the restoration of that fracture is prepared.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	And when you have made it even, place the plaster on top, then put a stick of wood or cork over it, and hold the binder so that it does not move; and fill the area under the ribs until the flesh is level.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And instruct the patient to sleep on their healthy side or on their back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And if hot abscesses come up, do not touch them until the hot abscesses are appeased, and place what we said before on it; then return to the restoration process, and bind as is appropriate, if there is no adverse incident; and this is the method.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	of the fracture of the shoulder
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des II manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren I fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The shoulder joint is what is between the collarbone and the head of the shoulder, and if it is broken, you must restore it according to one of the two methods: one of which is that you take a staff filled with healing ointment, in this form:
Et lie as II chiés II liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus I siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	And tie the two heads with two ropes and pull them up, then seat the patient on a chair; then lay the broken arm on the staff, until it reaches the armpit, and place a curved piece of wood in between, then raise it with some heavy object or have an assistant hold it down; then place the fracture level with both hands, so that it returns as needed.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a II ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout I liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And the other method is that you lift the patient onto his uninjured side, and tie the hand to his neck, then instruct two assistants that one should pull above the fracture at the hands, and the other below along the entire length of the arm, stretching each part.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	And if you wish for the extraction to be stronger, then remove the ligament below the fracture, and above the fracture, and extend each of the muscles on its side.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the fracture is close to the head of the shoulder, then you must place one ligament below the socket, and the other towards the side, below the fracture; and likewise, if the fracture is towards the side, then place one ligament lightly, without labor, until the fracture is level above the area, and above the side; then equalize the fracture as it should be, and compress it, unless abscesses cause issues.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a VII jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	And if abscesses appear, do not compress it until the seventh day, and apply linen moistened in lard and rose oil until the abscesses subside; then compress it, and the manner of compressing is that you place a plaster on the fracture, then bring the arm up to the shoulder joint, and place your hand on the shoulder or chest; and wrap it with a cloth, and compress around the shoulder joint and the arm, so that the arm is in position, unless anything prevents it, or if the bone has not moved.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele I doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure III dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	And if you doubt that the bone does not move, use splints, and place over the fracture a splint wider and stronger than the others, and have between each splint one finger's width, and let each splint be so large that it passes the fracture three fingers' width on each side; then press upon the splints as I said at the beginning of the chapter on fractures, more firmly and less in spreading.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	And if you see the arrangement of the splints and the binding as we have said, when you restore the broken member, and you fear a hot abscess, leave it tied up until the seventh day, as we have said; then examine the bandage every three days to ensure that itching or swelling does not occur at the site, where the new tissue cannot form because it is too tight.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	If it is reduced, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	And if no such accident occurs, do not attempt to dislocate it for III days or more, and let the patient sleep on his back, with his hands on his stomach; place under the shoulder one cushion filled evenly with wool, and check every hour of day or night that the figure of the broken limb does not move, nor is its ligament softened; reduce it by the power of medicine, and give him the food we have mentioned before, in such a way that the food is initially light; and when he begins to recover, let it be more substantial.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	And it is customary that the shoulder and the leg should be treated for XL days in total; and then they must be dislocated and administered baths and medicinal ointments to heal the area.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	And if the stricture is bad and stuck, then wait one day or two months to loosen it.
de la brisure du bras	of the fracture of the arm
Li bras est compos de II os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the two "fascicles," of which one is small, and it is the one that is near the elbow; and the other is large, and it is the one that is below, towards the little finger; perhaps only the larger fascicle is broken, or the smaller one, and sometimes both together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	When the smaller fascicle is broken, the restoration is easy, and the healing is quick; and when the larger one is broken, the healing is difficult, and more troublesome than when both are broken together.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	If it is the small bone that is broken alone, then it should be gently extended and set evenly.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	And if it is the large bone that is broken, then it should be more firmly compressed; and lay him on a cushion, and raise his hand higher than the others, and the small one lower than the other hands, and let the patient lie crossed over himself, and place the cushion in front of him higher so that the patient does not suffer any labor; then extend the helper's arm to the underside part of his hand at the joint, or another helper above.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And then set the bones evenly, according to their natural form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if there are multiple fractures, place each piece in its proper position, and if any are displaced and cause pain to the heart, and you cannot restore it to its proper position, then cut it out as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if with the treatment of wounds, I have spoken of it in a separate chapter; then take that treatment.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	And if in the beginning of the restoration abscesses occur, apply a strip of cerate made from rose oil and white wax, which should not be too hard or too soft; and place this strip gently over the abscess until it is alleviated.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	And then remove the cerate and apply a poultice of powder from the mill with plenty of egg; place the bandages on it, and ensure that the bandage for the wound is thicker and slightly wider than the others; and note that there should be six bandages on the arm in various positions: whether one or two are over the wound; tighten more around the wound than elsewhere, as I said at the beginning of the chapter; and let the cloths that cover the wound be soft and moist, not hard or rough; and let the thread from which it is made be linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have stated.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And examine the limb and its joint after several days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	And if any bad accident happens to the limb, such as itching that comes to the limb, then it is necessary to rinse the limb with warm water until the itch subsides; and let the limb rest loosely.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And then resume the compression, and if the joint is weakened and the bone dislocated, or similar things, address them.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses I poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And be careful if the swelling cannot come to the limb because it is too tight, then you should loosen it a bit, and leave it like this for several days until the swelling runs through, and then compress it.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	And if none of these things we have mentioned come to the patient, do not dislocate until twenty days have passed.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	And when around the neck, then he can place his hands on his neck, and let his necks be equal, and beware of movement and shaking, and sleep on his back; and know that this fracture is restored in thirty days or thirty-five, and perhaps in twenty days, according to the compositions and the natures of the virtues.
de la brisure de la main	Of the fracture of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	Know that on the back of the hand and the thumb there are few fractures, and it rarely happens but rather sprains many times.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en I drapeil de lin.	And when the palm of the hand is fractured or sprained, it is necessary that the patient sit with a cross support and sit upright facing straight ahead; then place his hand on an extended cloth, and the practitioner should extend the broken bones and align them properly until they are well joined; then apply a plaster and bandages, unless abscesses occur, then place a splint according to the size of the area; and wrap it in one linen cloth.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	And if the fracture is around the base of the foot, make a sphere from strips of cloth, and instruct the patient to bind it to their fractured sole; then wrap it with a long strip of cloth, and let the knot be as large as the palm of the hand, and tightly secure it, as is appropriate.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the fracture is at the base, place a splint above and another below on the sole, so that the hand remains open and straight, then wrap it tightly around the hand, and secure the wrapping between the two splints.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en I tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	And if the fracture affects one of the toes, especially a toe bone, place it straight as is appropriate; and bind it with the sole, and if necessary, place a small straight splint to elevate the fracture, so it does not move; and if the fracture is in another finger, such as the index or any other, place it straight and bandage it together with the adjacent healthy finger; or keep them all in position as they should be moved, or place a splint on it like for a toe bone; and take care during restoration and in the treatment of hot abscesses, and support whoever comes to you, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	of the broken thigh
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie I liien desus la briseure, et I autre desoz.	The bone of the thigh is often broken, and this can be seen when it turns forward and backward; and its restoration is that one ligament is tied above the break, and another below.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And the patient lies on their back, then each assistant stretches out his ligament equally; and this is when the break is in the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	And if the break is near the root of the thigh, then one of the ligaments should be towards the groin, and the other ligaments below the break.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	And if it is near the knee, then the ligament should be close to the knee, and the extension downward; then place the bone evenly with both hands, as per its natural alignment, and then apply the plaster, and bind it, unless abscesses arise.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	And if there is a hot abscess, let it subside before you return to your work and treatment; the healing process occurs in such a manner.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	It is necessary that you wrap around the fracture a bandage doubled in II or III layers, and remove any excess; then turn the leg so that the heels come to the root of the thigh, and insert one long thread between the thigh and the leg near the knee, with the ends of the thread above; then wind the bandage around the leg and thigh, then place splints on the fracture, and put a splint on the bone of the leg; then fill the space between the leg and the thigh with soft cloth to make the compression even, then begin to tie tightly III or IV turns over the fracture; and as you go further up from the fracture, the tighter it should be bound; then take the two ends of the thread that you inserted between the leg and the thigh, and tie three splints above them, then come back under at the head of the thread until you reach the foot; and bind it so tightly that it does not move out of place, then leave it thus, since no abscess or swelling will occur.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	And if it happens, disassemble what is there and arrange it as we have said many times; and if there are bone fragments that cause pain, they must be removed if possible; and if it cannot be done, the area must be cut open, and the muscle drawn out; and treat it as we have said until it is healed.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	And sometimes the thigh is broken in such a way that splints are placed on it, as with the shoulder and arm; nevertheless, the patient does not suffer during this kind of restoration.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en L jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And know that the thigh is restored in 21 days, or a few less or more, depending on the differences in temperaments.
de la ruelle dou genoil	of the knee joint
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	Know that in the joint of the knee there is often a fracture, but it bends many times.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	And if it breaks, it is usually just a crack, or perforation, and results in all kinds of wounds, and feels like a wound, and one can feel this very well.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is such that you put equal those which are cut to their sides, until they are assembled as much as possible; then apply a poultice, and if necessary place a round splint, and bind it as required, then observe all the precautions we have mentioned for other fractures, such as hot abscesses and similar conditions; provide each case with what is appropriate until it is healed.
de la brisure de la jambe	Of the breaking of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	Know that in the leg there are two bones, of which one is called by its proper name "mustelz", and the other is called "foscile"; and any kind of fracture occurs as it does to the arm, and for this reason the restoration is just as it is for the arm equally, and the treatment is all here. And if both bones are broken together, then the leg is turned in every way.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the finer bone is broken, it turns forward.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz.	And if the larger bone is broken, there is great pain, and it can be seen well; and it turns backward.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	Then administer extension, and place it evenly, and bind the splints equally; but still, if the fracture is ugly, and there are many pieces, the extension should be smaller and gentler; and proceed according to your ability.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren II faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en II leus I bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent I bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have completed your work, take two splints that fit the leg from one side and the other, and let them run along the length of the leg from the knee to below; then wrap it with two strips of cloth above and below, and tie it in the middle as well, so at this point the leg cannot tilt right or left, and thus it is well; some apply a plaster along the length of the leg, and if it is made of wood, they place the leg to prevent movement, and properly done this is also for fractures where there is an open wound; and move each day the leg, to see if there is an abscess or any other accident; treat as necessary until it heals.
de la brisure des os dou piet	of the fracture of the foot bones
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle there is no fracture, but sometimes a fracture occurs in the bones of the foot and at the two toes, and it happens that a crack occurs in many conditions.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a II chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	And if a fracture occurs in the bones of the foot and you see these bones protrude one over the other, place the patient's foot on the ground as if they wanted to walk, then now put your foot on his, where the bones are raised, and press so hard until they return to their places; then apply a plaster and bandages, and under the sole of the foot place a small board filled with two handfuls, then bind it tightly around the foot after you have wrapped it in cloths, and other things that you need.
Et quant III jors ou IIII seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when three or four days have passed, undo the bandage, for you will find the bones even, whether broken or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a II ou III, ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en I drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	And if any of the bones are broken, restore them as we have said for the two of the hand; then place a splint along the length of the bone, and make it slightly wider, then place under the foot the board that I mentioned, and secure it properly; and if there are two or three, or more, broken, place on each bone a splint according to its size, wrapped in one piece of linen cloth, and secure the board under the foot; and let them be placed at the head of the board so as to cover the arch of the foot, so that it holds well.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And you must not forget the other things that I have said to other fractures; and treat each case as is appropriate.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	of the fracture of the bone of the thumb
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the bone of a woman's urethra is fractured, make her sit extended, then lean her towards the part of the back, and hold her from behind; then fill the urethra of the patient with cotton, and place there something as thick as a reed; then raise the woman, lifting her back little by little, until the cotton reaches the entrance to the urethra, and return the bone along with the reed; and when she wants to urinate, remove the cotton, and after she has urinated, put it back; do this for seven days or around that time: the fracture will be healed. If you wish, take a sheep's bladder, tie a tube to its opening, and insert the entire bladder into the urethra; then blow strongly through the tube until the bladder is inflated inside her: this will help heal the fracture; afterwards fill it with cotton, and leave it in for several days until she is healed.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	And when the bone of the finger of a man is broken, or of a woman, restore it as we have said about the thigh bone; and these nearby fractures are not hidden from one who applies his study and practice to them, and understand my book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	For the fracture indicates in various ways the proper method of restoration: understand then.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse III jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	In the shaft, when it is broken, take a goose quill and insert the shaft into it; then wrap cloths around it, and leave it for three days or until it has healed somewhat, and it will heal quickly.
de brisure avec plaie	of fracture with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is necessary for one who has a fracture with a wound, especially if it is large, such as the bone of the thigh or shoulder or similar, to be treated now, so that the treatments we have described bear witness.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound heals, then apply a constrictive dressing of vitriol, if you have nothing else, and then begin to restore the fracture at the same hour, or on that day, unless abscesses form.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if abscesses form, then delay the restoration until a new day, until the abscesses are subdued, and do not tamper with it on the third or fourth day, for you would cause a harmful incident.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the broken bone is apparent on the exposed chest, then it is necessary to set it gently with your hands, with slight extension.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a VII dois ou VIII de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne III ou IIII, selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if the extension is not available to make even with your hands, then use this instrument made of iron, which is seven or eight inches long, and the width is according to the size of the wound; and for this, it is necessary for the physician to prepare three or four, depending on what is needed for each fracture treatment; let it be smooth and a bit thick, so that it does not bend under pressure on the limb during your work, and let it be sharp in front and thick from the middle forward, as follows:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	And it is called "palainche", for which the curved head should be placed on top of the visible bone; and push it in one go, until it returns, and let them be equal to each other.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And if the fracture is subtle, and the instrument cannot properly grasp the bone, then you must cut the head of the bone until the instrument has sufficient hold.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you cannot return the bone as we have said, cut it with an appropriate instrument, either an incisor or saw, to your ability; then reset what remains in the bone of hardness and small fragments.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	And when the bone is reset, and the patient feels great pain afterward, know that it is not in its natural place.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	So place it in its proper position, then moisten the bandage with black styptic wine, and properly if it is in summer; and do not put on the wound cerate or anything else that has oil, for it may cause putrefaction and corruption; then administer splints once you have restored the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and cover the surrounding area according to the size of the wound, and take great care that the wound is not constricted with the fracture; and many times foolish physicians have done this, causing death or corrosion in some cases; and let the bindings be looser and lower than other fractures.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	And if the wound is bad or large, and you fear that some harmful accident may occur, as we have said, and you find pain in the area, then it should not be covered with splints; but wrap around, instead of splints, hard cloths, and secure them.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And when you see after one day or two the wound beginning to heal, remove what you have put on with vinegar, and apply healing ointment to the wound, such as tetrafarmacon ointment and similar.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre II fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And it is necessary to untie the limb twice a day, in the morning and in the evening, until it is healed and sound.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And it is necessary that the limb be positioned in such a way that the wound runs down slightly.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if many days pass and it cannot heal but continues to form a wound, know that there are small pieces of bone, for which you must probe the wound with a probe, and remove all these displaced fragments that cause pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	And if a fistula comes to the place, or any other kind of corruption, then it is necessary that you treat it, according to what he says in his chapter above.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And when the bone is broken and exposed on the limb, such as the bone of the thigh or shoulder, and other similar cases involving large limbs, do not attempt to remove it, for many times this results in death, but let it be until it becomes rotten; perhaps it will fall off after twenty days or thirty, then treat the wound if you can; and if you cannot, leave it.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	of bruises that come upon the joints
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	They often come after the injury, especially when it is near the joint, and it is a terrible thing to see the shape of the limb; and perhaps it cannot perform its natural functions.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Take care then when the sweat is fresh: if the minister applies styptic medicines, such as aloes, incense, and myrrh, and sarcocolle, acacia, and similar others, take any of these things or all together, and confit them with styptic wine or with plenty of egg whites or with oil; and place them on the wound in tampons, and press well, and do not loosen it for several days; then remove it, and start another one until the swelling is gone; or you can press onto a piece of plaster well made; because the property of the plaster is that it removes all the swellings above the limbs; and if the swelling has already turned into hardness like stone and needs to be removed, cut it off at the top, and let the excess appear; or you can shave it with some razor until it is gone, and treat it until it is healed.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	of the limb which is weak after recovery
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the fracture of the bone is restored, and the limb remains weak and delicate afterwards, this happens for many reasons: one reason is that it was bound too tightly, and was not bound as it should have been; or there were too many bindings, preventing proper nutrition from reaching the limb; or due to excessive washing; or due to too much movement at the wrong time; or because he has little blood in his body, so he is weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the treatment is that you make the patient eat and make the body soft, until the blood is multiplied within him; and administer baths, and give joy and rest; then apply pitch to the limb so that the pitch attracts abundant nutrition, and wash frequently with cold water, until the nourishment flows to the limb; and let it return to its natural form.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	of the limb twisted after the sickness
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai I emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	When the limb is twisted after restoration, and the bone broken openly, and the form of the limb is ugly, it does not lose its natural function entirely: do not believe those fools who say one must break the limb anew, and many foolish doctors have done this in our land; such work is blamed, and great harm comes from it, and perhaps even death; nevertheless, if the ligaments and muscles are fresh, they should be bathed with hot water, or herbs that soften should be cooked, such as leaves of vervain, roots, and meadow sweet, and similar things; make a softening plaster as well, such as good myrrh-based one, and take the mucilage of vervain, and mix it with fat from hen's flesh or sesame oil to form a plaster; you may also crush fatty figs with linseed meal, and similar medicines that reduce swelling.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	And sometimes the knot is removed for continuous and prolonged rubbing with wet hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And let motion be given to the limb every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if the twist is inflamed and hardened, like a stone, and needs to be removed with an instrument, then it must be cut gently up to the bone with precision; and apply careful attention and study in the treatment.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book of dislocations
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When a dislocation occurs to someone, it is necessary now to return it without delay.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors; toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	For if one delays, the limb swells, and by chance it may be reset with difficulty to its place; therefore, it is not right that one should move it when it is swollen: many times this causes spasm and other pains; however, when this happens, let the patient be bled, then leave him until the swelling subsides; then bathe the limb in warm water and oil, then reset it gently, and treat each part as the cure will come into its place.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have arranged the chapters on dislocations from the head down to the feet.
des mandibules	of the mandibles
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc II manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	It rarely happens that the mandibles are dislocated on both sides, and there are two ways of such dislocations: either they are slightly removed from their places and softened a little; or they are completely dislocated and hang towards the worse side, causing saliva to dribble from the mouth as it cannot be held back, nor can the mouth be closed, and the tongue wraps around itself with speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is slight, it returns to its place on its own in many cases.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie; et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	And if it is complete and thorough, then you must reset it quickly and without delay; and in such a way that the assistant holds the head of the patient, and pushes their fingers into the root of the dislocated jaw inside the mouth, if the dislocation is on both sides; and the other hand should be behind to make it even; and instruct the patient to soften their jaws and move them in all directions.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And the physician should place it evenly, so that it returns to its place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les II mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And if it is difficult to reset, especially if both mandibles are involved, soak them in warm water and oil until you can gently reset them; do not delay in resetting them, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens; et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules; et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	And when they are reset evenly, and the patient's mouth is swollen and needs to be softened, apply cloths moistened with a salve made of rose oil and wax, then bind it lightly with soft bands; and have the patient lie on their back, with their head resting between two cushions so that it does not move left or right, nor do they strain to open it, but eat light food until the pain is gone, and the mandibles are healed; and then eat what they wish lightly, without forcing the mouth to open for eating and drinking until the mandible is well healed.
Et se les II mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two mandibles cannot be reset properly in one hour, and are not returned to their places, fever and habitual diarrhea may come, and by chance vomiting of pure bile.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en VIIII jors.	And when you see this, then you know it is a prediction of death; and many times the one to whom it happens dies within nine days.
de la forcelle	of strength
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The dislocation cannot be corrected from the side within the continuity of the rib and the hip, and it is sometimes dislocated outward, and this can be felt.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint; et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez; et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	And the restoration is such that the patient lies supine on their back and extends their arms; then press the area firmly with your palm, and it will return to its place; then apply the plaster and bandage, and bind it tightly; and the head which is towards the side cannot be dislocated; if not, and if it does become dislocated sometimes, reset it to its place as we have said; then apply the plaster and the bandage, and bind it tightly, and instruct the patient to rest until they are healed; and in this same manner, the head of the spine is returned when it has been dislocated from its place.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc; et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	Know that the shoulder is dislocated in only three ways: one of which is that it dislocates at the part near the socket behind; and the second is at the part below the socket; and rarely does it dislocate above, this happens seldom; and it does not dislocate behind for the shoulder, nor within the nerves; and more often it dislocates below towards the socket, especially in those who have little flesh, because with them it goes quickly; with those who have enough flesh, it goes with difficulty, and returns with difficulty.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And sometimes it happens to some men that they suffer a blow or fracture, and the shoulder swells with a hot abscess, and they believe that it is dislocated because of this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	It is necessary then that you test it until you are certain; and then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste; et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens; et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier; et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	And it is known that the dislocation occurs when it is down towards the socket, and there is a difference between the diseased shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find their diversity manifest; and you will find in the head of the shoulder a hollow, and below the socket to touch the head of the shoulder, as if it were an eye; and the patient cannot bring his hand to his nose, nor move at all; and similarly, if it is dislocated above, it is not hidden, for you feel it manifestly by touching; and this manner of dislocation cannot be reduced when it is new, or if a child is ill.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	And the method is that the minister lifts the hand of the patient up high, then places his fingers under the armpit, and raises the joint with force upwards to its place; and the minister lifts the hand, and stretches it up, then puts it down; it will quickly come back into place.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree; puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide; et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere: et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar; et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	And if it does not come back as we have said within a few days, then the patient should be bathed in hot water; and the minister applies soothing and softening treatments, such as a decoction of elecampane, fenugreek, and marshmallow in water, which should be applied gently; then rub the patient’s back with it, and place a pad of wool under the armpit that is neither too soft nor too hard, then put your heel on the pad, lift the shoulder forcefully, and pull the patient's hand; another minister should hold the patient's head so he does not move downward; now the shoulder returns completely, and if you wish to reset it according to this method: have a man present who is larger than the patient; stand facing the side of the patient, place your shoulder under the armpit of the patient, lift him up high, so that the patient hangs from the arm; another minister should pull the patient's hand downward towards the stomach.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And if the patient is too light, something heavy may be placed with him, and now the dislocation returns.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile; puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment; et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	And it is reset in another way as well: one drives a long stake into the ground, which should be as thick as a pike, neither too large nor too thin; then place it under the patient, but let there be cloths beneath him, and the patient must stand against the shaft of the stake; then extend his hand downward on the other side, and the joint will return to its place quickly; and if it does not want to return despite all these things we have said, I do this cure: take a stake two arms' length long and four fingers wide, which has a thick head for entry beneath the armpit, according to this form:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus I eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	Then tie above the head of the body with strips of cloth so that the body does not hurt the patient, then place it under the seat of the patient; extend his arm along the long pole, and tie the shoulder on the pole, and the arm at the top of the hand, then put the arm on one side of a wide ladder, and let his hands hang down, and let the body hang from another part: the joint will now begin to heal.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is in place, however that may be, you must put under the seat a pad of equal thickness, then apply a poultice prepared with powdered mill and egg yolk incense around the entire shoulder, then gently pull down from underneath the seat, wrap the bandage over the poultice, and bind the hand to the neck, and let the hands remain thus.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés V jors ou VII, et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And it is necessary that he eat little, until the limb is strengthened, for it will heal sooner; and then eat more after 5 days or 7, and move it; and if it is firm and has not softened, it is healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint is dislocated due to moisture that has come into it, or for another reason, you must administer cauterizations with three perforations, as it is described before in the chapter on cauterizations.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés VII jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And if you do all this, and it dislocates after seven days, and the joint does not stay in place, and he cannot lift his arm upward, then know that the nerves at the top of the shoulder are cut or stretched or weakened; and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The dislocation towards the hip, and the breasts, or behind, is made by impulse, and extension of hands, and another minister tends to it; and treat until it is healed.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after healing there is stiffness in the limb, and slowness in movement, the patient should take many baths until the stiffness is alleviated, and returns to its original state.
de la dislocation dou coute	of the dislocation of the elbow
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	Know that the joint of the elbow is dislocated by bones, and returns to the bones; and if it is dislocated from all sides, especially in front and behind, and the dislocation is not properly set, as it can be seen and felt clearly; and dislocates according to each figure.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	And when you join the diseased part with the healthy part, then you can see clearly.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	For the joint is dislocated, and cannot bend the arm, nor touch the shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And you must reset it as if for deep abscesses that come out, because if such abscesses were to come out, it would be difficult to put back; and perhaps it cannot be entirely reset, especially when it is at the rear; this one is worse than others, causes greater pain, and may lead to death.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes II mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And the restoration is such that when it can be put back, you extend their hand with your two hands; and have their arm spread out, and place the joint between your palms around it, from above and below, and push the joint together at its base or at the root of the palm until it returns to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is to the front, it returns when he doubles his hand against his hand, and the knife that is dislocated from the root of the palm.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large; et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne; et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	And if it does not want to return to its place, administer strong extension; and when two ministers extend the arm, and hold it with both ministers so that it does not move during the extension; then turn the arm from each side, after you have wrapped a double length of cloth long and wide around it; and when you see at the joint the joint to his hand, anoint with some oil to soften the joint, then forcefully insert the joint until it returns; and when it is in place, apply dry plasters with egg yolk, and firmly bandage it, and pin the arm to the neck of the patient, and leave it for several days, then release it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	And if the joint is firmly in its place, undo the binding and leave it; and if you see that the joint does not bind tightly, redo the plaster and the binding, and leave it thus for some days, until it is firmly set; then release it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain; et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	And if he feels stiffness after the joint is reset and it moves, bathe and rub it well, and press until it is relieved; or place a piece of fat lamb's wool on the joint, then leave it for one day and night, then remove it, and have him enter a bath; when he sweats, gently rub the joint, then put the wool back on, and then enter the bath again; do this two or three times until he is healed; if you wish, place moistened horse manure warmed with butter over it and apply pressure; thus it will return to its proper condition.
li dislocation de la main	the dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	The dislocation of the hand is displaced, and its reduction is easy, more so than other joints. Nevertheless, it must be returned to its place quickly, in the same hour that it is dislocated, before swelling occurs or an abscess forms.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	And the reduction is done by placing the affected hand on a table, and having the assistant extend the hand, with the physician's hand placed equally so that it rests upon the appearance of the joint, pushing until it returns. Nevertheless, you must check if it is in place; then have the patient rest the back of their hand on a board for extension and reduction.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	And if the dislocation is on the back of the hand, then the patient should place the back of his hand on the table, and the physician places his hand upon that appearance of the joint.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If it returns now, that is well. If not, apply a poultice to soothe the abscesses, and leave it thus without restarting.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte; et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	And if he cannot bear it, and you cannot place it in its proper position after several days, then the joint remains dislocated; and it does no harm to the patient until his hand becomes softened, and he is unable to grasp anything at all: then you know that the nerves are severed, or the artery; there is nothing else but to cauterize near the case with a cautery, and perhaps nothing else will help.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse V jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when it is in place, apply the plaster we have mentioned, then bind it and leave it for five days, then untie it and leave it thus.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if he cannot move it well and there is some stiffness, moisten with hot water, and rub until it is healed.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	of the dislocation of the thumb of the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre; adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins; et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	Sometimes the thumb of the hand is dislocated to each side, sometimes on the back of the palm or on the front; then it is set, and pushed into place until it returns, then support the head of the thumb, and pull it towards the part where it is dislocated; and leave it for two days, and then make it equal that day; and tie it as we have said, and untie it daily, and move it, and retie it at night; and do this often until it is tight, and similarly do so if it is dislocated on the front of the hand, and do as you did before, until it is healed; and do the same when it is dislocated from another part.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	of the dislocation of the backspinе (or of the dislocation of the spine)
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the dislocation of the spine or neck is reset, if there are many resets, there is no cure, for death quickly follows the patient.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»: li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	And the signs are that vomiting happens without control, and they cannot hold it, and many times a limb is weakened, whether in both thighs or both arms or one. And many times the dislocation moves to four parts; when it moves to the back, it is called "gilbositez": the treatment is to check if the gilbositez came from childhood: there is no cure or immediate healing then.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit; mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	And for those who come from falling or blows or similar things, the ancient methods of treatment are described with grand words, which offer no great benefit in all cases; but I have abbreviated them according to my understanding, and have fashioned instruments in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit; et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis; et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece; puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles; et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons; et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	I say that in the flatfoot deformity that comes to the sole of the foot, there is no remedy or cure; and likewise the one that comes directly on both sides, and cannot be cured except by that which specifically affects the back, as I said; and it should be that the patient lies stretched out on his face in an equal place, and has some padding underneath him so he does not hurt himself; then place a torch at the head in the ground firmly, and another at the feet, and tie one rope under the armpits of the patient, and one at the hips, and at the knees, and at the ankles; and two ministers hold the ropes, one at the head and the other at the feet, between the two torches; and they should be well secured, the torch as we have said, and the physician places his palms on the spine firmly, until it straightens.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee; et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	And if it does not return with this treatment, take a board three arms long and place cloth underneath it, and have the patient lie on their side, then put the end of the board under the affected area, then place the middle of the board over the spine; and have the patient place their feet at the other end of the board and press firmly until it returns to its place; if you wish, do this with a twisting motion toward the hand.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc; et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet; et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	And if you place two torches at the head of the patient on one side with their arms spread wide, and two others near their feet, there should be a palm's length between each torch both above and below; and in each torch have a hole through which the cord passes, and let the torches be firmly fixed in the ground so they do not move; and between each pair of these torches place one rotating torch on which the cords turn, and two small torches of a palm's length for turning the rotating torch; then tie the cord that is between the stakes to the rotating torch near the head, and the other cord near the feet to the other rotating torch, and each assistant turns their own torch for the entire cord, and the master positions the spine straight as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	And when it is equalized, apply a desiccative plaster with an abundance of egg, then the plugs, and then a splint of three inches long, which covers the area of the gibbosity and the part of the spine that is sound, then the grease from a linen cloth, as we have said, and the patient should undergo gentle care until he is healed; and if anything comes at the end of the healing process, it is necessary to administer softening and soothing medicines with the splint that we mentioned before; and sometimes one administers a piece of lead, and sometimes an appearance occurs in the last vertebrae of the back, and one thinks it is dislocation; and this bone can be exposed, for which there should not be presumption: perhaps it would bring death.
des dislocations de la hainche	Dislocations of the hip
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc IIII parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	Know that at the joints of the hip and the shoulder, only dislocations occur, not as with other joints; and the joint of the hip is dislocated according to four parts: inward and outward, and forward and backward; and more inward than elsewhere, and slightly dislocated forward and backward.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu; et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	And the knowledge of this inward dislocation is that when one ties the affected leg to the healthy one, it becomes longer, and the patient's knee appears more bent than the healthy one, and the patient cannot bend their knee towards the fire; and the spot nearby is swollen with an abscess because the thigh bone comes there.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the signs of him who is coming to faint are contrary to those mentioned before.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the signs of him who is about to fall are that he keeps his leg straight according to its completion; nevertheless, he does not double his knee without pain, and if one wishes to make him move forward, he cannot go ahead, and retains his urine, and his ankle swells, and when he walks, he passes over the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of him who is about to fall behind are that he cannot bend his knee or double it, and that leg is more crooked than the other, and the ankle is softened, and the head of the thigh is in a position below the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	The remedy for this similar case of dislocation is that you observe whether the dislocation is old, and it remains according to its condition, without any treatment; and there should be no expectation of improvement.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des IIII manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	And in the one where the dislocation is fresh, and it is of the four types of dislocation, hasten to return the joint, and move it inward and outward, and shift it right and left; perhaps it will return, and there is no need for other treatment.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil; et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien; et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	And if it does not return in this manner, you must prepare a strong minister, and stretch the leg firmly with two hands, or tie it above the knee; another minister places his hand above in such a way that he pushes his hands under his heels, then tightens them with a single firm bandage on the thigh; and another holds the head of the joint; and they all extend upwards and downwards at once, until the patient is lifted off the ground at once, and remains suspended.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as IIII semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This method of extension is common to the four similar cases, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is well.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele; puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	If not, then you must treat it according to its likeness. When the dislocation is in the thigh bone, you should lift the patient on their healthy side, then place a bandage at the root of the affected thigh, and below the joint; then stretch the bandage upwards towards the joint and towards the muscle; then take another helper with his arms, and embrace the large part of the affected thigh, and extend it forcefully: it will return to its place now; and this method of dislocation is lighter than the others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres; puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc; puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	And if you cannot secure it in the manner we have described, then bind the patient's two feet together with a strong bandage under both heels and above both knees; then place the affected leg extended two palms longer than the other; then suspend him by his head from a post, and raise him off the ground two arm lengths; then instruct one helper to embrace the upper part of the thigh, and have another assistant hanging alongside the patient who firmly embraces the thigh, because now the joint will quickly return.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi; puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme; et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	And when the dislocation is out of place, let the patient lie down, as we have said about him who has gilbositeit, and tightly bind one bandage on the diseased leg and another on the foot; then put two torches, one at the head and the other at the feet, then place a torch between the thighs of the patient in its form; and let pieces of moist cloths be placed around so that it does not burn the patient, then each minister should extend towards him, and the physician places his hand equal to the dislocation.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	If it returns, it is good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If not, place him on the table and press as we have said in the case of gilbositeit, and let the patient lie on the healthy side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when the dislocation is in front, it is necessary to extend the affected leg quickly, as I have said; and place the healer's hand on the bad angle, then press with the other hand, and extend downwards towards the knee.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches; et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table; et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve; et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And if the dislocation is to the side, it is not necessary to extend the affected leg downwards, nor raise it up in the air, but rather it should be as if the thigh were dislocated to the side, as we have described for lying on both thighs; and he should lie on his face, and the limb extended as we said before, and one must press on the joint towards the table; and it is right when the patient extends their legs, and they are even; then join the thighs, and apply a plaster, and bind them firmly with a bandage so that the thigh does not move; and rest for three days or four, then unbind him, and put the plaster back on; and if you see that they are even, bind them as before, and leave it for three days; then unbind him, and let him walk gently until the limb is restored.
de la dislocation dou genoil	Of the dislocation of the knee
Li genous est desaluez selonc III manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The knee is dislocated in three ways: namely, inward and outward, and backward; it does not dislocate forward.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez; et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez; puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement; et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And the signs are that you instruct the patient to bend his leg at his thigh, and if it does not bend properly, you know it is dislocated; and the restoration of all such cases is as follows: make the patient sit upright, and extend his leg if he can, then place your back against his chest, and put his foot on your feet; then take his knee in your palms, pull between your hands, then bend both sides of the knee forcefully; another assistant should straighten his foot so that the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that it bends properly at the thigh slightly; then apply a plaster, bind the leg firmly to the thigh for three or four days, then loosen it; and the patient must not labor to walk until the limb is strengthened.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	And if the limb is not properly positioned, apply strong extension, as we have said in the treatment of the thigh, until it is set correctly
de la dislocation dou talon	of the dislocation of the heel
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The heels are sometimes bruised, and sometimes completely dislocated, both inward and outward.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee: li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	And the signs are that the ankle is swollen, and there is tenderness in the area where it is dislocated: the reduction is easy, and one should gently extend it with their hands when it is only bruised.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville; puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut; et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient; et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide; puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet; puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent; puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	And when it is completely dislocated, you must have the patient sit straight, and hold the limb firmly by the leg above the ankle; then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, then twice with the left hand, then extend it upwards, and forcefully push the foot upwards; do this twice as we have said, pushing and pulling the foot; if it returns, that is good; if not, start over because it will return; and if it cannot return like this, make the patient lie on their back on the ground, and place a board firmly in the ground between their thighs, and tie cloths around them so they do not move the patient; then hold the limb with your hands or a sling tied under the foot's neck; then both assistants extend equally, and the board should be steady between the patient’s thighs to prevent movement when extending; then place the dislocation in your hands evenly, and another assistant holds the healthy leg from behind, and the dislocation will quickly return.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois; puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors; et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	And when it is ready, put the plaster and wads on, and bandage tightly, and tie the foot to the leg, and watch the nerves that are above the heel, so that the bandages are not too tight; then leave him for two days or three, and if the bandaging loosens, tighten it again; then untie after the third day or fourth, and forbid the patient from walking for four days; and if he walks before this term, it is not certain that it will not dislocate again.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if painful boils occur, you must relieve them as we have said elsewhere, until they are healed.
des dois	of the two
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When both are dislocated, they must be gently extended without effort, and this is an easy thing.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne; et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the dislocation is at any joint of the back of the foot, you must have the patient sit on a flat place or on a table completely straight, and put your foot under what appears to be the joints, then press with your foot firmly, until it returns; and when they are even, and nothing appears amiss, place a board two fists under the sole of the foot, then hold firmly, and leave for three days, then release; and let it rest until it is healed.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	of wounds and dislocations together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert: si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis; et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit; et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne; et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis; et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples; et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	When a wound comes with dislocation, and one wants to restore it, many times the patient dies: do not be presumptuous in treatment if you are not wise in the art and have not long experience, and if you are not compassionate and cautious, not bold; and use at first soothing remedies for hot abscesses, and leave the patient in God's hands if there is no hope of health; and when there is hope, now reset the limb to its place, so that the hot abscess does not follow; and when the limb is in place, administer soothing remedies for hot abscesses, and treat the wound as it should be done with drying ointments; and if along with dislocation there is a fracture, and small bones displaced, remove them, and do what we have said in simple diseases; and guard against entering into ways of fear according to what I have said, for this will bring you harm according to your Creator, and for the sake of wisdom of your art and of your body.
Amen	So be it
