O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	O you, dear sons, I have completed this book which is the last of the medical science along with its contents, and I have made the end by its explanations and by its declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to me in vision that I should complete it for you with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, namely "surgery".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of hands is discouraged in our region and entirely foreign, the science has been lost and fragmented, and nothing remains of its essence except for small descriptions in books by ancient authors that have been passed down.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this has come the error and vanity, and intentions are closed off and the science is distant.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	It seems to me that I should revive it together with the arrangement of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and I will come together with the forms of cautery tools, and other instruments of the work along with the adjustment of the declaration and preparation of them, as is necessary.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And because there are no good masters of the craft in our time, the art of medicine is neglected.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And it is necessary for those who engage in it to excel in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, so that they know the true nature of the limbs, their forms and conjunctions and separations, and have knowledge of bones and nerves and veins, and the number of them, and the movement and location of moving and stationary veins, and their origins.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And for this reason Hippocrates says that names with a name are much, and with the work is little; and similarly in the art of hand.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	We tell you at the beginning of this book that whoever is not knowledgeable about the things mentioned before, should beware of falling into error and harming people; thus I have seen many times those who interfere with this science and abandon themselves to ignorance and lack of experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa I apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	For I saw a foolish doctor who lanced an abscess of scrofula on a woman's neck, and cut the arteries of her neck; from which so much blood issued that the woman fell dead in his hands.
Et vis I autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens III jors.	And I saw another doctor who treated a stone in a man's bladder, and the stone was large; he removed a piece of the bladder along with it, and the man died within three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I had already been called to treat him by drawing it out, and saw the condition of the patient and the size of the stone, and knew well that if he was cut into he would die.
Et vis I autre mire qui prist en cure I duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi I termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And I saw another physician who took care of the duke of our land who had his leg broken, and with the break there was also a wound; and these physicians, full of ignorance, set the fracture on top of the wound with splints very tightly, leaving no cloth for the wound at all, and left it thus for some time; and commanded that he not loosen them; and remained this way until the leg was completely swollen and the foot as well, leading to loss.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I was called to come to him, and I hurried to come and release the leg; and when I undid it, he felt at ease and did not feel any pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	But once corruption had already set in the limb, it could not be healed; and the corruption continued to spread throughout the limb until the entire limb was lost.
Et vis I autre mire qui effondra I apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And I saw another doctor who drained the embedded abscess and then burned it with the skill of his expertise.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For a carbuncle, when it is full of melancholic humor, should not be touched with iron unless it is in such a place where all the corrupted matter can be completely removed.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en II divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And for that reason, dear students, it is necessary for you to know that the work of hands is divided into two categories: one being where there is danger in many situations; and I will show in each place in this book where there is fear and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	Therefore, it is necessary that you take care so that the foolish doctor cannot speak ill of you. Take your weapons in readiness, and approach your patients gently yet firmly, and use the best method so that by the grace of God you may come to salvation and be praised; and leave the terrible diseases of severe suffering alone; and remove your weapons from what causes you doubt, and act in such a way that you may come from this world to the next with glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	Galen states in some of his admonishments: "Do not concern yourself with serious illness, lest you be called a foolish doctor.
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	I have devised this treatise according to three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapter is about fire cauterizations and medicinal hot cauterizations, and the chapter is organized from head to feet; and on the forms of instruments, and tools for cauterization, and all that is necessary in the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and suction cups and wounds, and the extraction of arrows, and similar things; and the chapter is organized along with the forms of instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things; and it is organized from head to feet, and the forms of instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Thus, as we remember the work, it is necessary for me to tell the quality of the aid and harm of each temperament.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the qualities of benefit and harm are the longest speech and subtle science and secret responses; and about these many wise people spoke, and agreed on them; and their words suffice for me, because I fear length.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que II complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that the cautery universally aids in every temperament where there is matter, whether it be two temperaments: namely, hot temperament with matter, and dry temperament with matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In the temperament that is both hot and dry with matter, some people discussed and said that the cautery is great help there; and others said the opposite: that the cautery is not useful for diseases coming from heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	For the nature of fire is hot, and it should not be used to cure hot diseases by heat or dryness; and those who say the opposite claim that the cautery provides great help for hot and dry diseases that come in the body of humans.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you examine the body of the person and their moisture according to the temperament of fire, you find the body cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this statement.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have found it to be true on occasion through experience.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And always, do not intervene except by those who have experienced it, and who know through long practice the chapter of cauterizations, and the diversity of temperaments of people, and their dispositions and causes of their illnesses, and the outcomes and time span; we fear not other temperaments, especially in cold and moist diseases.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all the doctors gathered and agreed on the cauterization.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, son, that the fire cautery together is of the secrets of cures, and of greater goodness than a burning medicinal cautery.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For the fire is simple, and it does not harm any part other than the one being treated if it can be named.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	Burning medicines spread from one part to another, and cause diseases in the affected member that are difficult to heal; and perhaps they kill the patient. The fire, due to its height and the goodness of its substance, does not do this unless there is excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	And this I have found through experience and the length of service and study that I have dedicated to the art, and it is based on the truth of things; and for this reason I excuse myself for the length of speech, for it does not please me to take from you the secret which lies in the fire, and the quality of the work, how it overcomes bodily diseases, as the philosopher demonstrates; now receive it in your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, son, that they agreed on what time should be chosen for the cauterizations, and chose appropriate times.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And I say that cauterization is appropriate at all times, because the harm coming from it can be avoided with the help of cauterization; and especially if the cauterizations are necessary for pains that cannot wait, so that no greater evil comes to the limb.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And do not think, dear son, as foolish doctors do; because the illness that is cured by cauterization has no relapse; and they say thus; but it is not as they believe, because cauterizations are nothing other than medicine that changes the complexion, dries up the humors which cause pain, and acts faster than ordinary medicine due to its power and mastery.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	And it is possible for the illness to come sometimes according to the complexion of the patient and the place of the disease and its power; and are gathered in him the superfluities by the acquisition of foods and similar things, except where there has been applied a cauterization in places where there is little superfluity and moisture, such as cauterizations for tooth pain and similar things, and such pains do not return; but this happens rarely.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And many people do not understand why cauterizations are called the last resort of medicine, and this is true; but they do not believe that cauterizations can be effective after other medicines, yet their beliefs are false, and cauterizations are the last resort of medicine because when we administer methods of treatment in any illness and they are ineffective, then we apply the cauterization, and it works.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Then it is clear that cauterization is the last resort of medicine, not according to the intention of foolish doctors.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	The ancients said that cauterizations with an instrument of gold are better than those with iron, and they said this not because of the quality of the gold or its high substance; and they said that the place where the cautery is applied does not cause corruption, but this is not true as I have proven, and I have found it to be true in some people; and cauterizations with gold are no better than those with iron, as they claim.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	And yet when you heat an instrument of gold, you cannot tell when it is hot by the color of the gold, and it cools quickly; and if you heat it too much, it becomes damaged by the fire; and thus there are enough hindrances.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And for this reason we use fire cautery which we have prepared for our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	I have ordered this chapter from head to foot for the sake of making it easier to find the vein.
dou cautere olivaire	of olive cauterization
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	This cautery is useful for moisture and cold affecting the brain, and there are two types made because of a disease called "soda," and due to many humors that descend from the head to the eyes, and ears, and for an abundance of dreams and pain in the teeth and throat, and especially for all diseases that come from cold such as paralysis, soda, apoplexy, and similar illnesses.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief III nuis ou IIII, selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The form of this cautery is such that the patient should be purged with a solvent medicine cleansing the head for three nights or four, according to what the strength and age and habit of the patient can endure; and then do behind the head of the patient.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses II eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	And then have him sit between your hands, and place his hands on his thighs; after that, put the root of your palm at the root of his nose between his two eyes; there where your middle fingers will lie, let it bleed from there, then heat the cautery which is called "olivare", here is its form:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os I sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren I poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse III jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place it on the spot marked with ink, and do by descending and pulling your hand little by little while turning; then lift your hand gradually, and examine the spot if you see a small bone there; and if you don’t see it, repeat the cautery until you see the bone as I told you; afterwards take some pitch, and put in wax and soften cotton inside, and place it on the spot, and leave it for three days; then apply moistened cloth with butter; and keep it covered until the heat is gone; after that treat the wound with ointment called "tetrafarmakon", until it heals.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And the ancients said, when a wound remains open for longer, it purges more; thus it helps to keep it open.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And some say that one should leave the cautery on until part of the bone is burned, and then remove what has been burned from the bone, and treat it.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme I vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And others say that the cautery should be left on and pressed so hard that it cuts into the bone as wide as a finger, so that the humors can flow out; and the wound should remain open for a long time; afterwards, it must be cleansed and treated.
Et ces II manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And these two methods of cauterization do not seem entirely good to me, except in some people where there is a risk of fear; and I believe that I should leave it out; for the head is weakened by continuous solutions of nature, as we witness in other parts of the body; and even when the patient's head is weak by nature, the first appearance of cauterization seems safer and gentler to me, and with this method I work towards safety.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	of the old pain of the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	When chronic pain comes to the entire head and lasts for a long time, the patient should use herbs and pills called "cochie," and perform purgations of the head and oils and plasters; and if one performs the cautery as we mentioned before, it is not effective.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Be careful if the head of the patient is of strong nature, and that it is not too cold; then cauterize below that area a little as we said above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai I cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est I leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	After cauterize each horn of the head until the bone, as we said before, and cauterize at the place called "vasselz"; and there are places where one puts suction cups; and lighten your hand so that you do not see up to the bone: the patient feels much greater pain in this cautery than in others, and I will speak about it later; and it is necessary that the cauterizations of the horns be finer than those used to cauterize the middle part of the head, and this is the form:
dou cautere dou chief	For the cautery of the head
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc II manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When sudden pain comes to a part of the head and extends to the eye, and the head is purged with cleansing medicines, and all the other treatments that I have mentioned in the division of diseases have been performed, but none of these help: then I perform cauterizations according to two methods, namely using cold medicine and fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope I poc as II chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi XII houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi II jors ou III; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	The cautery using cold medicine is done as follows: take a dose of garlic, remove the skin and coat it with two cloves, then make an incision in the temple where the pain lies so that you can place the coated garlic under the skin; when placed, secure and press it well and leave it there for twelve hours; then loosen it and treat it externally with crushed garlic, and leave the wound like this for two or three days; then apply a poultice soaked in butter until it heals.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the treatment with ointment until it is healed; and if you wish to use some burning medicines that I have written in the twelfth chapter on burning medicines.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	The cautery of iron is done according to this manner.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Heat the cautery as described in its form:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait I poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And it is called "clos" because the head of the cautery is made in the shape of a keyhole with a bit of curvature, and at the center there is a slight appearance; place it on the painful area, hold your hand and turn the iron slightly, until half the thickness of the heart's muscle is burned; lift your hand so that the artery does not burn, which is outside, and an abundance of blood will flow.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par III jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	After place cotton in bandage of thread, and put on the spot for III days; then put wetted cotton with butter, and then treat the spot with ointment until it is healed; and if you wish to cauterize this inflamed area with the cautery called «cultellare», at the entire point, and take care not to cut the artery in this inflamed area which is not old.
de emigraine	from the inflamed area
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	When you treat an inflamed area as we have said before in the division of diseases, and it does not improve, and see that the cauteries previously mentioned for medicine and iron do no good, then it is necessary to heat the cautery called «cultellare» until it becomes white; and cut thus on the painful spot a line half a digit long, and withdraw your hand once so as not to cut the artery and not reach the bone; and beware of the mandible that moves when eating, and the nerve should be careful not to move and that spasm does not come upon the patient, and beware of bleeding from the artery when it is cut, or cutting causes great fear even for one who does not understand it and who has no study and experience; but I will tell you how to stop blood when the artery is cut, and I will show you where it happens in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait II coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	And if you see that these cauterizations do not alleviate the illness, and the patient is suffering, cauterize him on top of the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it is healed; and if you wish, administer the cautery that we have described in the chapter about the extraction of the artery, with the cautery that has two knives; and this cautery is better than that one and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	of the pain in the ears due to coldness
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When pain from cold comes to the ear, and one has applied medicines that dissolve and other treatments that we have mentioned in the division, and the pain does not subside, then heat this cautery which is called "points," of which here is the form:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les II se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait X poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After puncture all around the sick ear, or around both if the pain is in both, and move away a bit above the root of the ear after you have marked the spot; and make ten points around each ear; then treat the area until it is healthy.
de la torture de la bouche	of the treatment of the mouth
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	A torture that must be treated with a cautery is none other than those caused by phlegm, as we have said in the division of diseases; and do not use cauterization for similar cases that come from dryness and nerve spasms.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de III cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des II levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When you treat this type of phlegm-related throat condition that requires purging and gargling, but these methods are ineffective, then you must cauterize the patient with three cauteries: one at the root of the ear, another a bit outside the temple, and the third between the two lips; place the cautery on the part that appears healthy, and perform one cauterization near the top of the head above a little below the horn of the ear, and another at the temple as long as a finger's width; leave the cautery in place until half the heart area is burned; this is the form of the cautery:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And it is similar to the case of the cutellaire that we have mentioned before, but it is a bit more subtle and the knife must be a bit larger; after treating the area as I said before, until it is healed.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai IIII cauteres: II sus les II cornes dou chief, et I emmi le chief, et I ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When apoplexy is old and you treat it as we have said, but there is no improvement, and the patient does not have a fever, then make IV cauterizations: II on the II horns of the head, and I in the middle of the head, and I at the place called "vasselz" as we mentioned before, and the last cautery above the stomach; and let them be treated as we said before.
de litargie	For litargie
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	For this illness, give the patient large pills and purifying herbs for the brain; then raise up the head of the patient completely, and place on the occiput a plaster of mustard which is written in the treatise on plasters; and this is the manner of the cautery: do it as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai III cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere I doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai I cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, II autres sus les II cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If he is healthy in this manner, it is good; and if not, make III cauterizations from the middle of the head descending to the neck, with a space of I thumb's width between each cautery; and treat as with others, and if you wish to add more, and the patient endures, make one in the middle; and if necessary, two more on the two sides, and treat until he is healthy; and let these cauteries which are called "olivare", as I said before.
de la froidor dou chief	of the coldness of the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et I derrier et III sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai IIII cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	It is necessary that the head be cleansed of dirt and what we mentioned before; then anoint the patient's head, then make a cautery in the middle of the head and on each temple, and one at the back and three along the nape of the neck; and if you need more, and the body is moist and the patient is suffering, and the illness is severe, make four cauterizations along the spine; let it burn until it becomes reddish, then lift your hand; afterwards treat it until it heals, and make the cauteries known as "olivare" which we mentioned before.
de l’epilempsie	of the epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	Epileptics should not use fire cautery except for those who are phlegmatic, and it is necessary first to cleanse the brain of dirt and other treatments that we have mentioned in the section when the patient is large and suffers from a need for strong medication.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai I cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et I cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if it is a child who cannot endure this, make him gargle and chew food cleansing the brain often with good meats; then lift his head in the middle, and I perform the cautery according to what we have said before, and the cautery on the vessel, and on each horn; and if the patient is weak and suffering, perform cauterizations as I have said for one who has paralysis and weakness of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and let the cauterizations be olive according to the manner that I have said.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai I cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is a child, perform the subtle cautery according to this manner:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When due to melancholy the excesses or moistures are corrupted and phlegm is thick, then cauterize with such cauteries as we have said for one who has paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if due to melancholy the excesses are declining into melancholy, and the body of the patient is moist, then give them something to drink that purifies the brain, according to what was stated before in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai I torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com I cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After raising the head of the patient; then make a bandage of linen well made, as a circle, and place it on the head; let the patient sit cross-legged, and be held securely from all sides; then present the liniment, which should be mutton grease from an old sheep; heat it over a moderate fire so that what is applied to the wound can be endured; then empty the circle inside onto the head, and leave it to cool; do this for the patient once every week along with other good management until he is well.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	When you wish to cauterize, make many small punctures all over the area to be cauterized.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	This method of cauterization moistens the brain excessively; then apply cotton soaked in butter and goose fat.
de l’awe des eulz	from the pain of the eyes
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When pain first comes to the eyes with the signs I mentioned in the division, then begin and give the patient something purifying to drink, and protect them from all moisture, and make them sweat in a bath several times on an empty stomach.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai II cauteres sus les II temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as II eulz ensamble, ou en I se li dessendemens est en I; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	Afterward, command them to bend their head backward, and perform a cauterization in the middle of the forehead, and make two cauteries on the two temples if the pain descends to both eyes together, or one if it is in one eye; cover the entire area with all veins and arteries that are below the heart, and let the cautery be as long as the width of the temple; beware of excessive bleeding, and if you see too much blood coming out, stop it with enough force.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les II os derrier.	And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and at the incision the caution how you shall stop it; and sometimes a cautery is made between the two bones behind.
dou cors des larmes	from the body of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: I cautere emmi le chief, et II cauteres sus les II temples, et II cauteres ou haiterel desoz les II os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout I petit cautere.	When the tears from the eyes are old and habitual and are on the veins, treat the arteries that appear on the head surface; and if it is seen that it comes from cold phlegmatic excesses, then I perform the cautery that I mentioned at the beginning of the treatment descending to the eyes: I make a cautery in the middle of the forehead, and two cauterizations above the two temples, and two cauterizations behind between the two bones; and if there is need for more, cautiously cauterize above the eyebrow with one small cautery.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	from the body of tears within the eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide III nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai II cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les II sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you treat it according to what we have said in the division, and it does not improve, then give the patient three nights of decoctions to drink; afterward raise his head, and apply a cautery in the middle of the olive-shaped cautery area; and make two cauterizations of the cautery called "clavilis" on the two sides, a little below the hairline; and be careful not to cut the artery.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the shape of the cautery called "clavilis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	When the conjunctiva of the eye is softened by disease and moisture, then cauterize it with this cautery called "olivare".
de coi ci est li forme:	of which this is the form:
Et se tu vues si fai II cauteres sus les II sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you wish to apply two cauteries on the two eyebrows as long as the hairs are; and do not leave your hand aside until a third of the paper is burned, according to the manner I have described.
dou poil qui point l’oil	of the hair that points towards the eye
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	Sometimes it happens that the hairs of the eyes grow inward and irritate the eye, and one applies cauterization according to two methods: either with fire, or with burning medication.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they grow and are even, then place the patient in your care; after that, cut into the paper covering the eyes a figure like that of the leaf of myrtle, and let the beginning of the sign be near the hairs; then put cotton moistened with egg white and parsley juice on the eye, then heat the cautery according to this form:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi III jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After cauterizing over the figure you have marked little by little many times, until the flesh is burned in that place; and the signs of the success of the work are that you see the paper retract, and the hairs raised at the edge of the eye; then lift your hand, and leave it thus for III days, then put on cotton moistened with butter until the burning is gone; after which treat with ointment until it is healed.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if the hairs come after that, and the skin is softened, then restart the cautery on the same spot as you did first; and if the hairs are missing, cauterize until the skin rises to its natural place, and is even, and do not let the hair prick the eye.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en I oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en I, et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse I poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The cauterizing medicines that burn should be such that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; then make from parchment a shape like a bay leaf; then take of French soap and hot vinegar, each one ounce, and grind well together; and do it quickly so that it does not cool down, then spread it over the form you have made as with a bay leaf, and place it on the skin around the eyes; if the illness affects only one eye alone, work on just that one, and both if in both; and put under the eye cotton moistened in egg white; and hold your head near the patient’s head and place your thumb over the medicine, and press down each time the patient feels a burning sensation from the medicine, for it will feel as though burned by fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done this for a long time, then remove the medicine at its proper time.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	And when the bite has passed, lift the area of concern, and check if you see the skin raised as if it had been lifted by heat or incision; and if it is so, then it is well.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If not, then apply more medicine to the area until the medicine has taken effect, making your work even and your eyes properly set; then place moistened cotton on butter until the burn subsides, after which treat the ointment area called "dyafenis" and others until it is healed.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	And if it is necessary for you to be very careful with your work so that none of the medicine falls into the eyes.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And if the parchment becomes soft afterward, and the hair pricks in the eye, then reapply the medicine to that place which is softened by the proper parchment as you did before; treat it until it is healed; and this is the form of the myrtle poultice:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And know that the eyes of people vary in size and smallness, and adjust accordingly; and do not return to the right path for one who lacks expertise in this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	for the treatment of a fistula by cautery
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat a fistula as we have said in the division of diseases, and your treatments are ineffective, then it is necessary to cauterize it according to this method.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	Instruct the patient to place his head on your lap; and hold the patient's head between your hands in such a way that it does not move or shift his head; afterwards apply cotton moistened with egg white or parsley juice to the eye; after that heat the cautery which is shaped: and attach it to the head like the form of a feather quill, together where the cautery will be placed; if you wish, it may extend from one side to the other, and if you wish, it may be as a tent; but in any case, this attachment is useful for your work.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	After press the fistula if it is open, and remove the pus, and dry it; and if it is closed, then incise it, and draw out the bowels; afterwards apply the hot cautery firmly, and hold your hand on the cautery above the part of the knife near the eye so that your hand does not make a mistake; and place the cautery in the fat of the eye, and corrupt it.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	If you proceed to the beginning of the cautery up to the bone, it would be well.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	If not, then start the cautery again, and do so as many times as necessary, leaving it for three days; after which apply cotton soaked in butter, and treat with a drying ointment until it heals, and if forty days pass without healing, apply corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed; and proceed according to what would come in its chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	And there is a method of cautery for fistulas that some of the ancients described.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	Attend to the fistula and clean the area; afterwards place in the opening one small piece of cotton wool, which is made as follows:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	and they make it in the quantity of one .З. of lead; and hold your hand on the camahan firmly, and let the patient not move at all, so that the melted lead does not run to his eye; and it is necessary to put on the eye of the patient a cotton ball soaked in egg white or water: the lead thus fills the place of the fistula, and heals marvelously quickly.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	And if the fistula is healed by the cautery that we have mentioned, it is good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	If not, it is necessary to administer a puncture with a knife, and bring the fistula back into the body of the knife according to what is proper in its place.
des crevaices en levres	of cracks in the lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Many times cracks occur on the lips which are called "hairs," especially on the lips of children.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe I petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these cracks of what we have said in the divisions, and the treatment does not help, then heat a small knife-shaped cautery according to this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place it quickly in those cracks until it reaches the bottom; afterwards, treat the area with plaster until it is healed.
de l’aposteme de la goule	of the abscess of the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies I cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou II, aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When an abscess comes to the root of the throat or in the uvula, or at the palate, or at the roots of the teeth, it becomes pus-filled and round and matures and turns into a fistula; and you treat it as we have said in the divisions, but if it does not help: then you must have a cautery according to the size of the fistula; afterwards, insert it into the opening of the fistula, and hold your hand until the hot iron reaches its bottom and back part; do this once or twice, then treat it as we have said in treatments, until it is healed; and if it heals thus, that is good; and if not, you must uncover the area and remove the corrupted bone according to what you find in its chapter.
dou movement des dens	from the movement of the teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicine but it does not help, then place the head of the patient in a healthy position; after that heat the cautery as described below so that you place a chain on the tooth; and put the hot cautery inside quickly, and hold your hand long enough for the patient to feel the heat reaching the root of the tooth; then lift your hand and repeat the cautery according to your will; afterward fill the patient's mouth with salt water, and let them rinse for an hour and spit out.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in this manner, the tooth that was moving becomes fixed, and the softened gum is restrained, and the corrupted moisture dries up.
de la dolor des dens	Of the pain of the teeth
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc II manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When tooth pain comes from cold, where there is actual coldness, and the remedies of medicine do not help, then there is need for cautery in two ways: one with butter and one with fire.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus I fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	Cautery with butter is such that you take sheep's fat and put it in an iron or bronze spoon; then take cotton and wrap around the point of a needle, and dip it in boiling butter, and place it quickly on the painful tooth and hold it until it cools; and do this often until its effect reaches the root of the tooth, and if you wish, soak wool and cotton in cold butter, and place it on the painful tooth, and apply a hot iron until the heat reaches the top of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	The fire cautery together should be such that you take an iron rod or one of brass, and let it be thick enough that the flame does not reach the mouth of the patient; after heating the cautery, from which the form will come afterwards, place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery is cooled; do this often, for the pain shall be removed either that same day or the next.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it is necessary that the patient fill his mouth with good butter at the moment of this cautery, and then wipe it dry; and this is the form of the cautery:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	And perform the cautery from whichever part you wish, according to your ability; and this is the form of the rod:
des scrophules	scrofula
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	When scrofula is cold and phlegmatic, and does not respond to digestion through medicines, then heat the cautery as described below, and make two openings for the fumes to exit on the opposite side of the cautery; place the hot cautery over the abscess once or twice if necessary until it reaches the bottom of the abscess; if the abscess is small, apply the cautery according to its size, and leave it there for three days; then cover with moistened wool until the burn is gone; afterwards treat the area with ointments and poultices until it is healed.
Li forme de la cainne:	The form of the cautery:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	When the moistures overpower in the channels of the body, and especially when it comes from cold temperament, then the patient must first be emptied by solvent medicines; afterwards perform cautery at the root of the throat, and take care not to reach the throat itself, but do not burn the heart but a little bit.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	Afterwards perform another cautery at the joint of the neck to the head of the spine, and let the cauterizations called "clavile" be as we had the form before; and treat the area as we said earlier until it is healed.
de la toust	of the cough
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et I autre cautere emmi le pis entre II mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When all the diseases of the body are caused by cold moistures, and the patient does not have fever or dryness, and the illness is chronic, then perform one cautery on the shoulder blade in its two angles; and another cautery between the breast bones; and let the cauterizations called "clavile" be according to the form that was said before.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	And if you wish, apply the cautery by pricking throughout the entire area which is called “points” of which the form is described above in the disease of the ears; and let the points reach up to XXX, or inquire around.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	After treating the area as previously described, let the cauterizations be three rows according to this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais III a cop.	And because the cauterizations are lighter, make three of them in one session.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners douqueil ci est li forme:	After the patient is laid on his back and side; then lift the arm that is inside the armpit with both hands left hand; and if the joint is dislocated inside, heat the cautery which has two nerves of duck intestine here is the shape:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble IIII cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a III ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a III ners:	and cauterize the arm until it penetrates to the armpit, and there would be four cauteries in total; and for that person, a cautery is made with the one that has three nerves, so the shape of the cauterization is six cauteries; and the nerve follows the subtlety of a thread, and this is the shape of the cautery which has three nerves:
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce I nerf por coi il i a VIII cauteres.	And sometimes it is adjusted on this one nerve, so there are eight cauteries.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After place the cauterizing powder crushed with salt; after make rest the patient, and let not move the limb for long time until it is well comforted.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	And if it is dislocated above, which happens rarely, then make a cauterization on the thick part of the cautery nail, or many cauterizations in puncturing.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	For the joint is closed, and the moisture is removed and the patient is healed.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	When coldness and much moisture come to the stomach such that it exceeds its balance, and the catarrh is multiplied within him, and with customary methods of treatment he gains no benefit, then it is necessary for the patient to be laid on his back, and extend his legs and arms.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture; et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	From that point onwards, I perform three cauterizations. One is done with a spoonful of pitch for the quantity of one egg, covering the entire cautery surface in clavicles, and two cauterizations outside each side until the figure of the cauteries forms at three angles, and have such space between them that they do not join together when they discharge pus; and let the cauteries be so deep that they reach both sides of the chest, and let the shape of the cauteries follow this form without adjustment:
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme; et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche; puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if you wish to cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form; and for him who fears this cautery, cauterize by pricking and cutting one point on the stomach according to the size that you see fit; then cauterize over the entire area which is called "points".
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the care of the treatment that we had before, until it is healed.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez; et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil; et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient; et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi; et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere; et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez; et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais; et c’est li forme:	When the liver is in pain due to cold and moisture and excessive flatulence, so much that it is weakened from its natural complexion by excesses; and the patient is treated with what we have mentioned in divisions, but it does not help them; then the patient should be positioned on their right side; and place three cauteries according to this form, figure, and size above the liver, near where the ribs are located below the armpit; and there should be a space between each cauterization equal to the thickness of a finger; and let the cautery be as long as the body, and do not press too hard on the entire cautery area; and burn only half the heart's side, and have the patient stand straight on their feet; if they cannot, then lie them down, extend their legs, and raise their arms; and this is the form.
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors; et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	And if your will is to cauterize these cauteries of the elbow, if you are subtle and wise in the art, and beware that you do not burn entirely the heart, for you would dry up the whole body; and let it not reach the eye, for the heart is very delicate there, and you know this well.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile: s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort; et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	When there is an abscess in the liver, and you wish to know whether it is in the flesh of the liver or in the membrane: if it is in the flesh, the patient feels pain but not too strongly; and if it is in the membrane, the pain is intense.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste; et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	And when this treatment is to be applied to the ribs, it is necessary that the patient lie on their back with their head elevated; and then incise the area where the abscess is, and then heat the cautery which resembles a ray, as follows:
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers; aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez; et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	And cauterize until the wound is burned, and it reaches syphac, until all the tissue is completely charred; after which treat according to the treatment of ulcers until it is healed; and it is not appropriate for anyone other than those who have studied long in the art of medicine, and by whose hands these diseases have been treated successfully at times.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	Then he may boldly proceed with the work, yet it seems to me that waiting might be better.
dou cautere de pleuresin	for the cautery of pleurisy
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize I cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et II petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et II cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et I cautere emmi le pis, et I autre sus l’estomac, et I entre II espaules, et II as II costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre II espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	The ancients said that for pleurisy one should make cauterizations from the roots of aristolochia, and in this manner: take a root of aristolochia as long as you can find, dry it, and ensure it is as thick and as long as your thumb; soften it in oil, apply it to the fire, and cauterize once between the shoulder blade and the neck, and two small cauterizations a little further down below the beard area; and two cauterizations between the fifth and sixth ribs, inclining slightly towards the back; one at each hip, one above the stomach, one between the two shoulders, and two on either side of the hips near the cautery between the two shoulders; do not press hard with your hand but apply it gently as when sniffing.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	And some ancient ones said that some men use a cautery of fire similar to a razor, and they heat it and place it between the ribs until it reaches the abscess; and thus the pain is relieved, as we have said in the abscess of the liver.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	But in this work there is fear that the patient may die now, or that a fistula may come which cannot be healed.
de la mice	of the mouse
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent III manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the disease of the mouse from what we have said in the divisions of treatments, and it is not effective, then they offer three methods of cautery that are all good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos; et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	Of these one method is that you make three or four cauterizations in a line along the length of the mouse, according to the shape of the liver cautery as we have described before; and do not press your hand over the entire cautery area, and let the patient lie on his back; another method of cautery is to heat the cautery with two handles, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; and lift the chest where the mouse is located, or where the pain of the patient comes from the left side, and make the elevation according to the chest, along the length of the body, and let the cauterizations be according to the width of the body.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	After you insert the two inflamed nerves until the heat is felt on the other side, then draw out the cautery, and thus there will be four nerves. And if you wish, cauterize the entire area with three nerves.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After the treatment when it has expelled foul matter over a long period, this is preferable to the other treatments mentioned before.
de ydropisie	of dropsy
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	Cautery is not effective for dropsy, except in the manner called "asclytes".
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	When you treat it according to the methods we have described in the divisions, and your treatment is of no benefit, then you must apply four cauteries around the navel, one on the stomach, one above the liver, one over the spleen, two behind the back near the spine, and one at the breast; and let the cauteries be close to the area of the heart.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les II ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	After leaving the cautery open for a long time to expel impurities, do not leave the treatment of the patient after the cautery; and healing would hasten, and both intentions would be together with the help of God.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The shape of the cautery for the abdomen should be the key that we have shown before; and that for the back should be olive-shaped, as it is placed above.
de l’enfleure des piez	of foot swelling
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	When the feet are swollen in one who is suffering from dropsy and are full of yellow fluid, you must cauterize on the back of the foot between the little finger and the ring finger; and lift your hand with the cautery while turning.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	And do not enter too deeply, lest you go beyond the awl's tip, and apply the cauterization in this manner:
Aprés fai sus II jambes II cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After apply two cauterizations on each leg at the tip of the olecranon; and let the cauterizations be long, one below the knee in front and the other outside, along the leg; and leave the cauterizations open without cleaning them, until the awl is removed; then cure them as described in the other treatments.
de la menoison	of massage
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai I grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et IIII cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout I cautere clavile subtil, et II cauteres sus les hainches.	When abdominal distension comes from cold and moisture, causing the retentive and digestive virtues in the stomach and intestines to be weakened, and cannot be cured by usual methods; and you see the patient suffering greatly and of great strength, then make a large cauterization on the stomach as previously described for the circular cautery on the stomach; and four subtle cauteries around the navel, each one being half the size of a small clavicle cautere, and two cauteres on the hips.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et I cautere sus chaicun yle, et II petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see excessive moisture and the patient suffering, make a cautery on the wrist, and one cautery on each armpit, and two small cauteries near the stomach close to the large intestine, for the treatment is beneficial when there is proper assistance.
de la cure des emorroydes	of the treatment of hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois; et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	When the hemorrhoids are in the fundament, one or more, and they are old and consist of large cold and moist corrupted humors, and have been treated as we said in divisions but to no avail, then make cauterizations: three on the spine of the back, one near each hip bone forming a triangle, and one below the navel; and if you think that their stomach is chilled, and the food does not digest, and the abdomen swells, then above the navel place one large cautery as previously stated, and another on the liver, and another on the spleen for the entire length of the cautery; and leave the cautery open for a long time.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After treatment, ensure the area is healed.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the fleshiness which is called "thelul
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou II, et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you cut into the thelul, heat the cautery to resemble a razor, and then place it fully heated upon the cut thelul; leave your hand there until the cautery reaches the base of the vein where blood is cut off; do this once or twice, and if there is much thelul, cauterize each one as we have said; after that, cure with beneficial ointments until they are healed; and if you cauterize a large area on the flesh, it will provide greater help.
de plaie mal curee	of an improperly treated wound
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot tolerate incision or opening, which we will describe in its place, such a disease comes that can only be healed by cautery.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	When a fistula comes to someone and is inflamed and discharges putrid matter and corrupt moisture, then you should measure it thoroughly with a probe, and be sure to know the depth of the probe completely.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	After heating the cautery which resembles a razor, apply it to the fistula according to the depth of the probe that has entered, and repeat the cautery until all the putrid and corrupt tissue is burned, once, twice, or three times, as needed; be careful not to burn the nerves that are nearby, and also avoid large veins.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	If the fistula goes to the bladder and intestine, be careful in these areas, and do not make an incision except in soft tissue, and consider that it is not safe; after treating the area until it is healthy, if the area has healed and the matter has been removed for a long time, then you know that the area is completely healed; and if the matter has not been removed, know that the area is still diseased, and the bone at the root will be corrupted; and thus as one of those we shall speak about in its place.
de la maladie des reins	of the illness of the kidneys
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra III cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When pain from cold comes to the kidneys, and there is great gas swelling, and if it does not respond to female treatment, then you must make a cautery on the sides of the kidneys with the clavel cautery that we have mentioned before; and if we cauterize in the middle, there will be three cauters in a line, and they will provide greater assistance.
de la vessie	of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et I a destre et I a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais I cautere defuers le dos, ou II se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder is weak and cold from frost and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then apply cautery to the outer part above the bladder where the pubic hair begins, both on the right and left sides, and each cautery should be as long as the breadth of a finger; and you make another cautery outside the back if needed; and let these cauteries be shaped like a key according to the form described before.
de la marris	of the swelling
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice III cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et II cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the swelling is cold and moist, and does not allow conception to occur, and the flowers are corrupted and their terminations delayed; and when they come, there is great pain: then it is necessary that three cauteries be made around the groin, as we have said in the cautery of the bladder, and two cauteries outside the back; and let these cauteries be shaped like a key, as we have said.
de la hainche	of the hip
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a I cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When the viscous fluids descend to the hip joint, and for this reason it moves from its place, and the sign is that one thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and if the location of the departure point is found, then you must cauterize the patient on the hip joint with a cautery similar to a circle, and mark in front of the location around the hip so it encircles it; and let the cauteries be such as those used for cauterizing the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai III cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if these cauteries are not present, make three large olive-leaf cauteries for him, and let the cauteries be as deep as all the other wounds; treat it until it is healed.
de la dolor de la hainche	of the pain in the thigh
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain comes in the buttock of the thigh, and it is from coldness and moisture, and the patient is treated with what we have mentioned in the division but the treatment does not work, and the illness is old: then you must purge the patient of thick humors with fetid pills or other good similar pills.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	After you perform cauterization; and the method of cauterization is according to two methods: that is to say, simultaneously with burning medicines, and fire cauterization.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	Cauterization with fire is according to many methods, of which one is as follows: that you cauterize on the buttock of the thigh three triangular cauteries in this form, and make them deep and large, and leave between each cautery a space equal to the thickness of two fingers, and let the cauteries be olive-shaped; sometimes one makes a cautere in the middle over the top of the thigh, for which there are four according to this form:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you wish, cauterize with the circular cautery that we mentioned earlier for the dislocation of the hip; but do it in such a way that the circles enclose the entire hip, and all the nerves are burned.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	And this is the way it is done in cases of sciatica, when the pain is located in the hip and does not extend to the thigh or the leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if it extends to the thigh and leg, place two cauteries where the patient says the pain is located, and one above the ankle four fingers wide on the left side; and let the cauteries be circular, burning the thickness of the nerve; and if the patient feels that the pain spreads to within three or four finger-widths of the foot, cauterize there where they feel the pain at three points or four using a cautery called "points".
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if necessary, do more; and if he knows that the pain is below the knee towards the thigh, perform a cautery with the cutellaire or circular cautery, and take great care in all your cauteries that you do not leave so much cauterization that you burn the nerves and large arteries, and that you do not cause more harm and constriction to the patient.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	And I myself have seen many who performed a cautery on the ankle of the foot, and they left it so long that the entire leg became swollen, as well as the foot, and it was pierced and the whole foot corrupted.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	After a belly treatment from which he died.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	And if the pain is in two parts together, perform a cautery on each one according to this manner.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	And the wise ones said concerning the cautery of the thigh, about which this is the manner: make it like this iron and let it be at the head as thick as one new nail of oak, or a little less, and let it between the notches in length from one notch to the other by the space of an inch; and let the notches be covered on two sides, and let them also be like knots, and there should be one handle of iron well made; and this is the form:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois I cautere reont et lou laisse III jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And heat it until it is all red and sparks fly, and then place it on the diseased thigh box, and turn it towards the healthy side; and let the cautery be applied once and leave it for three days; and then make a plaster of butter, and leave the wound open for a long time; after the cure with ointment until it is healed.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Albucasim says that we use this cautery little because of his fear regarding it, and we see few who use it; yet this is one of the good cauteries for those who can endure it, and where it applies.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi; et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	The cautery of burning medicine is such that you make the instrument with interlocking parts in which descends the margin of the door, and it should be made of bronze or iron on one side long, and at its height have two notches, and there should be between each the thickness of a finger; and they are open at both ends and join together according to this form:
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche; aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	Then place the box on the patient's lying thigh on their healthy side, and then press your hand strongly upon the box of the thigh; after that pour between the two circles of the hot iron which has been heated in the fire a little, and leave it for one hour, and let the patient endure the heat and burning from it.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu; et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit; et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait; et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	For there is a burning as if from fire; and when the burning has passed, lift your hand with the instrument and raise the thigh gently, and leave it thus for three days, and put on butter until what is black from the burn is removed; and let him lie three days so that pus may come out; and this would be the last aid after the treatment of ointments until he is healed.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument; et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	And if the pain has spread to the thigh or to the leg, make an instrument that holds warm water as you did for the thigh similarly; and this is the way of hot water treatment, and I have written it in the chapter on the preparation of medicines.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	Take alkali and quicklime, as much of one as the other, and grind them together, and put them in a new pot.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir; et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main; et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	where there is a small hole to drain so that the point of a razor can enter; and place over that pot another well leaded pot, and put alkali and heat on it and cover gently until there are two layers of powder which you have taken in your hand; and leave it thus until water and sediment come out of the leaded pot, then take all that water and pour it over heat and alkali as before.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	And then it will be much clearer and is administered in many works of medicine and in cauterizations of other members Because it performs another task like fire, and there are other medicines with which one can well cauterize the hip as tisisie and honey anacardium and heat with soap, all these things mixed together.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	And Galien tells us of a cure where a man was cured of the pain in his hip and sciatic nerve, and he praises it greatly, and says that no other treatment was done, and that he was healed in one attempt when this cure was performed, and he bathed as is instructed hereafter.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie; et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	And he says in this manner that you should take green fresh and dry litharge, and grind it much with a little grease, and apply it to the hip, thigh, and leg where the pain is, and bind it; and leave it for three hours until the patient no longer feels the burning sensation.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	And then have him enter the bath until his body is slightly refreshed, and then have him enter the bed, and the pain will go away entirely and he will be healed.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	And you must know that no one should use a cautery with such medicines unless it is after the evacuation of the body.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout; et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	And Dioscorides states that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with goat hair, it helps greatly; and the cautery should be performed in such a manner.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	Take wool and grease it with old oil, and place it on the depression which is between the thumb of the foot and the one called fossa.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains; et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee; et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	After that, take dry goat hair and hold it to the fire until it turns to charcoal, and place it on the wool, leaving it there until it becomes ashes; and do this again, and continue doing so until you think by sense that it reaches up to the thigh, and the pain is ceased; and this method of cautery is called "goat hair cautery.
de la dolor dou dos	of the pain in the back
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, whether from falling or from impact or due to excessive bloodletting, or from similar substances spread coldly, none of these instances warrant cauterization except for that which comes from an infusion of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne V cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai III cauteres ou IIII au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	It is necessary that after the patient has been made void of pills or other similar substances, three lines are marked on the back where the pain lies, each line containing five cauterizations or more according to the strength and quantity that the patient can tolerate; and let the cauterizations be done according to the cautery which is called "poins"; and if you wish, make three cauterizations or four at the middle clavicle cautery according to this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	This disease often comes to young children, and the signs of its beginning are that they have narrowness in their spine when they lie down, and fear; and you find it at the last vertebrae of the back and in the appearance which comes upon the other spines.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this and wish to treat it, cauterize with the bell cauterization according to this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	So that the cauterization affects each part of the spine equally.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	And if you wish, cauterize around the spine with the pricking cautery in lines of two or three, and let the points be close to each other.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	After treating the area until it is healthy as we have said, and beware of applying a cautery to a lump caused by a nerve spasm.
de la dolor des jointes	of the pain in the joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When joint pain is caused by moisture spread throughout each limb, and when the pain occurs in the feet, which doctors call "gout" properly, and when it is due to cold causes and medicines cannot cure it, then it is treated with cautery in this manner: make a row of cauterizations around the foot joint, and let the cauterizations be olive-shaped according to this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	And if there is need to cauterize on the top of the foot, then make the entire cauterization called "point".
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if the pains come to the knees and other joints, which often happens, apply cauterization on each knee three or four times per part, for the entire cautery olive; and if you need more, do so, but keep your hand no longer than until the surface of the skin is burned.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	And if the pains descend to the knees and the back, let the minister apply the cauterization that we have mentioned in its chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	And if the pains are in the hands, make punctures around the wrist two lines; and if pain remains in both hands, make punctures on each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if the pains come to the elbows or up to the shoulders, cauterize each part, and provide good care for the patient and appropriate medicines.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	For if you give it proper management and purge phlegm, it will be healed with the aid of God.
de la routure dou syfac	of the fracture of the cheekbone
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When a fracture occurs in the ribs, and the organs descend towards the thighs and this is new, then it is necessary that when you see to curing him, he eats nothing that day; and he should use things that loosen the bowels so that his stool passes from his body; after which you make him sit on your lap between your hands, and command him to hold his breath until the ribs are reset, and reset them with your hands, and cut above the fracture on the bone of the arm; and make a mark that resembles half a circle above the body; then heat the cautery in this manner:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	until it is white and until it sheds scales.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	Then reset the bones to their place; and the practitioner should press his hand on them so that they do not retreat backwards; and work well the thighs of the patient, and put a cushion underneath him and a strap over his thighs, and another one under the buttocks which he holds with his hands; then apply the cautery on the mark with your whole hand, and hold it straight and keep holding it until you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, repeat it again until you reach the bone; and be careful that the bone does not protrude when you perform the cautery; that you do not burn him; and that by this the patient does not die or suffer another harm.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	And know that when you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your work is worth nothing.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And it is necessary that the cautery for children be delicate according to their size, and for adults as large as appropriate for them; after three days, treat the area of the cautery with butter until the burn is gone; afterwards, cure it with other ointments until it is healed, and have the patient lie on his back for forty days until the wound is well sealed; and it is necessary that their recuperation be prolonged so that their eyes do not bulge when they are urged to go into rooms.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	And after forty days, when he wishes to rise, give him a well-made bandage and have him wear it for another forty days; and let him rest properly, work little, and avoid excessive drinking and eating, and refrain from raising his voice too much; and when he follows this advice, he is completely healed.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And I will say hereafter the treatment for cutting in his chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	of the rupture of the abdomen
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	When ruptures occur in other abdomens and are constricting, and you wish that they do not grow larger, apply the cautery according to its size, and let one-third be burned; afterward treat it as we have said; and some of the ancients have stated that it should be cauterized with a three-angled cautery according to this form:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	but mark the site first and draw a line across the width above the rupture, and another below it, and then proceed to make the entire cautery in this manner.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But the first cauterizations are lighter and gentler.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	of old pain in any limb
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	When pain comes to any limb, whether from falling or being injured, and that pain lasts long, and the cure by medicine is of no use, then it must be cauterized with a cautery called "points," and the cauterization should be according to the length of the limb and its smallness and weakness and strength and location of twists and its pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	If he is healed by the first cauterization, it is well; if not, repeat another cauterization over that one, for such is the custom that it must change to the nearest limb, so it is necessary that you perform the cauterizations until the patient is healed.
de meselerie	of confusion
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	The sick are sometimes helped by cauterization with great care, and especially those diseases that come from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief: I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	When you wish to cauterize, take care if the illness is in its beginning stages, and if it has progressed according to what we have said in the division, do not delay or hesitate, and if you fear that corruption may spread throughout the patient, then apply V cauterizations on the head: I under the chin, nine places; and II behind each ear at the hairline; and place your hand so the cauterization reaches the bone, and until the skin comes off so that the vapors of thick humors can escape; and cauterize on the neck according to what is mentioned before.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et I cautere en som lou neis, et II cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et VI cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et I grant sus la crupie et I autre delez, et II sus les II espaules; et II sus les coutes, et II sus les tendrons dou pis, et I sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et I autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et I autre sus lou foie.	And if the mischief is spread everywhere; and it appears clearly, then you must cauterize with the cauters that we have mentioned at the head, and one cautere in the nose, and two cauteres on the neck vertebrae, and six cauteres on the spine, and one large one on the buttocks and another nearby, and two on each shoulder; and two on the ribs, and two on the tendons of the foot, and one at each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands; and beware of the nerves that are on the heel, so you do not burn them; and sometimes a person cauterizes on the bone of the wrist, and another on the bone of the stomach, and one more on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	And know that the more cauterizations you perform, the more help you give, and it benefits them; and know that the patient does not feel pain from the cautery as a healthy person would, because their body is already completely corrupted.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	And it is necessary that the cautery be large and small according to the members and joints, according to what you will find in the ways of iron.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	After treatment, apply flour of vetches with honey to the area and other treatments until it is healed.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	When swelling occurs in any member and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, and it does not heal, then make cauterizations on the member according to its size; let them penetrate slightly into the thickness of the skin; then treat with ointments until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	And sometimes a cautery is made on the hand and foot and back, at the exit of the nerve that moves the member, and thus the swelling is removed; yet one should not intervene in such matters unless they are knowledgeable about the members and the exits of the moving nerves.
de albaras	of alum
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the disease called "albaras" is advanced, and medicines are of no use, then cauterize with a cautery slightly deep, according to the thickness of the skin, until the blueness is removed, and its color changed; then treat it with flour of vetches and lentils with rose oil and plantain leaves, and pheasant blood and lark blood, one part each; and mix them all together, and apply it to the site until it heals.
li cure de chancre par cautere	the treatment of a sore using cauterization
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	When a sore begins to appear and you wish to stop its progression, then cauterize it with a cautery that forms a circle all around the edge of the sore.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	And yet the wise ones say that one should make a cautery in the middle of the ulcer; and yet this does not seem good to me, for I fear it may become ulcerated and corrupted, and I have seen this happen sometimes; and more prudent is it to cauterize around it, with the cautery called "circulus", as we have said concerning many types of cauteries.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	of the swelling that cannot be cured
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi.	When someone has a disease called "adubelati", and it lingers because of the excess it produces or due to the age of the patient when they are old and have little blood, or due to time; and you wish to hasten its end: then cauterize around with many small cauteries by puncturing; after that leave it as is.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	For she will hurry to heal me.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you wish to pierce it completely with the cautery, then heat the cautery as follows:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	And place your hand in the middle of the disease called "adubelati" until the cautery pierces the heart, and let the patient feel it externally in such a way that the course of the pus is alleviated.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	After the treatment until he is completely healed.
li cure dou feu par fer	the fire cautery with iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	There is another type of disease called "corrodens," and it is nothing other than a consumption of the limb, for it consumes the limbs as fire consumes dry wood.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	If you see this illness in a place that can bear cautery together with fire, then heat the cauters very small and large, according to what is needed at the location where the illness is; afterward cauterize all around until you reach all the corruption, and leave nothing of it, so that everything that is corrupted be removed.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	Then leave it for three days, and apply the places that have been cauterized, crushed with oil until the burns from the fire are removed, and all the corruption.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	After the treatment with ointments that generate flesh.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	And if you see after three days that no healthy flesh is born, it is good; and if not, then restart the cauterization on what remains of the corrupted areas.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	And this meal was sometimes cured with a medicinal herb in place of fire cautery; but still, fire cautery is of greater help, and I have already said the treatment of the medicinal herb in the section: take it when you need it.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	pains that come to the feet
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	Many times a disease called "clos" according to our understanding arises on the feet from outside, and it is a swollen lump that impedes the foot.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	And the cauterizations for this disease are in two ways.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	That is to say, fire cauterization, and hot water cauterization.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	The fire cautery is such that you heat it until it glows like a feather of woodcock, and it should be made of good iron to the size that it can penetrate the nail from all sides, and there should be delicate edges; afterwards place it very hot on the nail, and turn your hand completely around the nail until it comes to the head of the nail; then leave it thus for III days until it begins to discharge pus; then I make a poultice of wild mallow crushed with salt, and leave the poultice on all night, and the nail will fall out and be uprooted from its roots.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat the wound with an ointment that promotes flesh growth until it is healed.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	And if they are converted from the outside of the body, and this often happens in hands and feet, then you must apply hot water cautery to them; it is done as follows: take a chain of copper or iron, or a feather of woodcock, and place it on the nail and althea leaves, which are known for removing warts; then put the chain so that it penetrates all around, then add a little hot water, and hold firmly with your hand, pressing your hand as you turn so that the edge of the chain comes to the root of the nail, and the hot water should reach deeply to the root; allow the patient to endure the burning sensation of the hot water for about an hour; then leave it thus, and it will be completely uprooted from its roots.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	Do this one after another, until you have examined all those who are in the body, then treat them with ointments that generate flesh.
li cure dou trembler	the treatment for trembling
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices IIII cauteres ou IV sus l’espinee dou dos, I cautere entre chescune espinee; et I cautere ou pez, et I sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	When someone trembles from cold, nervousness, or quartan fever or another condition, you should perform IV cauterizations on the spine, one between each vertebra; and one on the foot, and one above the stomach at the olive cautery; this will stop the trembling and hasten recovery from the cold illness.
des pustules puans	the treatment for foul pus-filled sores
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	At times, baths or foul pus-filled sores appear on the surface of the body, which come from large corrupted substances.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	It is necessary first when they appear that one should make a cauterization on each head of the pustule: a fine cauterization from a branch of myrtle, whose tip has been touched by fire, or from a long piece of aris root, or with a lentil-shaped cauterization.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	And sometimes they cauterize them at the beginning when they appear, in this manner, and they cannot grow from then on, but the excesses from which they come are broken off, and they heal; but it must be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	when the artery is cut
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	Often there are great flows of blood from the artery that is cut at the wound coming from outside, or in the incision of an abscess, or in the cauterization of a limb, and similar things; and it is very difficult to stop.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren I, ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	And yet when this happens to anyone, hasten to place your thumb on the vein wound, and press hard until the blood is stilled beneath your thumb, and no more drops emerge; then put in fire olive oil cauteries many small and large until they are all red; then take one, either large or small according to the wound and where the artery runs, and place the cautery on that vein where you have your thumb, and hold the cautery there until the blood is restrained.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement I autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if it spurts out when you lift your thumb from the vein, and the cautery has gone out, take quickly another of the cauteries that are in the fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des IIII manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And do not stop doing this one after another until the blood is stanched; and be careful that you do not burn the nerve next to it, and that no other harm comes to the patient; and know that when blood spurts from an artery, it cannot be well restrained directly if the artery is large, except by one of the four methods we have said: either by cautery, or extraction when it has not been treated, or by strongly binding with thread, or by medicines applied which have the power to restrain blood; and let it be bound and compressed accordingly.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Who will bring a foul smell by tightly wrapping cloths or placing burning things on them, or other similar things, it does no good if the pus cannot escape.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And if this happens to someone and there is no doctor or medicine present, then he should place his thumb on the wound of the vein as we have said, and spread it well until it smells foul over the wound and over the vein; and do not move the thumb, but moisten it with very cold water often so that the blood is congealed and thickened and smells foul; and make this happen gradually for those who need cauterization and medicines.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Here begins the second book of treatments for wounds
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	We have told you in the first chapter about all diseases in which it is necessary to use a fire cautery or hot medicine, and the reasons, causes, instruments, and forms of cauterizations; and I have placed that chapter from head to feet, and I will proceed in this chapter in the same manner so that one may find more easily what one wants.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And thus as I begin this, it is necessary, dear friend, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first about cauterizations, and therefore greater caution is required.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	And I warn you that you do not undertake folly.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	For many kinds of people come for treatment.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	There are those who are so afflicted by their illness that they change easily due to the madness they experience from their sickness, and from the severity of their suffering; one must fear these individuals.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse.	And among these, there are those who regain their senses and say: "Wait, I am healed"; yet the illness is severe.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	It is not right for you to consent to those who come to you with such behavior, but place greater value on your honor than on your desire, and do not act foolishly but wisely in cases about which you are certain and from which you can earn respect; use prognosis and indication in the treatment of your patients where healing may be achieved; this will help you gain a good reputation, glory, and praise.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Most gracious Lord, Our Lords grant you good understanding and uprightness, and if you wish to breathe in the holy inspiration of his hand, amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Now I have ordained this chapter by dividing it into sections, as it is before the chapter on cauterization, which I discussed from head to foot, so that you may find more easily what you will need.
dou chief plein d’aigue	the head full of water
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	Know that this illness often comes to children at birth, and when the birth attendant restrains the child's head too forcefully; and sometimes it happens for a reason unknown.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And I have never seen this illness except in children, and in all those whom I have seen it hastened death; therefore, it seems to me that it is best to leave such treatments alone.
Et je vis I enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com II nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	And I saw a child whose head was full of water, and his head swelled each day until he could no longer hold it up; and the moisture increased so much that he died, and this moisture is assembled beneath the bone on the siphon, between the heart and the bone; and if the work is such that the moisture is between the heart and the bone, and the abscesses are small, then you should cut a wide incision in the head; and it should be as long as two fingers, so that the moisture can flow out; and see here the shape of the spatumile:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai II fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is more abundant, and the abscesses are larger, then make two incisions in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief III fendures selonc ceste maniere:	And if the swelling is away from the bone, and you see the sutures of the head open on each part, and the fluid jumps when you press it with your hand inside, and there is no response to this: then you must cut three incisions in the head according to this manner:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	And after the incision, extract all the swelling outside.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	After packing the incisions with cloths and powders, apply wine and oil, and leave it this way until the fifth day; then loosen it, treat the wound with bandages and ointments, and allow the head to drain equally, and give the patient dried meat to eat while there is little swelling until the limb is comfortable and healthy.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	And another way of incision is that you look at the opening of the abscess and the gathering of the fluid; for sometimes it is in front; sometimes behind; sometimes on the right; and sometimes on the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	So cut there where the abscess is open and filled with fluid, and make the incision according to what you can do; and be careful not to cut an artery; if blood flows, the patient may die from loss of blood and evacuation of moisture.
de reume	Of rheumatism
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les II arteres.	When someone suffers from a disease called "cataract" in the eyes or head, and the illness is longstanding, and medical treatment does no good, then the last resort is cauterization by cutting the two arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	It is therefore necessary, when you are to cut the veins, that the patient lie with his head back; then rub the area with a rough cloth until the arteries become visible, then have the patient pull the cloth tightly around his neck; then look where the vein runs, and the places of both are behind the ears, and they are placed there; then mark the places clearly, then cut each one with a sharp scalpel from two sides, until the jugular vein reaches the bone, and this should be done across the width of the head.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com II dois au traver.	And if you wish, insert the scalpel below the artery and cut it above, cutting as you would across two sides.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is cut, blood will flow continuously from above outwardly.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And if the artery does not open upon feeling it, then measure the quantity of space for III fingers, then cut to the bone; and what should be removed of blood is VI cups, and perhaps a bit more or less depending on what the patient can endure, and the fullness of the artery; then look at the wound: if there remains any soft tissue on the bone, then cut it so no abscesses may form, then clean out the wound and tie it up, and treat with ointment until it is healed.
de emigrainne	For migraine
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When chronic migraine comes with acute catarrh, due to the moisture of tears and heat in the temples and ancient soreness and similar things, and it is treated by methods of medical care but nothing helps, then we should cut open the arteries in the temples and apply cautery, as we have described.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And the method of extracting them is that the patient should arrange his hair at his temples, and observe the artery which appears in the temple, for it beats clearly, and can be felt except in some people who are too cold; and if it is not palpable, then the patient should compress his neck with some cloths, then rub the area with a rough cloth, and apply hot water to the spot until the artery becomes distinctly visible; then take the spatula of which this is the form:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	Then lightly scrape the skin until you reach the artery, then trace it upwards to the ligatures, and carefully separate the tissues from each side; and if the artery is fine, turn to the tip of the hook, then cut along that part according to the quantity of two arteries.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	For if it is not incised, the blood does not flow completely.
Et trai dou sanc des VI c/, jusc’a III; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en II leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les II liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And draw out the blood from six fingers' width up to three; and if the artery is large, you must bind it in two places with a double thread of silk so that no corruption comes before the wound is soldered, and let there be no further bleeding; then cut away the excess that is between the two ties at the same time, and then, if you wish, cauterize with a cautery knife down to the bone until the head is severed; and this is the best work, if the patient does not have fever and he has a warm complexion.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For cauterization is help to stop moisture: for this reason it is of greatest aid in moist conditions.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de II pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	For the extraction of arteries, one should fill the place with old cotton and put on well-made tents; and when they are removed, treat it with dry medicines that cause flesh to grow, and with tents, until it is healed; and if there is no cort of the artery as you work, hasten to cut by cautery, placing the site with vitriol and press it in your hand so that the blood coagulates; and if you do not have this present, place on the site your dose sufficiently for the blood to congeal, and rinse the area with cold water until the bleeding stops, and bind as is proper; and what is softer and lighter in the extraction of arteries is that you cauterize the vein from this cautery cutting in two parts, but let the cuts be well spaced to preserve their heat longer.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the instrument is too thin, it holds less heat.
Et doit avoir entre les II coutelz I doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les II leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en II leus; et soient esloigniet entre les II chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it should have one thick space between the two blades, and then when you mark between the two places, place the hot iron on until it reaches the bone, and cut the vein into two parts; and keep them apart between the two points because they are not fused together by this cautery throughout; and this is the form of the cautery:
des larmes	of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When the tears from the eyes come down from the veins that are on top of the forehead due to heat, and it does not benefit from any medical treatment you may give, and you see the face of the patient turn red, and feel the forehead moving as if trembling; and when the eyes are thin and moist so that the hair on the cheeks falls out, and the cheeks are hot and scorched by the burning tears, then this cure is needed.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins; et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	And the ancients called it "cure contuse," which is that you make behind the patient who has this disease the hair on his forehead be cut, then you make III incisions on the forehead equally according to the length of the forehead; and let one of the incisions as if II do throughout the forehead downwards until the nose, and the other two on each side above the temples, and beware of cutting into the arteries that are on both sides above the temples; and keep your hand away from the continuation of the II mandibles, and let each wound be the quantity of III fingers across; then have ready a piece of sponge and much cloth for wiping the blood, then place the spatumile sharp from both sides as this is its form:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les II fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	from the incision which is above the temple until the second incision; and scrape off all the skin that is between the II cuts to the surface of the skull which is on the bone, then do likewise from the middle incision until the other second one, and then extract with this spatumile.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	Insert into the first fissure the instrument which is called "cultellaire", and it is very well cutting on one side, and on the other side it is smooth, not cutting, and this is its form:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	And place the cutting side towards the soft flesh of the heart, and the smooth side towards the bone, and insert it until it reaches the middle fissure.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And cut all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes until the incision is continuous up to where it opens into the heart, and then make another incision in the middle fissure up to the other side; and then extract blood evenly, and press the area for blood clots; then place a piece of old cotton in each fissure, and cover with cloths moistened in wine and oil and honey, and guard against abscesses forming; on the third day loosen the bandage, and apply large poultices of vinegar, then treat with basilicon ointment mixed with rose oil, and other treatments used for wounds, until it is healed.
dou reume des eulz	of the rheum of the eyes
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	When catarrh frequently affects someone, and you see the eyes swollen and small, with vision weakening, and the whites of the eyes inflamed; and the hair falls out, and in the head there is pain from ague, and the patient sneezes; then by these symptoms you know that those substances and that catarrh come only from many veins, and if the mucus present is such, this is it.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	And it is that you instruct the patient to lie with their back against their forehead, then make a large incision across the forehead, and another from ear to ear.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	And start from the incision at the left temple to the right temple, and let the incision go up to the bone; and keep your hand away from the nerves of the temples that move when chewing; and when the bone is exposed, wipe all the blood with a sponge, and then separate between the two edges of the incision and put old cotton there, and bandage it with linen; then place over damp cloths in wine and oil, and guard against hot abscesses; when it is removed, you must rub the bone until flesh begins to grow, then treat it with substances that promote healing, which cause tissue regeneration.
En teil maniere: pren II parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine IIII parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In such a manner: take two parts of wheat flour, and four parts of colophony, and make a poultice; and apply it to these wounds to generate flesh throughout.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the blocking of the ears
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des IIII choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	Everything that falls into the ears is one of the four things: grains, animals, stones from mines or similar things such as iron; seeds, such as peas, beans, and lentils; or flowing substances such as water and pus and similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	When a stone or any other object that does not fit into the ear and does not grow in the ear falls into it, place the ear towards the sun.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus.	If you see the stone, then drop a little bit of violet oil or sesamum oil on it, and proceed with extraction; and make them sneeze with powdered substances, and plug their nostrils when they are about to sneeze, and place around the ear pieces of cloth or wool; and keep the ear above.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	Often the stone will come out through this treatment; and if it does not come out, use delicate forceps, which are described here:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If it comes out with the forceps, that is good; if not, use fine double-ended forceps; and if it does not come out with that, make a small fishhook of silk and insert its tip into the ear canal firmly, and plug the area around the hook with soft wax so that no air can enter through the hook; then pull it out forcefully, as often it will come out as we have said; and if it does not come out in this manner, take glutinous material which birds use to line their nests, and place a small instrument properly fitted for the task inside some of it, and wrap a little cotton around it; then press the glutinous substance against the stone or whatever is present, and pull it out.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if she cannot escape from all these things that we have said, then hurry to cut the ear like an abscess below so that chills and spasms may come; and the manner of cutting is that you make the patient bleed from the cephalic vein according to the measure of his strength, then seat the patient between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and make a small cut at the root of the ear in the fat or hanging part; and let the cut be as crescent-shaped until you reach the stone, then remove it according to your power, and suck quickly with your mouth; and cure him until he is well.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre I spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if this grain is inside and it swells, then administer extraction; and if it cannot come out, then administer a thin poultice according to this form:
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	and administer an incision of that swelling.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	But do not do this when you think the swelling is moist due to moisture from the ear, until you have made many incisions; then extract with fine forceps and suction, as we have said, so that the extraction is gentle.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	In the case of acute illness that falls into the ear, the patient should use sneezing powder first, and fill the ear with old cotton.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	And lie down on that same side where the illness is.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	if it comes out because of that, it is good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	if that is not the case, take many stones according to the length of your thumb and light ones, and warm them slightly over the fire; then put one stone in the patient’s ear, and hold it there with another foot away on the other side, and press against the stone in the ear with another stone; do not stop placing one stone upon another until all the fluid comes out, and thus it will come out completely; and if you wish, take a reed, put one end of it in the patient’s ear, and hold the other end over fire until the softer part is burned; then repeat this with other reeds until all the fluid comes out, as we have said about the stones.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	In the removal of the creature, if it is small like a flea and similar things, treat it as we have said in the division; but if it is large enough to be felt, remove it with tweezers; and this is the easiest thing to take out that may be in the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	In the extraction of worms from the ears, when you treat them as we have said in the division and in the treatment of distillations, and the cure does not help, then it is necessary that you look at the ear in the sun: if any worms appear, take them out with fine forceps, and if none are seen, use the method described here:
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	And let it be narrow below and wide above.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	And insert the finer end into the ear according to the amount of pain the patient feels, then gradually form it all along the canal; do this often until all the worms come out.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And if they do not come out, plug around the canal with cotton as I said about stones; and if they do not emerge as we have said, administer distillations that the ancients have proven effective against worms, which you will find in the treatment of distillations; and distil your oils and medicines into the ear using this instrument, the form of which is shown as you see:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a I petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a I estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren I raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations I poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And let it be of silver or brass narrow at the small openings, and above that cover for dripping; and to press inside the distillation use an instrument of brass well made for this, and if you wish take a razor and wrap around the tip appropriately with cotton; then pour your oil or juice, and whatever medicine you want in the tube, and let the tube be in the ear; then put inside the razor all over the cotton, and press with your hand gently until the oil is distilled to the bottom of the ear; and let the patient feel it within, and keep the distillations a little heated by fire as when you distil into the ear; and beware that it is not too cold, for the medicine would not be so good.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the congestion of the ears
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient I poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	Some children are born without any hole in their ears; and this same thing happens to adults due to a stoppage of the wound, or flesh grown inside the ear, and these blockages sometimes occur deep in the ear, such that one cannot see them; and sometimes it is necessary for the hole to be made to come out, and then one can see it well.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	The one that occurs deep inside, which cannot be seen, requires difficult treatment in many cases, and for the one you can see, you should place the patient's ear towards the sun; and look inside: if you see inflammation clearly, then proceed with this spatula as shown here.
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	And let it be sharp and cutting in front and smooth at the back so that it does not hurt the ear; if the inflammation is of flesh grown within or on the ear, then hold it with fine forceps, and gently scrape away all the tissue.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	And if there is an obstruction in the ear, take a fine and light razor and heat it slightly over fire, then place it in the flesh of the ear.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	If you feel the obstruction and the patient feels pain in the ear, pierce it gently, and be careful not to damage the nerves of the ear; then place a tent in the ear according to the width of the opening, and apply Egyptian ointment.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Do this for as many days as it takes for the wound to heal, or take a tent and moisten it in rose water, and sprinkle powdered vitriol on top; and if you see that the ear is swollen, then you must remove the tent and replace it with another one moistened in cerate made of rose oil and wax, until the swelling subsides; then continue to treat it until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if bleeding occurs, dip a sponge and cloths in cold water, and place them on the ear, and use other treatments that stop the bleeding which are in the treatment of hemorrhages.
de la char des papieres	of the flesh of papers
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	This althethum that comes from the eyes when they are moist and dry, you must stretch them with tongs and forceps, and cut off a piece of its root with a scalpel; then place over the spot vitriol ground up.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And if without removing it, you cauterize with the lentil cautery and then cauterize after incision with mues; and many times they repair where some part remains of their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
de la gresle	of hailstones
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	Many times things come from the eyes that resemble hailstones in form and hardness, and for this reason this disease is called "hail," and it is a collection of thick moisture above and below the membrane; the treatment is as follows: observe if the hail moves to one side or another, and it is easy to know; then take them out widely, then gently scrape each part, then take them with forceps, and cut them.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	If you cannot cut it without piercing slightly the skin, do not cause any harm to the patient; and if the wound is large, sew it up with a stitch, and treat it until it heals; and if it is small, do not force anything, for the ointment will heal it quickly and regenerate flesh.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	And if the grain is descending inside the ear towards the upper part, turn over the skin, and extract the grain with forceps, and cut and press from both sides; and if the skin is removed by incision, it does not cause any harm; and when the grain is removed, lift the eye with salt water, and treat the area that regenerates flesh until the patient is healed.
de la graisse des eulz	of the grease of the eyes
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	Exinach is a grease that is produced in the membranes above the pupils, and this happens more often to children than to some people, and it causes them great pain in their eyes, and they get catarrh in the mornings, and cannot look at the light of the sun because tears hasten to their eyes; and for this reason they lie on their backs immediately, and sleep like that, and their membranes below their eyebrows are moistened by exinach which appears in the eye.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	And when you press that place with your thumb and feel the exinach between them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren I drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	And the manner of the work is that the patient places his head on your hand; then take one cloth of linen, and prepare a tent in the shape of a circle according to the quantity it contains exinach for each part, then place it over him; and press with your thumbs from both sides so that the exinach is assembled within the circle; then cut open the moisture with a sharp spatula making a slit no larger than the incision made when opening a vein; and make an incision through completely until you reach the exinach; and in many cases, the exinach comes out from the slit, according to the form of a piece of white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Draw it then in one piece of ripped cloth between your two fingers when removing it, and move your hand right and left until it is spread; and be careful not to jam into the crevice, so that you do not come to completely cover the spatumile up to the eye, so that you do not injure it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	And if the excrement does not appear at the beginning of the opening, then gently widen the opening slightly until it appears; then remove it as we have said, then moisten cloths with oil and water, and place them on the area, and bandage it.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	And there are people who grind salt and apply it to corrupt the moisture that remains.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat him until he is healthy.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if he comes to the place of an abscess that is hot, treat him with poultices to alleviate it until he is healthy.
des poilz des papieres	of the hairs of the eyelids
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc IIII manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When hairs grow in places other than those intended by nature on the eyelids and become entangled, they harm the eyes and cause various diseases such as habitual tears and inflammation of the eyelids and conjunctiva, to the point where it can lead to the destruction of the eyes; and the treatment is according to four methods: either by cautery with fire altogether, or by medicine accordingly as it was mentioned before in the chapter on cautery, and also by incision and suturing, or by cauterization, as I will explain.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai I fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai I fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	It is necessary that you place the head of the patient in your lap, then turn the paper of the eye towards your left hand; if it turns, it is good; if not, insert a needle along all the thread; and let this be near the margin of the paper where the hair grows among these hairs, and draw the thread above all the paper, and turn it to the razor; then cut in the part below the paper, below the adjacent hairs, up to the entire spectacle area from the large tear duct to the small; then remove the thread, and place under the paper a small tent of cotton and cloth, then sign on the paper a figure of an anchor, like the leaf of myrtle, and nonetheless it is necessary that the figure be according to the quantity that you wish to raise the paper which is designed for all.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor; et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	And if there is one who needs it cut in great quantity of the paper according to how much the paper is softened; then make across all the spatulate on both lines that you have marked, and begin from the large tear up to small; and let one of the incisions be near the natural hairs in the thickness of a root, then insert the needle into one of the two corners of the wound, then skin it entirely; then sew together the two edges with a single fine thread on a needle, and wipe away the blood, and make adhere the excess threads around both eyebrows to certain sticky substances if you wish to do this; and if not, pay no mind, then leave the stitches and the threads until three or four days; then cure the wound without stitching of drying and binding materials because the paper rises suddenly from the wound and its coming together, but the stitching is soft (as the ancients say), and these are works without fear; and there is another way: which is that you mark the paper with a shape like the leaf of myrtle, as we have described, at three inches apart according to the form which is here:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	Then cut those which rise above the small forces evenly according to the form which is here:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans; et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	And if you cannot hold the forceps, and the things are not equal, take a needle with thread, and place it in the figure; then place another thread beside the large artery, and the second thread beside the small one, and tie both threads evenly; then lift your hand evenly, and lift all the skin on which you have marked, as we have described, then suture the two lips of the wound together, and heal until it is healthy; and if an abscess comes to your incision, soothe it with cerate and similar soothing ointments; but sometimes the hair from the membrane is turned: then it is necessary to use what we have said about the incision; however, the sutures in both cases are more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai II caines par art, et II liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as II chiés de II pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les II cainnes des II parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	The treatment of the canthi is as follows: you should turn the paper and cut it according to what I have said, then make two canthi by art, and two fine threads as long as the paper and the width of the spatula are; and tie at the two corners where you hold the threads; then gently bring together one and the other above the part that sticks out from the paper around the eye, and pull the two canthi firmly from both sides; leave it thus for several days, and the skin which is pulled will die off and heal and grow, until it falls off by itself.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	If it delays, then cut with force, and treat until it is healed; and when the wound is sealed, the paper will be lifted, and no more hair will grow there; and this is the form of the two canthi that you will make according to this figure, and according to this length and width:
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute I fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse I autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a I ou II ou III ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	The work is such that you take a fine needle and put a thin silk thread underneath; then join the edges and tie one to the other finely, and let the length of the threads be one palm long; then arrange in the socket another fine silk thread briefly, and tie the ends of the thread; then have the patient place his head on your hand; and keep it near the sun so that the work is clear, for this is a delicate and small work, then pierce the needle throughout the socket at the root of the hair alongside, and make it pierce into the membrane quickly as you draw it over the natural hair; then pull out the hair up to the socket, and place in the socket that hair if there are one or two or three or more; then withdraw your hand until the hairs come out completely from the socket with the natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo II jors ou III, tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne I poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	And if the hair is treated and does not come out with it, draw the needle back along all the thread that you have inserted until the hair comes out from the opening above and you can see it by sight; then pull out the needle and leave a thread in place for two days or three, until the hair grows in its place and the flesh grows over; and if the hair is short, match one long hair from the natural ones, and raise it with the one where you left it, until it is raised and then lift it.
de la porriture de l’oil	from the pus of the eye
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	When this disease which is called "aleacrati" or pus comes in the eye, it happens in two ways: one naturally, and the other unnaturally.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	And it happens by sudden wound, or incision, or cautery, and similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	And the manner of the work is that you should split the wound, separate its edges, and place linen strips inside, keeping it dressed until it heals; and it is not appropriate to use in its treatment things that dry out and constrict.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	For if you do this, the illness will return worse than before; but use things that soften it, such as fenugreek; and bathe with water or a decoction of flax seeds, and apply ointment made from dissolved mutton fat mixed with some oil, and wrap a cloth around it, and treat it thus.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the treasure of your treatment is that you guard against it not healing according to its former form; and these works which we have mentioned are nothing other than remedies for this disease, so that it does not return according to its former form.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	of the flesh that comes in the eye
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	This disease which is called "axacrati" in truth, and its nature and circumstances.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	The circumstances arise from wounds and cuts and cautery and similar things; and the method of treatment is that you take a needle, on which there should be double thread, and insert it into the flesh, and pierce starting from the left tear duct to the right, so that the thread passes through two points of the flesh; then stretch the flesh above all over the needle, and cover with one spatula width.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the figure of the paper returns according to what is required, it is good; if not, take the scraper and place it in the fissure, and turn the paper, and make II fissures on either side within the paper; and let the edges of the II fissures be at the II corners of the incision that you have made, and shape them so that when they are joined together, the figure is as the figure of a letter called «I griesche»; then remove that flesh according to the quantity that its sides are acute underneath, from what lies under the paper, then join the II separated parts with thread; then treat it with what we have said about softening medicines and tents until it is healed.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les II leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	And if the disease comes from a fissure or seam or cautery, it is necessary that you make a full fissure underneath the hairs of the paper, as stated above; then separate between the II leaves of a tent, as I have said; and one must perform the work according to the form of the disease, for it is very diverse in form, and wise masters prepare their instruments with all their power so that they may bring back the figure to its natural form; and the patient himself, according to what requires work and tools in various conditions.
dou soudement de la papiere	of the sudden swelling of the skin
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	When this swelling occurs in such a manner that the skin above is swollen with the white of the eye, and he cannot move or do his natural works, then you should place the tip of a razor under the skin, and lift it up; and stretch it with forceps, until you cut away what adheres to the delicate spatumile, which must not be too sharp or too cutting, so that the patient cannot endure the spatumile causing any injury to the eye; and make your incision, by which you peel off this assembly, lightly, so that the skin returns to its natural form; and heal entirely this assembly, and sometimes put in the eye a brine solution, and lift it with fresh water, and of milk; then place between the skin and the eye a pad of linen, and place on the eye wool moistened abundantly with egg white; and after three days use a poultice and soothing things until he is healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	of the nail of the eye
Saiches que li ungle est selonc II manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a I dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	Know that the nail is according to two manners: one is nervous and similar to hard skin, and another which is not nervous, but is like white congealed moisture, so when it is touched by iron and one thinks to pinch it with pincers, it cannot be done; and both semblances begin near the large tear duct, and grows little by little until it covers all the sight and all the light and the movement of the eye.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met I poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et I fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	And the manner of the incision is that the patient places their head in your lap, then works the eyes; and lift the paper to your hand, then coil the nail with pincers slightly, and stretch it above; then take a needle, and put horsehair, or cow hair, or bull's hair on it, and strong thread; and double the point of the needle a little and pierce it into the nail, and pierce it all through the needle, and tie the nail with one thread and stretch it above, and shave off all the hair around the side of the nail which is near the tear duct and tie the hair to the root of the tear duct up to the head, then cut the remaining part at the base of the tear duct throughout the fine spatula and small forces, and leave the natural flesh of the tear duct so that by the incision there does not come forth tears habitually; and sometimes stretch the nail only on a needle and with thread as we have said; then shave off all the spatula under which is this form:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	And ensure that the spatula does not touch the tender flesh and break it, and that the probe is not pierced; after the incision, sprinkle a bit of ground sulfur into the eye, and from the preparation made with litharge, apply it until the next day; then treat it as needed until it heals.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And if the nail is not nerve-filled and you cannot insert the needle, and the forceps cannot enter, this condition of the nail is often treated with various medicines; and it grows as I have described in the section, and if you wish to cut it, proceed carefully with the patient's eye, and take a light, sharp spatula according to this form:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	And raise the nail gently above, and if you see that it thins slightly and the tissue adheres to it, then drip from your mouth into the eye a preparation made of litharge and red ochre and ground sulfur, and plug the eye until the next day; then continue with the other work according to this same method until it is completely removed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If anything is contrary in the eye, such as a hot abscess, then let it be, and treat the hot abscess until it is healed, then resume work as before, until it is healed.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the appearance of the flesh from the eyelid harms the eye greatly, then suspend it at the corner and cut a part but not entirely so that no tears come out; then drip into the eye red choler which is made from litharge.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	of the flesh that grows over the pupil
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre; et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	In some people's eyes, red flesh sometimes grows and covers the pupil, restrains it beneath the eyelids, and turns it outward, resembling a white rose; and the procedure is that the patient places their head on a clean surface, then the treatment of the eye begins. Use appropriate hooks to coil all this flesh, and support it with force; then cut the first layer, and continue cutting until you reach the end, being careful not to injure the eye during the work; make the incision in the way we described for the nail bed and small finger operations as illustrated after this chapter; when the incision is complete and all the flesh has been removed, apply salve or grind it into a paste where you can drip red choler and similar corrosive medicines; then place cotton soaked in egg white on top of the eye to prevent a hot abscess; if anything remains and there is suspicion of a hot abscess, leave the eye alone and treat the abscess with soothing remedies for a hot abscess; then return to your work until it heals, and similarly handle any flesh attached to the eye by this method.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	However, it is necessary that you treat each weak eye by the natural way; and by the accidental way, using iron work; and do not put your hand into any of these works until you see that this member can bear that work.
des voines des eulz	of the veins of the eyes
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	Red veins that cover the eye cause discomfort in its work and weaken the eye all day.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	Therefore, it is necessary first to check if the eye, in which the ailment exists, is alone and there is no other disease except this ailment; then treat it in such a manner: instruct the patient to place his head on your hand, then suspend those veins along the entire tendon according to your knowledge, and let the tendons be fine double according to this form:
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en I cors selonc ceste forme:	And let two lancets be arranged in gradations along the body according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	Then, as you apply force to those veins subtly, and wipe the blood hour after another, until you see those veins withdraw from the eye; and be careful not to injure the eye with the points of the spathes, and perform this work at noon facing the sun, and be very diligent in your work so that you do not miss any of those veins; and when you have done this, then drop into the eye green and red collyrium to corrupt what remains of the sore.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	And if you do not have the power to collect all of this at that hour, then apply a poultice on the eye with things that ease the pain of the eyes, and leave it for several days until the pain is eased and be assured there is no hot abscess, then restart according to this manner as described earlier until he is healed; and this is the form of applying force.
de la fistule de l’oil	Of the fistula of the eye
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	The physician calls this type of fistula "arissati": when you treat it with cautery and hot medicine as I have said before, and it does not heal, then there is pus that you must incise at the abscess, where it should be opened, and drain all the moisture that is inside until the bone is exposed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a I chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone is exposed, and you see the corruption and darkness, then remove it with all the instruments that are shown here; it is called "aspre chief," and should be made of iron bent into a head like a file as it appears in the present form:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And place it on the site of the corrupted bone, then turn it between your two hands and press gently until you know that the corruption is removed; do this several times, then restore the area with drying medicines.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	If the flesh is sealed and new flesh grows, and the body of the bowel remains sealed, and it stays thus for forty days, and does not renew itself nor become an abscess, and no bad accident occurs, know that it is healthy; if this is not the case, there is another intention to bring the fistula back to the anus according to this form: which is to uncover the bone a second time with iron, and by using dry medicines, and when it is uncovered take one fork according to this form, and let the head of iron be at three angles, and let the shaft be slender up to the top as you see here:
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	Then place it on the bone near the lamina, and move your hand from the eye one inch, then turn the fork completely until it pierces the bone and the patient feels it because wind enters if he holds his hand over his anus; and then restore the area with dry medicines as I have taught you, and when new flesh grows and hardens the tissue, remove the matter to the anus; this is a lighter thing for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	from the discharge of the eye
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil I liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en IIII, et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the eye is fully open and there is no disturbance or reduction in vision, you must bind the patient; then treat it, then apply cups to suck without cutting, then place on the eye a preparation made of boxwood, aloes, incense, and saffron; and then extract the eye, and apply plasters over bandages and cloths. The method for the cloths is that you take soft cloths and fold each one four times, and then lay them one upon another according to the size needed by the eye. Then press it down with a firm bandage, and continue using the cups to suck without cutting; then remove the cups and leave the eye bound day and night, and if the dressing becomes loose, you must tighten it much; then after a day and night, remove the dressing, and if you see the eye healing, that is good; if not, repeat the plasters and cloths and binding and suction until it is healed.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	from the tearing of a vein
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com I grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait I fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When a disruption comes to the vein of the eye, it opens up, and there appears pus like resin seeds, which is frightening to see; then if you wish to treat it, you place one needle at the root of the part below, then insert another needle where the double thread from the eyebrow part is; and pierce it, leaving the first needle according to its position; then cut the area of the double thread and tie a part of the eye around it tightly, then extract the needle and apply linen soaked in abundance with egg; and leave it until the thread falls off with the eye vein, then cure the eye with comforting things until the wound is healed; and sometimes the wound is restrained by the eye vein all around with a circle of cloth, until it is healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the eye shows great appearance, then pierce it with a fine spatula that comes from the side of the eye, and let the milky moisture flow out and lower the eye; then extract it until it is healthy.
de la bowe de l’oil	from the socket of the eye
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	This disease called "alcunnati" is nothing but an accumulation in the eye, resembling water dripping down, yet it is not actually water; and the manner of its appearance is that you seat the patient on a prepared and straight chair, then take his head between your hands from both sides, and move it until you see the accumulation come up to your eyes; then if it remains there without descending and obscuring the light, know that it is indeed water, and if the descent of the accumulation does not appear as we have described.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	Seat the patient between your hands, then take the spatula and make an incision through the corneous membrane in the direction of the conjunctiva and cornea, until the pus comes out; and when it has come out, drip warm honey mixed with water or fenugreek boiled with honey into the eye, then treat it further as necessary until it is healed.
des aigues de l’oil	of the eyes' fluids
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit.	We have described the appearances of the fluids in the division and what is necessary for piercing them; act according to the health.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	You should seat the patient between your crossed hands, away from the light of the sun, and with the healthy eye held tightly; then place the paper of the affected eye in your left hand if it is the left eye, or in your right hand if it is the right eye; then take in your right hand, if the eye is left, the instrument called "almagda," or in your left hand, if the eye is right; then place the tip of the instrument near the cornea by the thickness of a thread on that white part of the eye towards the lower tear duct, and insert the "almagda" carefully, turning your hand until it pierces the white of the eye, and feel when the almagda reaches the empty space; and it is necessary for the length of the path of the almagda to be perfectly equal to the distance from the plum-pit up to the end of the black part; this is the cornea; you will see the bone on that paper through the clarity of the corneous membrane, then place the instrument where the fluid is, and press it out one way after another.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	If the aqueous humor now descends, the patient sees before him and the instrument in his eye.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	After resting for a short time, if the aqueous humor rises again, apply force with the instrument, and when it is firmly in place and does not rise further, gently extract with almagda by turning your hand little by little; then put a small amount of rock salt into the eye, and lift the eye from there.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	Then place around the outside of the eye plugs made of wool soaked in rose oil and an abundance of egg whites, and bind it with a healthy eye.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	We, and those of our time, apply it with comminuted material mixed in abundance with egg whites.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if the almagda cannot enter the eye due to its hardness, because there are some people who have eyes that are too hard, then you must take the instrument called “alberit”, here is its form:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	Then pierce only the conjunctiva and do not go too deep, but proceed carefully; then insert the almagda as we have said; upon completion of the work, prepare for the patient a comfortable sleeping arrangement where he lies on his back in a dark place; be cautious of all movements, give him light food, and do not move his head to the right or left; bind him according to his disposition until the third day; then unbind him in that same dark place, test his vision, show him some objects, and then rebind him until the seventh day; it is not necessary to do this immediately during treatment or after incision now, but you should delay it because the fluid accumulates quickly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	If abscesses appear, that you loosen the eye before the seventh day, and direct it to him who alleviates abscesses; and when it is pacified, then loosen the sight and place on it a small cloth to cover for some days, and let it be immediately in that dark house.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	And then leave the house gradually and return to his normal activities; and know that no student should interfere in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And one came to us who was from the Iraque, who told us that in their country they make almond-shaped incisions for which water is sucked out, but nevertheless I have never seen any such thing in our land, nor have I ever read about it in ancient books; and perhaps it is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And these are the likenesses of the forms of almonds, because those who do not recognize them see them; and they are properly of brass:
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en III angles ague.	And let the heads of these be of the same subtlety, and the rear in three acute angles.
de la char sor le neis	of the flesh on the nose
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	Sometimes flesh on the nose grows in various shapes, some of which appear as many-legged scorpions; and there are such cases where it has a swollen red appearance, and there is also smooth skin of good color.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	In the case of that flesh which is smooth and not swollen, you should seat the patient between your hands facing the sun; work his nostrils, apply the lancet to those parts, and draw them out thinly; then hold as much as you can sustain with a fine sharp spatula on one side, until you know that all the flesh has been removed.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout I des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	And if there remains anything that you cannot cut, then treat it with all the instruments subtly and gently, so nothing is left; and if without penetrating too far, an abscess bursts, then cover it as is appropriate; and if these are malignant abscesses, then hurry and cauterize until the blood ceases to flow and all the flesh is removed, then apply clean water or vinegar or wine.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	If the urine flows and moisture reaches up to the palate, know that it is safe; and if moisture does not penetrate as it should, know there is flesh grown on the bone above where the instrument cannot cut: then you must insert a thick thread of flax, and tie it tightly with knots, leaving between each knot enough space for one finger at least; and place the patient's head in the thread at its narrowest part, and pull through smelling until it comes out through the mouth; and many times children at school do this, and it is an easy thing for one who wants to do it; then hold the end that comes out from the nose with one hand, and the other end that comes out of the mouth with the other hand, and pull apart gradually as you feel what is in the thread.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	Do this until you know that the new tissue has corrupted the flesh, then pull out the thread, wipe away the blood, and moisten the thread in Egyptian ointment, and put it back into the nose as before; do this for III days or more, until the ointment corrodes all that remains of the flesh; and then place a silver chain in the nose for some days until it is healed, and if there is need for drying medicines, use them; and this is the form of the instrument to purge the head, through which oils and medicines are dripped into the nose:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait I mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	And whether it is of silver or brass, it should resemble an open lamp, like a chain, and the conduit should be similar; and if you wish, make a closed chain, and the instruments should be full for purging the head; and let it have one handle at the top to hold when heating the oil or any liquid.
de la char sor le neis	of the flesh upon the nose
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	Many times a disease called "telul" is born on the head of the nose, and it grows and becomes large in time, such that it is visible to the eye; and for this reason you must cut it at the beginning, remove it entirely, then apply the cautery or hot medicine to its place; and if one delays cutting it until it is large, be cautious if it is hard, of a bad color, and lacking sensation: do not touch it with iron because it is an entrenched abscess, for when you cut it even once, great harm comes to the patient; and if the abscess is soft to the touch, not of a bad color, and you see that one can entirely cut it out, then empty the patient of blood without fear, and treat the place with drying and binding substances.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	When the skin is cut and sewn
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	Know that when solutions for continuity come in one of these cartilage works, there is little benefit, except in some men.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore, when this happens to anyone, examine if the wound is fresh and full of blood; then bring together the two edges into one seam, and treat it until it heals; and if the edges are separated on both sides, you must scrape all parts so they bleed, then join the two edges into a seam, bind it, and sprinkle powdered dragon's blood and ground incense; place a piece of strong adhesive plaster or another sticking plaster over the powder, and leave it until it flakes off by itself, then treat with ointment until it is healed.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The method of suturing is that you assemble the solution: either by needles, as we have said in the suturing of the abdomen; or by thread, as I have told you.
des apostemes des levres	of abscesses of the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	In some people, there is a hard abscess in the lips, resembling grains of wheat, small and large; then you must turn the lips, cut into each knot, grasp it with forceps, and cut it in each part; then apply to the place after the incision of powdered vitriol until the blood stops; and then wash the area, and treat the wound with dry remedies until it is healed.
de la char des gencives	of the flesh of the gums
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Often a piece of flesh grows on the gums, which the ancients called "albulus"; you must hold it with forceps, cut it at its root, and let the blood or pus flow; then put vitriol powder ground up, or other powders that constrict and dry, over the site; if this flesh returns after cutting, as often happens, cut it a second time, and cauterize: it will not return after cautery; these are the forms of instruments for cutting.
des sordens	of dirtiness/discharge
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	Sometimes there are scabs that are ugly and rough assembled at the top of the teeth, inside the mouth between the gums; and sometimes the teeth are black, yellow, or green, to such an extent that corruption comes to the gum and the tooth is foul-smelling; you must make the patient sit in your hands, and place his head in your lap, and remove the teeth or scabs thoroughly; thus do for the blackness, greenness, yellowness, and other stains until they are clean; if you extract what needs to be removed at first sight, it is good; if not, then begin again from the second day and third, until everything is removed; and know that teeth require various forms of instruments to remove them, according to what the work reveals, because the reamers used to pull out teeth are different from those used between the teeth; and these forms and others should be prepared for you.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	It is necessary when you treat the tooth of its pain that you delay pulling it as much as you can, for no one should do this; for it is a substance very high until there be no excuse for extracting it.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	Then when the patient is constrained to pull it, you must be certain of the tooth causing pain.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	Many times the pain deceives the patient, and they think it is in a good tooth and extract it; but the pain does not leave them because of this, until the bad extraction is corrected, for we have already seen this happen with these patients. And when you are certain of the painful tooth, you should char around the tooth to two phalang lengths strongly to protect the gum from all sides; then move it with your fingers or fine forceps bit by bit, until it is well loosened, and then firmly secure the forceps; place the patient's head in your lap between your knees, and hold it steady so that it does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	After extract the tooth straightforward without breaking it, and if it does not come out forcefully, take some of these instruments and insert them lightly on each side, and move it as you did before.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	And if the tooth is perforated and decayed, you must fill it with cloth where the cavity is; and carefully extract it with pliers without breaking it; and you must work very skillfully around the gum to loosen the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	And be very careful that you do not break it, and leave a part behind, as this will return to the patient as greater pain from the root's mischief than the first.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	And be careful that you do not act as ignorant craftsmen do, who through their haste and boldness sometimes break the tooth structure, and do not accomplish what we have described; but instead cause sometimes through this action greater illness from the roots that remain, or from the tooth structure they break, as often happens; and when the tooth is extracted, wash the place with wine or hyssop and salt; and if bleeding continues to occur, which often happens, fill the area with ground vitriol; and if that does not help, cauterize it.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The forms of the instruments with which one moves the teeth first should have long points and thick handles, so that they do not double when you pull the tooth; and these are the forms:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And they should have thick parts so that they do not bend when pulling, and they should be made of well-crafted iron, and they should be toothed to hold the teeth.
de la racine des dens	from the root of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou ij.,	When the root remains after extraction, it is necessary to place cotton moistened with butter on the site for one or two days.
tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	until the wound is softened, then you can insert pincers called "algefri," which look like a bird's beak; and they should be made inside like a file, and this is the form:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not want to come out with these forceps, then you must uncover the flesh all around the root, and apply the instrument which is called "althali", that is to say a plane, here is its form:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	And let it be firm and thick so that it does not break, and if the root jumps over this, it is good; if not, then help with all the instruments, of which the forms come next:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait II rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if one helps with this instrument that has two prongs, here is its form:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other iron tools which are mentioned before in the context of teeth, and of this instrument that resembles large forceps, here is its form:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	And let this instrument be such that it cannot break, and know that many instruments are made of bone; and also other instruments which are not mentioned here; and wise masters find their own tools according to the work they do and the disease they encounter, for there are some diseases where the ancients did not teach any tool due to diversity in cases; if one breaks the cartilage or other bones, it may rot, so seek the instruments that should be used, which I have told you about, and help with gestures of which this is the form:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And let them be large and well-made to hold the bone so that it does not slip, but can be held and removed; then restore the place with medicines suitable for this, and if there is decay in the bone, and it is small, remove it entirely with this instrument:
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a I petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When the tooth does not appear according to its natural position in the body, and its form is ugly, especially in virgin women, then you should know if the tooth has grown after another tooth, and it is not in the right place, and cannot be filed or polished: then remove it; and if it grows against another tooth, take this instrument whose shape is described here, and resembles a small beak, and let it be made of sharp iron.
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And cut it a little at a time over several days due to the hardness of the tooth, and so as not to move the others, and if it appears that you can polish it, then polish it with a file like this one whose shape is described here:
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	and it is similar to the file used for making needles; and polish the tooth little by little over several days gently, so that it does not move until it fits perfectly; then smooth out any rough edges with a plane at the end with any rasp, and if the tooth is too sharp and cuts the tongue, then you must file down the roughness until it is even, so that it neither cuts the tongue nor impedes speech.
quant li dent lochent	When the teeth clash
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	When the front teeth clash, either by percussion or falling, and the patient cannot press upon what they chew without it becoming loose, and you have treated them with restrictive medicines but to no avail; then it is necessary to restrain them with a gold wire, for silver wire turns green and rots, whereas gold never moves; and let the wire be neither too thick nor too thin, according to the quantity of space between the teeth; and if you wish to align the teeth, take the wire and place it double between the two healthy teeth, then put the teeth that need correction between those that are sound, whether there is one or more, carefully until you reach a healthy tooth on the other side; then continue covering until you reach the part where you began, and tighten your hand gently and skillfully so that they do not move; and let your pressure be at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	Then cut the tooth with pliers and join them, and place them between healthy teeth so as not to hurt the tongue; then leave it this tight as long as possible, and if it loosens or the wire comes off, tighten it with another wire; thus it will remain and serve in this manner for its entire duration, and this is the form of the tooth and the arrangement of the two healthy teeth and the two bad ones, as you see:
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And when the tooth falls out, replace it in its place fresh with a fresh one, as we have said; and do not intervene unless you are wise and skilled, and sometimes one makes the form of a tooth from a piece of whalebone, and places it where the deficiency is, and tightens it as we have said, and it remains and serves for such a long time.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	To cut the bandage of the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	There is this bandage that comes from under the tongue either by nature at birth; or by an accidental wound that has healed; and the operation is such that you work on the mouth of the patient, and have his head in your lap, and lift up the tongue; then cut the nervous bandage widely, until the tongue is separated from its attachment, and if there is hardness or knot, which is due to a sudden wound healing, insert an uncine (hook) and cut it widely in that manner; and be careful that the incision is not too deep, for the artery that lies underneath; and when you have finished, lift up with rose water and marshmallow juice, or cold water, then place under the tongue a pad of linen; and let the patient gargle each night so that the wound does not heal prematurely.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	And if bleeding occurs, apply ground vitriol to the area; and if it weakens the blood, cauterize with the lentiginous cautery, which is good for this; then treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see it colored black or hard, such that the patient does not feel it, do not touch it, for it is a chancre; and if it declines to blanchor, and there is moisture, apply lancing and open it with a fine scalpel, and release it from both sides; and if the blood weakens during your work, apply ground vitriol until it stops bleeding, then return to your work as long as you continue to treat all force; then lift the area gently and carefully, and treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
des apostemes de la gorge	abscesses of the throat
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	Sometimes there come into the throat glands which are called "godath," and they are properly referred to as the two tonsils, and when you treat them, as we have said in the division, and if they are not healthy, be careful: if these abscesses are hard with little sensation and of dark color, do not touch them with iron.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	And if they are red and the root is swollen, do not touch them with iron, nor for bloodletting; but leave them until they turn black, and then you can remove them, as they will fall off on their own; and if they are of white color and the root is delicate, prepare the instrument to cut, but first ensure that the abscess rests and is calm.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	Then have the patient sit before the sun, and his head be in your sight, and work the mouth and seize the jaw between your hands, and press the tongue down with all the instrument, which is of this form; and it should be of silver or fine brass as sharp as a knife:
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	As you press the tongue with all this instrument, and you see the abscess, take a lancet and insert it into the almond, and pull out more than you can; and draw some things from the cloth with it, then cover it with the instrument, of which here is the form, that seems like a forceps; and yet the ends are curved, one side opposite the other, and they are very sharp, and it is made of iron or steel:
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this instrument at hand, cut it with pincers, of which here is the form:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les II amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les II amandres igament.	And let it be sharp on one side and named on the other; and when you have cut one of the glands, cut the other in the same manner, and after the incision, gargle the patient with hot water, and warm and soothing liquids, and if bleeding occurs, gargle the patient with hot water in which pomegranate peels or myrtle leaves are cooked, or similar things, until the blood is stilled; then treat it until he is healthy; and sometimes other abscesses appear in the throat besides the two glands, so cut them as you would the two glands equally.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	And I treated a woman who had an abscess that had formed in her throat, which is to say the tonsillitis; and I found her throat almost completely closed off so that she could not exhale due to the blocked passage, nor eat or drink, and she would have died if she had remained in this state for one or two days.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	And the abscess was so high up that it had been placed two inches from each of the two openings of the anus.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	I hastened then and inserted an arrowhead into one of them, and pushed it out forcefully, extracting a large amount of pus; then I did the same thing in the other opening of the anus, and operated on her mouth and pressed down her tongue; afterwards, I inserted the arrowhead into the abscesses, and removed part of it, and only a little blood came out; thus, the throat passage of the woman was cleared, and she now began to drink water and then wine, and I did not stop cutting into that abscess for a long time; and the abscess regrew quickly, filling up the space I had emptied until it became very large again; then I treated it and cauterized it inside her throat: thus, it stopped growing; and I left those parts, and do not know what God did with her after me.
de l’uve	of the eye(socket)
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	When rheum descends into the eye socket, and it is swollen and elongated, it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is detached and round, it is called "eye".
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	When it is treated as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not help, and you see that the swollen abscesses are subsiding, and they are subtle, then you must cut them; and those which are rounded and are not elongated; and they are bloody or of a dusky color or black, then you must avoid cutting them.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	For there is great danger to the patient.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	It is therefore necessary, when you see it, according to the manner that I have said, concerning its blueness and length, that you seat the patient before the sun, and press the tongue with the instrument of which we made mention above; then place the lancet in the uvula, and draw it down, and cut at I of the two instruments that I mentioned in the incision of the two tonsils.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And you must not cut beyond the excess that is over the natural limit; for if you cut more, it will harm the voice and speech; and after the incision, use what we have said about the incision of the two tonsils, and treat it until it is healed.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	And if the patient fears the cutting, it is necessary that you use caution with the cautery to ease the fearful sensation.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	And the method of the cautery is sharp heat.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	And it is that the patient place their head in your lap, and then press the tongue with the instrument we have mentioned in the chapter on cautery, and confine it with sharp vinegar, so that it is not too thick or too clear; and use the edge of this instrument, which is as follows:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés IIII jors ou V Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place on the head a receiver where the medicine is applied, like the edge of a spoon, and put the instrument with all the medicine over the eye; and let the patient lie on their side so that saliva and mucus flow from their mouth into the medicine, so it does not go down the throat, and blockage occurs. Then hold your hand over all the medicine and press it onto the eye for half an hour until you see it congeal and the medicinal bites are appeased; and if you wish, take cotton and wrap it around some instrument, moisten the cotton in the medicine, and place the instrument with the cotton into the socket above, so that the cotton adheres to the eye; and do this often, until the cautery is complete, then let it dry, and fall after four days or five. And if you need to restart the cautery with the medicine, then restart it, and after the cautery, wipe around the eye with cotton wrapped in butter, and clean what is around the medicine; and let them drink cold water, and gargle until they are well.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en I pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait I estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This treatment is more effective than incision or cautery; if it is treated by fumigation according to this manner, take camphor and hyssop and origanum and rue and chamomile and wormwood and similar herbs, and assemble them all together or some of them in one pot, and add oil, and let it boil; and the pot should be well sealed with strong earth, and inside the pot have an instrument pointed according to this manner:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	And it should be made of silver or brass, and place one end in the patient's mouth so that the vapor rises to the eye through the vein, until the eye is deadened; then repeat often, until the eye dries up, and guard against doing this at the beginning of the hot abscess's onset, for many things happen; and do not perform it except during the decline of a hot abscess.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	And if this instrument is not present, take a chain and place inside the head an egg yolk so that the patient's mouth does not get too hot; for the egg yolk does not let the vapor weigh down the mouth, and this is both good treatment and safe.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou I morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge I fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren I estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Many times a bone or fish spine gets stuck in the throat, or some other thing; therefore, you must extract what you can see, and press the tongue with sunlight on all instruments so that you can see the object move; and for what is unclear and lodged in the throat, it is necessary to make the patient vomit as if the meat were cooked in their stomach; perhaps this will cause the foreign object to be expelled through vomiting; or the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of linen, or a lettuce root, or a dry piece of bread; and tie a thread to the sponge, then swallow it; when it reaches its location, it will swell, and then you can pull out the foreign object; if these methods do not work as we have described, take an instrument made of lead according to this form:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	And let the instrument be curved at the head so that it can more easily enter the throat, and have the head raised high; and beware that you do not touch the epiglottis, or suffocation may occur, nor should you push the bone in; move it as if the patient were pushing the instrument, for this will ease the passage when the thing is hard; if pushed down, pull it out gradually so that it is evenly drawn.
de la sansue de la gorge	of the blood from the throat
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	Sometimes the blood is treated, as I said in the division, by the cure of medicines; and when this does not help, then look into the throat of the patient in the sunlight, pressing the tongue with the instrument that I told you about.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	And if you see the blood, draw it out with the small hook or with fine forceps.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	And if that does not work, take a hooked cane and insert it into the patient's throat, then place a hot iron on top of the hook, and do this frequently.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	And if the patient is covered in water all day.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	Then take a full glass of cold water, work it in the mouth, and pour it down so that it is swallowed, and move it with your hand frequently; and as soon as the blood feels the water, it falls.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	And if it does not fall as we have said, then gently smoke the patient with asafoetida using the instrument I described for smoking grapes; do this many times, for it will fall without delay.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	And the method of fumigation is that you take a pot with glowing coals, and cover it with a perforated lid, and in that hole place the end of the instrument; then pour your fumigation into it, and have the patient put the tube in their mouth, and close their mouth so that no smoke escapes but goes directly to the blood; and now the blood will fall out, and if it does not fall, start the fumigation again multiple times; and allow the patient thirst, and drink salted things and alms, and do not let them drink water; and then it is necessary for it to come forth by this governance.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	And the form of the instrument with which blood is treated is such that when it can be seen, it resembles curved tongs for entering the throat; and it has the appearance of a bird's beak, and there are ridges like a file, so that what it grasps, it cannot let go; and here you see the form:
li chapistres des apostemes	the chapter on abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	There are many types of abscesses, according to what the memory brings back later from one and another in this book, and they differ in their perforation and size; and it is in two ways, one of which is in its form itself, and concerning those that hold moisture.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	And the second way is for the places where they are on the body.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	for abscesses of the head are different from those of the buttocks, and abscesses of the flesh area are different from those that come in joints, and each has its own judgment in the work.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	And there are abscesses that one must not pierce until the swelling is dead according to its completion; and there are others that should be pierced when they are hard, and do not die off according to their completion, such as those near joints.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	For when abscesses come near joints, and one lets them remain until they are ripe around, by chance the ligaments and nerves of the joint may be corrupted, which is the cause of contraction in that limb.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	When the abscess is near the principal limb, and if you delay the puncture until it is dead, it will harm the principal limb; when it is near the fundament, pierce it as soon as possible so that it does not become necrotic; and it is not proper to puncture a hard abscess before complete digestion, except for one near the fundament, which might rot perfectly and extend inward, and thereby cause a fistula; and cannot heal in a long term.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	And it is necessary that you know the time of the puncture of the abscess which is dead according to its completion, and this is when the pain is alleviated, and the departure of the fever, and the diminishment of the pain and redness, and the softening and sharpening of the head of the abscess, and other signs; and it is necessary that you perform the puncture where the abscess depends most, and where it appears to move; and let the puncture be along the body, and if the abscesses are in the hands or feet, or in joints and nerves and arteries, and at all places equally where there is no pleura.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	In cases of bleeding, according to that member.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	And when an abscess is in the flesh, it is better to wait until it is confirmed to be fully digested before performing puncture, as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	For if you pierce it before that time, the body of its venom will be elongated, and it will be full of much filth; and by chance its lips and depths may harden.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	And for some abscesses that need to be pierced according to the breadth of the body, as is necessary for the limb involved.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	And you should treat small abscesses with small incisions; and large abscesses with large incisions, and many cuts according to the size of the abscess; and for such abscesses where it is necessary to cut the core, and scoop out; when they have become as hard as leather, and softened, you should treat them as you would boils: and there are some that are cut into three angles, and others that are cut like a myrtle leaf, like abscesses on the hands; and there are those where a round incision is made, and other cuts and similar procedures.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	Those who have a superficial and small abscess, you must pierce it completely; and when the abscess is large, and there is much pus collected, and you pierce it, do not draw out all the pus at that time, but draw out some of it; then plug up the abscess until the next day, then draw out some more; do this gradually over many times, until all the pus comes out; similarly if the patient has weak constitution, or a pregnant woman, or small children, or old men who are decrepit.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	For the pus sometimes spurts out with the flow of the pus, which might cause the patient to die, and you would not be held responsible for it.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Avoid this chapter with great caution, and when you have pierced your abscess, clean the wound, and check if the abscess opening is small; if it is a smooth cut, then apply linen or old cotton dressings; and if there are large abscesses with many openings, you must place a dressing in each one so that they overlap against each other; and if you have cut into the skin of the abscess and sewn around it, you should fill it with old cotton or flax lint without moisture, and leave it tied for three days; then remove it and treat it with ointment until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	And if bleeding occurs during your work, then administer cold and soothing water, and wet the cloth, and apply it repeatedly to the bleeding area.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the bleeding persists, then administer management and treatment, and the powders that I have mentioned earlier in this book, and if it is winter time, and the area where the abscess is very tense, you must place tents and cloths moistened with wine and hot oil; and if it is summer, and the area is fleshy, then you should place cloths moistened with water and oil, or cold wine and oil, for three days as we have said; and then unbind the abscess and dry it and treat it properly until it heals.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	And this one must know universally in the treatment of abscesses: I have told you how one should proceed with the treatment of abscesses, and here is the chapter.
des soros	of sweat
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	For small abscesses of the head come in various forms, like the feathers of a goose, and there are many similarities.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	There are some that are fatty and contain moisture like pus; and there are others that are hard and stony to the touch, and there is no doubt if the artery does not oppose.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	And the work on the abdomen is such that you should test all the instruments called "entromissoire," of which the form follows next, what it contains.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	For if there is moisture, then he cuts it from above along its length.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	And when the moisture is emptied out, then scrape it clean without leaving anything of the skin that contained the moisture, for it returns quickly if anything is left behind; then dip cotton in Egyptian ointment, if it is available; if not, in water and salt, and apply it to the wound, and leave it until the next day; and those who are delayed at night will see improvement.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then reuse the cotton as before on the second day, and the third, until you know for certain that it no longer lags at night; then treat the wound with suitable ointment until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	And if the abscess holds to fatty tissue, cut it according to this form, lengthwise; and pour on your onions, and peel it from all sides, and put all your effort into draining the pus where it lies; and if an artery opposes you, do as I told you afterward.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	And do the same for an abscess if it is stony, cutting and scraping as I have told you.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	And if you incise the stony and moist abscess, it is lighter, because they contain little blood.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	And if someone has one of these abscesses on their head where there is no moisture, and I encountered such an abscess when I cut into the head of an old woman; and found the abscess like a hard stone, rough and white, and it could not be broken; and if anyone had touched it, they would have surely made a wound as from a stone.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	In other abscesses coming to the head, whether those that come to the heads of children and at the roots of the ears, the incision should always be made in the lowest place, so that the pus can flow out; and treat them as is appropriate.
des scrophules	scrofulas
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	Many times this abscess appears on the neck, and sometimes in armpits, and also in angles, and at other times they appear elsewhere on the body, and are very numerous, growing one with another.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	And each scrofula is properly within its own region, as the knot and the head abscess are, as we have said; and there are many similarities among these scrofulas.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	There are such that contain moisture, and there are malicious ones that do not wish to obey the treatment.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	In the one that you see well disposed for touching, and it resembles the color of the skin, and is not swollen at the veins of the neck or in the artery or the conduit, and is not deep; then you must cut above it, and peel off the skin from each part, and stretch the two lips of the wound with forceps if you need to, as we have said about abscesses on the head; and cut little by little, and be sure that you do not cut a nerve or vein, and let the spatula not be sharp or cutting, so your hand does not slip, and do not go too far in, so you do not cut what you should not.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	And if you cut the vein or artery, and it does not allow you to work on it, place in the wound vitriol ground into powder, or some powders that constrict blood flow, and hold the wound; and leave it until the abscess is appeased, and the wound is softened, and begins to purify.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	And when the blood is constricted, return to your work until you complete it; then seek with your proper instrument if there remain any small scrofulas, and cut them out and clean them.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	And if there is a large vein at the root of the scrofula, it is not necessary for you to cut that scrofula at its root, but tie it with a double strong thread, and let it fall away without harm; then fill the wound with old cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, and care for it.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	And if you cut out the whole scrofula, then it is necessary to bring together the two lips of the wound and suture them now, since there is no delay due to excess tissue from the size of the scrofula.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	Then it is necessary to focus on cutting the root of it, and drawing out the pus, and suture as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For scrofulas that contain excess tissue, pierce where it appears clear to do so; and treat the puncture as previously mentioned, depending on it, then administer treatments with ointments and similar things, so that it consumes what remains of the corruption; and when the wound is thoroughly cleansed, cure it with healing ointment until it is healed.
de squinance	of stretching
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The ancients spoke and wrote about the incision of the throat; but I have never seen anyone in our land who performs it, and this is the writing of their words.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en II amandres.	For those who have stretching, it is necessary to avoid the incision of the throat fold called "epiglottis"; and one should not offer assistance through this method, because all the veins and flesh of the patient are affected by hot abscesses in the mouth, or in the throat, or in both tonsils.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the illness is in the channel of the flesh, it is necessary to cut the epiglottis to avoid the danger of strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige; et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	It is necessary then, when we wish to cut the epiglottis, that we cut across III circles or IV a small incision through it, between the II circles or according to the size of the incision on the surface, not in the cartilage; and these places are suitable for cutting the epiglottis where there is no flesh, and the vessels are long from within.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit; et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix; et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	And if the master is fearful, then he should extend the skin of the throat for its entire length, then cut through until he reaches the windpipe; and avoid the vessels that carry blood, if you see any such thing, and then incise the surface as we have said; and it is demonstrated by the cutting of the phlegm from the windpipe which will flow out from the place that is severed, and by the loss of voice; and leave the wound open for a while.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les II levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the hour has passed during which strangulation is feared, bring together the two lips of the wound of the heart, and sew completely without the cartilage; then administer medicines that cause flesh to grow, until it is healed.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Albucasim states that one should not do this until the throat is completely blocked, and the patient is judged to be dead, and death occurs.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort; et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee; et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	Then cut the epiglottis because the patient cannot breathe, and he breathes through the wound, and thus is protected from death; and for this reason, the elders ordered to leave the wound open until the malice of the illness passes, which takes three or four days, and then they order it stitched and cleaned until it is clean; and I will tell you what I saw.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon; et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	I saw that a young lady took a knife and stuck it in her throat, cutting part of the windpipe; and I was called to treat her, and found her as if dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I examined the wound and found the blood that had come out, and I understood that she had not cut any vein or vital organ in her throat, and the wind was coming out through the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee; et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition; por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	I hurried and sewed up the wound, and treated it until she was healed; and nothing worse happened to the young lady than that her voice became hoarse, and she returned to her normal state afterwards; therefore I say that there is no need to fear in cutting the epiglottis.
de la grosse gorge	of the large throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes; et est selonc II manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	This abscess is called a "hernia of the throat," and it is a large abscess in the color of a hazel nut, and it often occurs in women; and it follows two types: natural, and accidental; the natural one does not have a root.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere; et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire: se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point; et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And the accidental one follows two types, of which one is similar to our fat, and the other type is similar to an abscess that comes from our artery; and there is fear, and it must not be operated on except for the small ones, and examine and search throughout the interior: if you find it as our fat, and cannot reach any vein, then cut it out, like cutting fat, and remove its entire covering if there is any; and quickly examine well, and treat it properly until it is completely healed.
des nous	from us
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances; et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	We have many ways, of which I will describe all the similarities; and now it is necessary for me to speak about all the differences that exist between us and them.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that after the fever and chills come, once the ebullition has passed, and the putrefaction is complete; then the fever and heat subside.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros; et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	With us there is no heat nor fever nor pain, and it contains a swelling, which is its own sack and corresponds to the color of the skin, and it begins like a pimple, and becomes large; and they are according to two types, either hard or moist, and many colors are as I have said in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	It is necessary when you come to the treatment of the nose that you test and inquire first about all the instruments which are called "entromissoire", according to what its form will come in the chapter which is after.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme; puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	And the method of examining abscesses of the nose is that you take the moistest place that you find in the abscess, and turn your two fingers a little at a time, until you know that the instrument has pierced the core, according to the size of the abscess; then remove the entromissoire, and be careful not to exert too much force.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes; et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout; et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	If moisture comes out when cutting, regardless of its color, proceed as I have said for other abscesses; and if after the entromissoire no moisture comes out, know that it is fatty, then cut it in a cross shape, and take it with forceps, and lightly scrape from each side and be careful not to injure the coat where it lies so you can draw it out healthy with the nose; and if you cannot draw it out whole, then draw it out piece by piece so nothing remains.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois; et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	For if anything remains behind, the pus returns many times; and if a little remains, and the blood troubles you, then apply to the wound some corrosive powders, and draw the wound, and put on hot poultices for abscesses, and treat it with other treatments until it is healed; and if the pus is great, sew together the two lips of the wound, and treat it as one who generates flesh.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet II jors ou III, tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	And if the vein resists or something else does, hurry and apply a place of broiled vitriol, and leave it for two days or three, until the wound festers, and let the blood boil; then return to copper what remains of the pus.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule; et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule; et sont de III manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	See here the forms of the instruments used for probing, and they are of three kinds: large, medium, and small; and there are three square ones called "albaret," and one called "breb," which also come in three sizes: large, medium, and small, for examining fistula abscesses; and they are like the needles used to sew wounds, and are made of yellow brass, or iron, or silver, and those that are yellow are valued more highly, and they are better suited for probing the bends of fistulas; and they are of three kinds: large, medium, and small, according to the size of the openings.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi; et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	The forms of hooks are of many similarities, as you see here: large, medium, and small; and there are hooks that have two bends in three ways thusly; and there are hooks that have three bends, and they are also in three ways; and there are hooks that have two bends, and hooks with only one bend, and they are in three ways; and all of these are necessary in their place.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf; et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes; et sont de III manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois; et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus; et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	The tip of these that one cuts with is sharp, and there are some that only cut from one side, so as to peel the skin, because thereby one does not cut into veins or nerves; and among these intermissive ones are the scissors held in handles, so that the patient does not feel at the opening of abscesses; and they are of three types: large, small, and medium, as you see; and one only uses them sparingly in flesh areas such as legs, arms, breasts, and similar places; and sometimes one makes another instrument small, resembling thorn shells, according to this form, with which one stops blood:
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	and it is placed sometimes at the place where the veins are cut, and the arteries, and sometimes returns according to this large form:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme; et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	Sometimes the breasts of some men swell when they begin to be corrupted, so much that they seem like women's breasts; and remain disfigured and swollen, and whoever wants to treat them must proceed according to this form from line b to g:
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures; de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.; puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif; et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	Then scrape off the fat and apply medicine that promotes flesh growth to the wound, then suture the two edges of the wound together, and treat it until it heals; and if the breast droops due to its size as often happens with women, cut it into two sections above through two similar incisions so that one end is joined to the other at each end, with the larger part containing the smaller according to this form from line b to line g; then scrape off the skin between the two edges, remove the fat, and apply the treatments we have described for suturing and powders, as well as what is necessary for healing, until it is healed; and if it does not heal or the incision has not been completely made because the patient does not want to rest or due to excessive bleeding, you must fill the wound with cotton soaked in a corrosive ointment; leave it until it consumes the remaining fat, then treat it until it heals.
des apostemes des asselles	abscesses of the buttocks
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	These abscesses that come under the buttocks are hard types of scrofula with edges, and there are some that contain moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Those that contain moisture should be cut according to this form, from line .b. to line .g.:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when all the pus in the abscess is emptied out, fill the wound with old cotton, and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton, and treat it with ointment suitable for healing until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscess is similar to scrofula, then cut it as we have said about cutting scrofula, and if the wound produces pus, then treat it with a cautery as we have said before.
de la routure de l’artere	Of the rupture of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme; et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont; et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans; et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	When the artery is ruptured and the skin above it is sealed, abscesses often occur; similarly, this happens with a swollen vein and an abscess. And when you know that it is due to the artery, the abscess will be long and deep; and when you feel it with your fingers, you sense tightness; and when it is due to the vein, it appears red and protruding. It is foolish to cut this abscess, especially if it is located under muscles and angles and on the neck and in many other places, and it is very large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc; puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte; puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples; puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme; puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient; puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit; puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil; et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus; puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez; puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	It is necessary to avoid treatment with iron, and especially in cases of swelling from an artery rupture, make a longitudinal incision through the skin; then work carefully around the arteries, and separate it from the tissues until it is exposed; then insert a needle underneath, piercing it all the way to the other side, and tie off the artery with a double thread at two places as I have taught you in extracting the two arteries in temples; then puncture the area between the two ties with an interposing instrument so that the blood flows out from there, and release the abscess; then administer treatment with decoctions until the tie comes loose; if the abscess is due to a vein swelling, you should mark with your hand the part of the abscess all over the skin, then insert the needle underneath where you marked it with your hand, piercing it completely along the line of the first needle; then suture the abscess as I have told you at two places on both sides of the thread; if you are afraid that the thread might come loose, place another needle under the entire length of the abscess following the incision of the first needle and tie off the threads in four places; then open the abscess until the excess matter comes out, then remove the excess heart fluid but leave what is tied off; then apply a moist cloth soaked in wine and oil, and provide treatments with tents and ointments until it heals.
des apostemes des ners	abscesses of the nerves
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	Just as abscesses occur in the artery and vein, abscesses also affect the nerves when they are injured, or from excessive labor, and similar circumstances.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor; et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur; et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction; et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	And this happens more often in the shoulders and elbows, and in all places where there are joints, and these are severe abscesses, and their color resembles the color of the skin, and they cause great pain; and when one presses them firmly, the patient feels pain, but it is not in the flesh but beneath the skin; and it spreads throughout without moving forward or backward, neither down nor up, and those that are in joints must not be cut with a knife: perhaps there would be contraction; and those that are in the head or forehead, make an incision through the scalp to the spatumile.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine; et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the abscess is small, hold it with pliers and cut it off at its root; and if it is large, suspend it with an ounce [weight], skin it, then remove it and close the wound by stitching, and treat it until it heals.
des grosses boces pendans	large hanging mouths
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans; et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	Sometimes it occurs in the abdomen and nowhere else, and it is a disease called "fungus" by its resemblance to mushrooms, and its root is subtle, and the growths are large; there are both small and very large ones; I saw a person who had two of these in their abdomen that were more similar to fungi than anything else, and there was no difference between them, they were white, and had fine roots, and moisture corroded them quickly.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine; si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	I weighed them and found in one eighteen ounces, and in the other six, and the work of the incision is such that you observe if the patient is moist, and the color of the artery is white and moist and of fine texture; cut it with a broad spatula, and have the cautery by fire present.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer; et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors; et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	For when cutting there are often excessive hemorrhages, and if the blood comes against you, then hasten to cauterize; and if you see the patient frightened and afraid of the iron incision, take a well-made linen thread and tie the artery as we have said, and leave it for two days; then restrain it, and do not stop tightening the linen thread until you cut the artery, and let it heal through it; and if the roots are thick, beware of cutting directly because of the danger to the abdomen, but you may safely cut half of it, then cauterize so that it does not regrow; then treat the wound, and be careful not to cut the tendon which is reddish in color and poor in sensation and white in appearance.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For this is a fixed abscess, and I will come to the treatment of ulcers shortly thereafter.
quant li boude ist fuer	when the swelling is strong
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit; et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	If the appearance of the swelling comes from a cautery on a wound or a fissure of the surface, and it is on the abdomen and there are some boils, as happens in other ruptures, or from blood that flows from veins or arteries according to what precedes, or from windiness; and if it is due to a rupture of the skin and an opening at the base, then the color of the abscess resembles the color of the skin, it is a light matter without pain, and open in various places.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is due to an opening of the intestine, then it is more varied, and when one presses on both sides it swells up, and then subsides, and perhaps it is hard, and greatly enlarges at the entrance of the bath and with great effort.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit; et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	And if it is due to moisture, it is a light matter, and you can easily discern when you press it in your hand, as it does not resist; and if it is due to blood, it is apparent by these signs the abscesses are large and hard, and fixed according to a certain quantity; and if it is due to swelling, it yields readily to touch, and the work consists of observing whether the appearance indicates arterial blood, or vein blood, or swelling.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	It is necessary that you leave the treatment.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	For there is doubt and fear about it, as I told you in the chapter on abscesses, concerning the artery and the vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude; puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine; puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz; puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine; se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre; et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit; et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier; puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi; ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit; et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	And if the appearance is due to intestine or pus, you must instruct the patient to hold his breath and lie flat, then draw a line all around the swelling; then have him lie still between your hands, then work around the area you marked with the entire spatula, then extend half of the abscess above to the large uncinate forceps; then bind it firmly with strong thread or thick silk cord so that the knots are tight; then work on the extended half of the abscess over the bandage, and place your index finger in it to seek out the intestine; if you find it caught in the binding, release it and extract the intestine from beyond the belly; and if you find pus, grasp it with the forceps and cut away the excess; and if an artery or vein opposes you, proceed gently around, then return to your work and take two needles, and insert two threads through them, and place the two needles in a cross formation as you pierce; then extract the abscess into four parts over the needles, and if you wish, remove the needles, leaving the site until it rots, and cut away the dead tissue when it is fine and rotten; then treat according to what is needed, and clean out the abscess as we have said; draw off any blood or moisture you find, then treat the area as required, and seal the wound.
dou chancre	of the ulcer
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	We have said in the division about the similarities of ulcers and how one should treat them with medicines, and how one should avoid treatment with iron; we say that an ulcer can develop into a malignant condition, and there is great caution required in its cure. The ancients stated that when ulcers are in places where they can be cut out like those found in the breasts, on the thigh, and in similar locations, you should remove them entirely when they are in their early stages; but when they are large and old, one must not approach them, for I have never seen anyone heal from such a condition.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide I boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the treatment, when it is in a place where it can be removed as we have said, is that you purge the patient of black bile at times; then make them fast if they show signs of overfullness, and position the patient properly for the procedure; then apply your forceps to the ulcer, and remove all hairs around it thoroughly without leaving anything behind; let the blood flow freely until it stops completely, and press hard on the area with your hand or something else; if the bleeding continues contrary to the incision of an artery or vein, cauterize it until the bleeding is stopped; then proceed with other treatments until it is healed.
de ydropisie	of hydropsy
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer: lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	We have already discussed in the division the similarities of hydropsy, and in what manner the accumulation of fluid is formed, and the signs of each type, and the cure that is done with medicine, and that which is cured by iron: it is only applicable for "eclites"; and one should not use iron on these two types: namely tympanites and yposarche, because it is fatal; therefore, when you treat this form of hydropsy called "eclites" with medicines, and the treatment does not work, then look if the patient is weak, or if he has another illness besides hydropsy, such as coughing and flatulence and similar things; do not use iron in these cases, because there is uncertainty; but if you see that the patient is strong, and he suffers from hydropsy alone, and he is neither too young nor too old, then proceed as follows: lift the patient straight up in your hands, and have an assistant press on his belly to expel the fluid to the lowest part of the abdomen, then take the spatumile according to this shape:
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	And let there be cuts from two sides.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier; puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu; puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	And point it, but do not make it so deep that it can reach the intestines when inserted, and cannot be withdrawn; then observe if the dropsy is inclined towards the intestines: if so, you should cut upwards from the navel three fingers width below on the left side; and if the dropsy is due to liver disease, your incision should be to the left of the navel by three fingers; and if it is due to the spleen, then it should be on the right; it must not lie on the incision so that excess fluids do not flow to a weak area; then perforate all the skin with the instrument, and remove your hand from the entire spatula between the skin and subcutaneous tissue as if in flaying about an inch or circumference around; then puncture the subcutaneous tissue until the spatula reaches the fluid-filled area, which is where the water is, then draw it out forcefully, and insert this instrument of which here is the form:
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus; et II d’autre part, et I d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	And it is similar to a thin silver chain, and it is made of copper or light brass, and has in the middle part one small hole; and on one side, three holes; and two on another side, and one on yet another; and the head is shaped like a feather quill, and this is the form of the incision that the scribes make when cutting the quill:
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort; mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit; fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	At the top is the alembic, so that when the instrument comes to the liquid, it now descends upon the instrument; empty then half or a third of it, for if you empty more than necessary at this hour, by chance the patient may die from the resolution of his spirit due to shock, or fainting, or approaching death; but empty according to the quantity of its virtue, and according to what the disposition of the patient's virtue signifies, and his pulses; then draw the instrument and retain the liquid, and it is now retained by the heart which stops up the hole that is on the syphon, about which I have spoken, that you pierce in this manner; then restart the instrument another day if you see the patient enduring this, and draw off a small quantity of liquid; do this for some days, and beware of overdoing it so that there remains only a little liquid.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	And if you doubt about the patient, and leave much moisture, then treat with the cure of burial or hot sand, and by much sweating or bathing in the sun, and let him abstain from drinking; and treat with drying medicines until he is healthy, and cauterize on the stomach and liver and spleen after the extraction of the moisture, as I said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	about the congestion of the penis
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	Sometimes children are born who have no opening in the penis, or the opening is small, or it is not in its proper place.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	It is necessary to pierce it immediately with a very fine spatula according to this form:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	Then place a fine cloth in the opening and tie it there for three or four days, and when he wishes to urinate, remove the cloth, let him urinate, and then replace it; and perhaps no cloth is needed at all, because the urine that comes out does not leave the cloth behind.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	He whose opening is small should be treated with the cloth of flax as we have said, and it will expand.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	Those who do not have the opening in its place are deformed, for some are born with the opening at the head of the penis, so they cannot urinate unless they lift their penis up; and they cannot copulate because the matter cannot reach the testicles, and this is a serious illness.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the manner of the work is that the patient lies supine on his back, then hold the head of the rod and place it as straight as the shaft of a feather, so that the aperture fits in the middle, as it should; and guard against the escape of blood which happens often, and if it does, stop it with what stops blood, and treat the wound until he is healed.
des pustules de la verge	pustules of the penis
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a I oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many times these blisters appear on the penis, and it is an ugly appearance of flesh; there are both benign and malignant ones; you must pierce them with a fine lancet, clean and treat all of them, then apply cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment; then cure with diafinicon ointment until he is healed.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	And if the swelling is malignant, of putrid color and discharging, then it is necessary that you apply cautery to it.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	When you have cut it, and if the swelling is on top of the penis, with part inside the skin and part outside, then it is necessary that you remove the swelling which is inside first; and when it is adhered, treat what is outside.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	For when you treat it all at once, there is no certainty that the head of the penis will not be pierced, and blackening and corruption come to the penis and the testicles; so it is necessary to remove everything that is blackened and corrupted, then apply a plaster made of pomegranate peel and vinegar, then continue treatment until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	And if bleeding occurs, then apply the lunar cauterization according to this form:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars; et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	The cautery helps in two conditions simultaneously: namely, bleeding and corruption; and if the head of the penis is corrupted and retracted, then you must insert a tube made of lead into its channel, and urinate through it; and when hair grows on the head of the penis which happens to those who have not been circumcised, whether due to an injury or abscess, then you must cauterize it with a fine instrument until the ligament is loosened, and release the head of the penis from all sides; and if it is difficult to describe this, then you must cauterize it with a small spatula at the top of the penis and skin gently; then carefully separate them, and place a delicate strip of wet linen between them.
de la circoncision	Of circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Circumcision is not like the dissection of other wounds; nevertheless, when we perform this work by our will, and especially on children, it is necessary to do it in the best way possible, and in the lightest manner for their well-being.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancient ones did not speak of circumcision for their children, because they did not practice it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired through experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor I dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a II toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	For I have seen the majority of masters and seniors who performed circumcision around the first foreskin, and with force, and entirely anew; it was painful because there are two layers, and by chance one might cut through the outer layer while leaving the inner intact.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	Then it needs to be cut again, and the pain doubles, and in the dressing of the wound which is from the nail there is no certainty about the tip of the member; and in the dressing of the nail by chance the blade slips, and runs along the work, and many times they are born such that they do not need dressing and I have seen it.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	From the dressing that is done with force to the entire limb of thread I have found through experience its goodness, for the force cuts precisely both above and below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien; et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge; puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	For when you press your hand, cut equally in one single moment; but the thread should be tightly around the skin; and the manner of the first work is such that if the child understands, make him think you are only tying the thread around the shaft solely for this purpose, then entertain him in all ways possible; then hold it straight between your hands, apply pressure between your feet where the child cannot see, nor any instruments; then put your hand on the shaft and blow on its head, and pull it up until the tip of the shaft is in place; then thoroughly clean the accumulated dirt, then tie the area with a double thread, then bind below the hole to another part; hold it by two fingers at the second binding pocket and cut between the two parts, then lift the head quickly and pull on the chief of the shaft; then let the blood drip drop by drop, for this is slowest; apply powder upon powder, with one yolk of egg thinned with rose water, seasoned well with fresh rose oil, leave it there until the next day, and treat it daily until it heals.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The form of the force for the world purification is thus: the two heads should be blunt and should be as large as the shaft evenly.
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	The error in the purification is when the pus inside flows to the incision; then it is necessary that you stretch it to your nail, similarly to how one treats an abscessed boil; and cut it evenly, and if you cannot hold it to your nail, hold it with forceps, and then cut it.
Et s’il trespassent III jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	And if they exceed three days, and the area below the shaft is swollen, wait until the abscess is sufficiently reduced, then gently scrape it; cut as much as you can move, and be careful of the part of the shaft, so that it does no harm.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Treat then the wound with powder, as we have said in the chapter on powders, and if you cut into the heart too much, and it goes beyond measure, it will not harm; treat it then as we have said until it is healed.
dou retenement de l’urine	from the retention of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division; et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e; et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	The retention of urine is due to the obstruction by a stone, or congealed blood, or bowel, or dead tissue, or similar things, as we have said in the division; and if the urine is not released, and you see that the retention is caused by a stone lodged at the neck of the bladder, then it must be that the patient should bend over his knees; and place his feet on his back, and extend his belly from the upper part to the back, and press the patient's abdomen as much as he can; and then it constrains the neck of the bladder to expel the stone upward, thus releasing the urine; and if it does not come out, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you must administer extraction with all the instrument which is called "syringe", of which here is its form: it should be made of fine light silver wire, like a bird's feather; and the tube should be one palm long and half a palm wide, and very fine at the tip.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede; puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine; et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	And the manner of issuing urine is that you take a double thread and tie at the top a pouch of wool or cotton, and put the end of the thread inside the syringe; and cut off the excess wool and push it all the way to the top of the syringe, then anoint the syringe with oil or butter and egg white, and make the patient sit on a chair, and massage the bladder and penis with moist olive oil and vinegar water; then gently insert the syringe into the penis until it reaches the base, then bend the penis upwards towards the body; then push the syringe forward to the bladder, and when the patient feels it reach the empty part, do not proceed further unless the path is straight; then stretch out the thread all along the wool piece by piece, and the urine will follow the wool, then pull out gently, and let the urine flow freely; and repeat with the syringe until the bladder is emptied, and make sure the patient feels relieved.
des maladies de la vessie	diseases of the bladder
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When pus or blood comes to the bladder, and putrefaction is gathered there, and you wish to introduce liquids and medications, use all the instruments which are called "clepsydre," and this is its form:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus: II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est; et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	It is closed, and it has III openings: II on one side, and I on the other, as you see; and the place where the medicine comes out should be such that it seals the tube tightly without addition, so that moisture can be drawn out and injected when necessary; and when you wish to introduce your medicines into the bladder, put the head of the catheter in the moisture, and draw with the drawer which is inside; thus you will draw the moisture into the catheter, and then firmly press the drawer back in; thus the moisture will enter, and it will reach the bladder now, so that the patient feels it; and this is the form of the subtle enema for administering an enema to the bladder: it is as follows:
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie; et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	And it is of silver or brass, and the head is higher up; and behind the chest where the ligament falls; then take a sheep’s bladder and put in the water with which you want to enema, then tie between the two breasts firmly with a strong double thread, and heat the pot of that water on the fire; then insert the tip of the enema into the penis, then press your hand on the bladder gradually until the patient feels that the water has reached the bladder; and if you do not have the bladder, take a piece of parchment and make a circle, and pierce it roundly around; then tie a strong thread through these holes, then assemble the circle as one would assemble a sieve, and put inside what you want of oil and water and vinegar, and tie it to the instrument; and do as you did with the bladder, pressing your hand gradually until the liquid reaches the bladder.
de la piere	of the stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have already discussed in the division the methods of stones and their extraction along with medicines; and I have explained the difference between a stone formed in the kidneys, and all the signs, and which stones one should work on for removal; and in the bladder, and in the penis; and I will tell you clearly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont IIII ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I say that the stone which is formed in the bladder happens more often to children, and this is a sign that the urine jumps from the bladder as if it were like acute urine in its subtlety; and one can see hairiness, and the patient's penis becomes irritated, and he suffers many times, and then it reddens; and much of these jumping indicate the foundation; and healing for children until they are four years old is easier, but very difficult for older people, and moderate for those in their prime, those between youth and old age; and the cure is lighter for those who have large stones than for those who have small ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	And when we come to the treatment, it is necessary first to cleanse the patient with an enema, to draw out all the feces that are in the intestines.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	For it sometimes hinders in seeking the stone.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche dedens; se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	Then take the patient by the feet and lift him up and move towards his back, so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, and sometimes comes from a high place; then make him sit between your hands prepared, and his hands should be behind his thighs, so that the bladder is entirely inclined downwards; then seek it and touch inside; if you feel the stone in its space, now hurry to cut into the stone.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	And if it does not fall upon touching from all sides, then moisten your index finger with oil from the left hand, if the patient is female, or your middle finger, if the patient is a fully grown male; and insert it into his anus, and seek the stone, and when you feel it with your finger, draw it to the neck of the bladder; then press upon your finger, and push it out where you wish to cut.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	And instruct the assistant to press the bladder with his hand, and tell him to spread apart his thighs with his right hand, and with his left hand remove the skin that is beneath the scrotum in the part where the incision will be made; then place the spatula cutting instrument, which is its form:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans; par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	And make an incision between the scrotum and the anus, not in the middle but on the side of the left thigh; let it be straight over the stone, and both ends should be close to the anus, and the length should be wide at the entrance, and inside narrow, according to the size of the stone, not too large; perhaps the pressure will cause the part where the anus is to jump out without effort; and know that there are some stones with angles and edges: it is difficult to extract them; and there are others that are below, resembling a thorn, round, whose extraction is easy.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole; et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	For those who have angles and margins, make the circumference larger; and if it does not jump, you must clamp with pliers that are like a file at the top, to firmly grip the stone so it does not escape; or place underneath a subtle curved instrument; and if you cannot manage it thus, widen the hole slightly; and if blood comes out, clamp it with vitriol; and if there is more than one stone, push the larger one first into the bladder neck, then cut above, then draw it forth forcefully, and the smaller ones after if there are several.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	And if it is very large, it must be observed closely, and a larger incision made.
Car II choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces; et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	For two things happen to the patient: either he dies, or urine comes immediately where the flesh cannot heal; but still strive to draw it out, or break it with pliers piece by piece; and when you have completed your work, apply the wound with frankincense, aloes, and dragon's blood, and bind it tightly, then place a moist cloth over it in oil and wine, or in rose water and cold water, to soothe the hot abscess; then lift the patient onto his neck, and do not untie the bandage until the third day.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you dislocate it, wash the area thoroughly with oil and water, then treat it with diafinicon ointment and basilicon ointment until it is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit; puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	And if abscesses and corrosions come to the wound, and congealed blood in the bladder, which causes retention of urine, which is known to occur with it: then put your finger into the wound and extract that blood, for if it remains there, it will corrupt the bladder; then clean the wound with water and herbs and salt, and help in all ways you know until it heals; and it is necessary that every time you treat it, you bind the two thighs together, and apply medicines to the site.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	And if the stone is small, and it is in the passage of the penis, and stuck there, and the urine cannot come out; then treat this as I say thus, that you cut it many times, but one is excused from the cutting by this treatment.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	I have already tested this thus.
Pren I foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a III angles fichiees en I tison:	Take an iron fork in the shape described and have three prongs inserted into one handle:
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	Then take some thread and tie it around the penis below the stone, so that it cannot move back into the bladder; then gently insert the fork into the penis until it reaches the stone; and turn the fork with your hand on the stone bit by bit, until you can pierce the stone from the other side; then urine will come soon enough, and press your hand on what remains of the stone that is inside the penis.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides; et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	It is immediately broken, and urine flows forth, and the patient is healed; and if you cannot do this for some reason that prevents it, tie one thread below the stone and another above, then cut the penis straight through the stone between the two threads, then extract the stone, and untie the threads, and clean the congealed blood which is in the wound; and treat until he is well.
de la piere des femmes	of the stone in women
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por III choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	It rarely happens that a stone appears in women, and if it does occur at any time, the treatment is difficult, and it is prohibited for three reasons: one is that perhaps the woman is a virgin; and the second is that one cannot find a woman who knows well enough to expose herself to doctors, especially when she is chaste.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere; et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	And the third manner is that by chance one cannot find a woman well knowing in this art of hands; and the fourth manner is that the stone of the woman is more em parfont than the stone of the man, why it must be made deeper cut, and much fear there is. And if necessity comes to them, then it behooves you to take a midwife well knowing, and at pains find one, and if you do not find her, by no means seek I cast midwife subtle; and give present a bailie well wise in the life of women, or a woman who knows part of the art, and command that she make what you command about the inquiry of the stone; and look very well whether the woman is virgin: then must she put her thumb at the fundament and seek the stone; and if she finds it, constrain it under her thumb, and recommend that she put her thumb in where the patient lies, and seek and press her left hand firmly on the bladder.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite; puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	If she finds it, she must move it gradually from the entrance of the bladder down to below, until she reaches the root of the thigh; then cut above the stone at the root of the thigh opposite the middle of the anus where it is lodged and feel for the stone in that part; and do not move her foot above the stone or below, and make the incision small at first; then insert the probe into the incision, if you feel the stone enlarge the wound until the stone can come out freely, and know that there are many kinds of stones: namely small and large and rough and smooth, long and round, and those with spines.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	and know the signs to understand the outcome.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre; et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	And if the blood fails you, place vitriol powder there and hold it for an hour until the bleeding stops; then return to your work until the stone is out, and have the instruments I told you about in extracting stones from people to assist you in your work; and if the blood fails you, and this is from the artery that has been cut, place powder over the site and bind it with cloths and bandages, and do not restart it again, and leave the stone and do not extract it, for by chance the patient might die; then treat the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of the blood is calmed, and the swelling subsides, then return to your work, until the stone is expelled.
de hernie carnouse	of flesh hernia
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit I autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	Watery ramice is nothing other than a collection of moisture or white matter, which is detached from the heart of the testicle, that contains the egg; and it is called "white matter," and sometimes it is properly in the membrane of the egg, if one thinks that it might be another egg; and this is the skin of the testicle between the white matter we have mentioned; and this does not occur unless there is a pocket present.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the generation of this ramice is due to weakness that affects the testicles, and this matter spreads out.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus; et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	And sometimes it comes from percussion on the testicles, and this moisture has many colors: where its color declines to yellow, or it is without redness, or black, or watery white, and these things happen more; and these are the signs to recognize this assembly, for if it is in the whitish substance we have mentioned, then the abscesses recur, I place long as the shape of an egg, and do not reveal the testicles, for there is moisture all around.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef; et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	And if there is moisture in the proper tissue, then the abscesses recur with part of an egg, and for this reason people think it is another egg; and if the moisture is between the skin of the testicles and the whitish substance, one feels it well; therefore when you wish to know the color of the moisture, examine thoroughly all around it, as its form was described above.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to what comes after the introduction, judge what is within.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz; puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions; puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir; puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue; et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when we treat it with iron, the patient must be restrained as best as possible and according to his body's condition; then lay him on his back on something slightly raised, and place many cloths under him; then sit on his left side, and instruct the assistant to sit on the right, and extend the rod along one of the two ribs near the groin area; then take the cautery lightly, and cut through the skin in a straight line from the pubic bone down to just above the testicles, ensuring that your incision is perfectly straight up to where the fluid-filled sac begins, and carefully peel back the skin without puncturing it; then pierce the fluid-filled sac wide open with an opening large enough for all the liquid to drain out, and remove all the fluid, and then place bandages on it so that only the sac itself is covered; cut around the entire area in pieces very carefully, because if you do not cut properly, the fluid will return; and if the testicles jump during your work, reposition them back into their original place once your work with the sac is complete; then sew together the two sides of the skin from the groin wound, and treat it like other wounds until it heals.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	And if you find the egg corrupted by another disease, it is necessary to tie the vessels that are suspensory, fearing the loss of blood; then cut off the suspension entirely, and extract the egg, and treat it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset; et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	And if the condition is assembled in two parts together, know that these are two branches; cut the other part as you did the first equally, then wipe away the blood, and put into the wound wool soaked in rose oil; and place another layer of wool soaked in wine and oil over it, and cover both with doubled cloths, and bind them securely according to this form:
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier; et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers; si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	Then take two cloths, and line them with flax according to this appearance and sew them together at the waist of the trousers, one extending from the buttocks up to the back, and the other covering the groin area; and both ends should be secured in the trouser buckle. Sometimes this branch is treated with cautery instead of a metal incision, so take a fine knife-like cautery, cut through the skin of the affected areas, heat it as we have said until the white pus-containing layer is exposed; then apply the cautery according to this form, pierce that layer at intervals, and cauterize it with this fine hot instrument.
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille; et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	And cut in all ways that you can, until you clean everything; and guard so that the fire does not touch the eye; and know that this work is safer; and move cautiously to prevent blood loss, and handle the procedures carefully; and if anything goes against your expectations, whether it be an abscess or blood loss or other things, then treat what opposes you as was said before.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit; pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer; puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee; et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	And if the patient is fearful and does not wish to wait for this procedure due to its horror, then perform a puncture, as I tell you, and it is that when you are certain by the signs we have mentioned that aqueous fluid is there, make the patient sit on an elevated seat; then pierce the abscess at the part below across the entire span of the cheekbone, making the puncture along the length of the body; and let the openings be wide so that all the liquid can flow out freely; then put cotton over the place, bind it down, and leave for the remainder of the fluid to drain; if the white cloth does not allow the liquid to exit from the mouth of the wound, you must insert a feather or instrument used for treating the water in hydropics, as described above; and expand the hole of the wound, and know that the liquid will return after six months or around thereabout, and when it is gathered together again like before, then the patient will pass his days.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the testicles
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse; et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	Know that in the section of this branch there is fear in many conditions, for which it seems better to leave it as is; and I will tell you about the work and similarities of the abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	I say then that many abscesses occur in the body, especially in the testicles; and this happens for various reasons.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion; et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief; et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	This is to know because of sour excess and acid, which spreads to the testicles, or due to impact; and the color of the abscess corresponds to the color of the skin; and there is no pain, and it is a severe abscess; and sometimes an abscess can be fearsome and stony, with a purple color, and at times it comes from a blocked artery or swelling of a vein.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois; et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	When it is an artery issue, it is known by the hot disposition of the abscess when you press it with your fingers; and it must not be touched.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars; et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	One who is afflicted with swelling of the vein is known by its disposition and the expression of touch sensation, and one can do a proper examination based on this appearance, and on others; then cut the heart from the loins, raise the egg upward, draw out the white substance, and release the suspensory from all parts around the egg.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope; et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	If the egg is already solid with these newly grown tissues, then you must draw out the egg and cut it; and if it is adhered to the white substance or within the vessels, then you must release all of that tissue and cut it cleanly.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the birth of the flesh is at the back, then you must cut it all away, and extract the eye, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your work is complete, cover the wound with wool soaked in rose oil and wine, then treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the testicles
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait; et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	This is an abscess enclosed in a wrapping similar to the scrotum, with softening of the testicles, and the patient suffers greatly when it moves; and the treatment for this illness is as dangerous as the one before, yet we will tell you about its work, according to what the ancients did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment; puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples; puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief; puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues; puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions; car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz; si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	It is necessary that you seat the patient on a raised chair, then place the suspensory of the testicles down to your hands, for all the vessels which are near the penis, and hold them masterfully, and stretch them firmly; then cut with a broad sharp spatula across the vessels, until they are uncovered, and then shave from each side as we have said in the extraction of arteries that are in temples; then insert a needle where there is double thread, and tie it at the first place where the vein came, and tie it again at the other end; then cut them straight down the middle according to the length of the body, and draw out the corrupt humors; then treat the wound as with others when bandaging, so that some vessels may fall that nourish one of the testicles; for by this no harm comes, and if all the vessels come veins, it is necessary to draw out the testicles from all the vessels; so that the testicle does not lose its nourishment due to the cutting of the vessels, and they dry up and cannot be aided.
de la routure dou syfac	of the fracture of the cheekbone
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions; et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses; et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement; et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	The occurrence of this rupture is through a section that comes from the cheekbone, or an extension on the abdomen in the area of the groins, causing the intestines to descend from that fracture into one of the thighs; and this rupture occurs either from the cheekbone itself, or by extending it, and there are these two manners due to many causes: from a blow, jumping, carrying heavy loads, and similar things; and the signs when it is an extension of the cheekbone are gradual over time, not suddenly happening; and the abscesses are equal up to near the base because the cheekbone presses on the intestines.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs when it is a section of the cheekbone are that it causes sudden pain at the beginning, and the abscesses appear differently, close to the skin, because of the exit of the intestine and the body parts protruding from the cheekbone.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And sometimes the intestines descend with the hernia, and are retained inside, causing great pain for the patient, especially when they are constricted.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these iron treatments there is fear, for which it is necessary to avoid them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir; puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes; puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc; puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir; puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars; puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille; et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement; et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz; puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz; puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars; puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne; et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi; et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant; puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	And the method of work is that you instruct the patient to push the intestines back into the wound with his hand if it can be reintroduced; then lift him by his neck between your hands, and raise the thighs; then stretch the heart above, and peel all the skin from the groin; then insert hooks into the flaps near the waist according to what you need to open the wound, so that the testicles may come out; then scrape off the fatty tissue underneath the skin of the groin until the hard fat is exposed on all sides; then place your middle finger in where the testicle is situated, between the white fat under the foreskin and the second layer, and separate what's behind the testicle from the second layer; then move it with your right hand into the heart of the scrotum, stretch the hard fat up to your left hand, and lift the testicle towards the waist; instruct the assistant to stretch the testicle upwards and undo the bandage at the back; check if any part of the intestines is wrapped around the hard fat, and if you find anything, move it under the belly; then take a needle with a thick thread made from ten strands, and insert it into the rear part of the fatty tissue behind the foreskin; after the waist, cut the threads so there remain four strands; then arrange them one above the other in a cross shape, and tie up the fatty tissue we mentioned under the skin of the scrotum with a strong thread from both sides; then wrap the remaining threads and tie them firmly from both sides, so that no foreign matter can enter, preventing abscesses; then apply another bandage according to the first long one for two fingers' width, and after these two bandages leave exposed the fatty tissue under the scrotum by a hand's breadth; then cover everything else according to the round shape of the testicle; then cut from the part under the skin of the groin until reaching the unscarred area and the bowe as we said earlier; then apply wet linen soaked in oil on the wound, and place the bandage we mentioned.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And sometimes the white vein that we have mentioned is cauterized after the incision, out of fear of bleeding.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece; puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	For this often happens, and let the ligature remain until it falls off by itself; and if it delays in falling, soak it with warm water, and put on what we have said, until it falls off; then treat the wound with another method, until it is perfectly healed.
de hernie carnouse	of flesh hernia
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this case, I have never seen anyone dare to treat it with iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz; puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the ancients said that it is done like the condition involving both the intestine and the abdominal wall, in such a way that you bind the vessels above the navel lightly on the back side; then cut into it, and treat the abscess with what we have described, until the vessels fall off; and treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres; et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent; et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert; et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere: et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois; et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac; et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre; puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines; puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	Sometimes a rupture occurs in the groin area, as we have said, and it is evident; and no part of the intestines descends to the thighs, and if they do descend, this is dangerous, and requires immediate attention at all times; and yet if it remains too long in this state, the wound or the hernia will worsen until the intestines descend further; and this happens due to the extension of the hernia area which we have mentioned, because it first extends, then softens and swells up visibly; and the treatment for this is by cautery, as we have previously stated; sometimes it is treated with iron in this manner: the patient lies supine on their back between your hands, then cover the swollen part of the hernia with a cloth about three fingers wide according to its size; then extract the herniated tissue beneath the skin that follows, then take the thread and place it over the visible area of the hernia; press firmly against the middle of the abdomen, then sew both sides together tightly; then pull out the head of the thread, do not cut the hernia or stretch the skin further as I have told you in the treatment for intestinal prolapse; then treat it according to the methods used for wounds.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when you cut the threads, then dress and treat the wound until it is healed.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The tissue is tense, and there is no appearance of tearing in the rupture, and the cauterization is cold in this area, and closer to safety.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	of softening the skin of the scrotum
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a III costures ou IIII fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	The skin of the scrotum is often softened in some men because the tissues inside are softened, and it appears milky; and when one wishes to treat it, have the patient lie on his back, and cut the soft skin over the natural skin; then join the two lips with a seam, and if you wish, sew together the excess soft skin at three seams or four firmly; then cut between the seams, and treat it as other wounds until it is healed, and stitch the thread.
dou chastrement	of the treatment
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	You know that castration is forbidden in our law, and for this reason I would prefer not to speak of it in this book; yet it is necessary for two reasons: one is so that the physician knows how to respond when asked and knows the treatment; and the other, because we often need to castrate certain animals to help us, such as goats and sheep and cats and other animals.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	I say then that castration is performed in two ways: either by traction or by cutting.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	In the method where we perform castration by traction, we have the animal sit in hot water until the testicles are softened and hanging down; then grasp them with your hand until they are retracted and you no longer feel them.
Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Of the castration of animals: you should anesthetize the animal, and press the skin over its testicles with your left hand, then tie the suspensory bandage, and cut through each testicle in one stroke when you have properly skinned them; and leave some of the fatty tissue and the delicate fat that is on the vessels; and this method of castration is gentler than that which is done by traction, because with traction there may remain a part of the testicles accidentally, causing the animal to desire lust; then treat the wound until it is healed.
des hermofrodites	hermaphrodites
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	Hermpheidry is in two manners for men: one is that between the two testicles there appears as clearly as the figure of a woman's nature, with hair, and sometimes urination occurs there.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	And the other method is for women, and place upon the wrist as thick as a rod and two fingers.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	And the treatment for both men and women is that you cut away all adhering tissues, and treat them as other wounds; in the second method, for men whose urine sprays over the skin of the genitals, there is no specific treatment.
de la tentigene	of the tension or strain
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	Tentigene is a tissue adhering to the natural part, so that it appears too ugly; and some women have it as large as a hand, and this is how it is treated.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	You should dye the excess of the tentigene with your hand or fingers, and cut it lightly; do not go too deep, so that no blood flows, then treat it as you would other wounds until it is healed; and for another part that arises at the mouth of the vagina, remove it, and sometimes it may bleed, and it resembles a horn, hence they called it by the ancients "horn disease.
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	It is necessary to treat it as we have said about tendinitis, and care for it until it is healed.
de erratique	erratic
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	It is erratic when the nature of a woman's body is not perceived, or the passage is small; and it is by nature at birth, or caused by illness that has come upon her; or due to added flesh, or thin or thick membrane, which forms perfectly in the womb, or in the ribs, or elsewhere; and it prevents conception, childbirth, and perhaps menstruation; and knowledge of this is determined by examining the aperture.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	If constipation is appearing soon, either use two or use the right method.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	If it is of subtle syfac [a type of swelling or inflammation], and it is near the two leaves [likely referring to anatomical locations], hurry, and do this: place your two fingers together, and have the woman lie on her back with her legs spread; then stretch the two areas firmly until the subtle syfac is flat, and over the swelling; then take linen, and moisten it in oil, and apply it to the area, and have the woman rest face down each day so that she may not sweat.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	And if the syfac is hard and thick, then you should cut it with an instrument similar to a myrtle leaf.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the swelling is of flesh growth, suspend it by a thread and cut it; and have medicines that staunch blood, such as vinegar, dragon's blood, incense, along with an abundance of egg whites; then cover the wound with a piece of flax large enough so that the wound cannot close; and thus keep covered for some time, and treat the wound with bandages until it is healed.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	And when flesh is infected in the wound, it must be cut according to this method, except for embedded abscesses.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	For in the wound where there is an embedded abscess, one must not cut it open.
des emorroides	of hemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	Hemorrhoids are protrusions of veins that usually occur without cause, and when hemorrhoids become old they turn hard; we have already described their appearances and signs in the division, and I will say here those that can be cured.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	I say that when hemorrhoids and hard growths are fully formed in the wound and do not respond to sensation, they cannot be cured by cautery.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	Those who have the mouth of the ulcer, which can be felt, are those who can be treated by scraping.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	Therefore, you must place the woman in a cold room, then remove the altar with tongs, and cut it at its roots; then apply powdered medicines that constrict blood, such as oak bark and dragon's blood and frankincense, and similar things. Then place her feet against the wall for an hour, then put her in cold water; if bleeding continues, make her sit in a decoction of sumac, pomegranate peel, gallnuts, and similar things, and then take barley flour, mix it with honey and grease, and use it to apply a plaster on her back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	And if the bleeding stops, that is good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	If not, have the patient undergo cupping on the back and breasts without injuring them; then take flax, soak it in plantain juice or elderberry juice with old wine, and apply it to the area.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the abscess has rested, treat the area with ointment until it is healed; and that which is called "albathir" is red and resembles a hard head, so it must be cut as I said about the thulul; and then treat it until it is healed.
des apostemes de la marris	for abscesses of the flesh
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	Many types of abscesses occur in the flesh, such as cankers and stone abscesses and herpes and ulcers and fistulas and hemorrhoids and hot abscesses, and many other diseases that I have mentioned in the division.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	It is therefore necessary that I speak in this treatise about the hot abscess which comes in the marrow, which is not of those abscesses that are collected from the bowels; and if you wish to know the work of iron, look to see whether the abscess is sharp at the beginning of its arrival, and full of heat and fever, and if it becomes red if you can see it.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	Then do not hurry to pierce it, but let it die until the pain subsides; and then make the patient sit on a chair, and have two small chairs where he can recline, and support his back and bring together his legs towards the side away from the thigh; and keep his thighs spread apart, and place his arms under his knees, and tie them securely with a good cloth; then give him some linseed oil to the right side of his chest, and there administer the instrument used to work on the mouth of the marrow, of which the form follows next; and it is necessary that when you intend to use this instrument, you insert its tip first to know the depth of the marrow, so that what enters inside the instrument does not exceed its proper depth and does not harm the patient; and if the instrument is larger, then cover the depth of the marrow with cloths so that the instrument does not hurt it; and he should place the cone of the instrument above and hold the instrument.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.	And when the abscess is open, and it is incised gently by hand, then you must cut off the top at the spatumile site; and when the pus is emptied out, it is necessary to put into the wound moist cloths soaked in rose oil or green oil; place the cloth over the wound towards the margin, and place on top of the margin and on the point clean wool wet with water or mallows that have been cooked; then cure after two days of ointment application as appropriate until it is healed; sometimes lift the margin and the wound by enema of water and honey, and then with water in which long arum roots and aristolochia are boiled; then return to the treatment with ointments.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	And if the wound is laid open in the margin, then you must avoid heating with iron, but treat it as we have said in the section.
de l’enfantement	Of childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	It is necessary first for the midwife to know the figure of natural childbirth, and the signs if you see a woman pressing downwards, and desiring to smell the air: then you know that the child hastens to come forth; then you know that this birth is according to the natural figure, and the passage is under its head, and the afterbirth with it; and when you see these signs, it is necessary lightly to press her belly, so that the child may quickly issue; for when it descends under its head, the afterbirth comes with it, and the woman is cleansed of her superfluities by good care; and those who come forth otherwise do not come naturally.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	For it sometimes comes upon its feet, and the body or head, and the hands, or upon her belly, or back, and is turned perhaps upon its neck, and by other bad figures; so it is necessary for the midwife to be wise and subtle in these things, and wary of error and deception, and I will show you all the figures how one should help them.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	If the child comes down on its head by natural means, and the woman gives birth with difficulty, and if her strength is weak, then make her sit on a stool, where women usually hold them; and prepare her nature with oil or fenugreek that has been cooked, and then place a small basin between her two thighs:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.	and cut the perineum, and make a small incision to allow the moisture within to flow out; and press on the woman's abdomen until the child descends, and if it does not descend, then it is necessary to administer an enema of fenugreek muscilaginous substance with sesame oil; then have her drink and sneeze from condisi, and keep her mouth and nose closed for one hour: now the child will come out.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	And if the two hands exit forcefully, then you must reset them gently bit by bit; and if they cannot enter, place the woman on a chair, and raise her feet up high; then lift the chair onto the ground, and steady the woman so she does not fall when standing up; and if the hands still cannot enter, and the child dies, cut the hands with the knife that is placed here beforehand, extract the child, and reset them equally.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	of delivering the child onto its feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut; et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz; puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	When the child comes up on its feet, it is necessary to push it upwards; then turn it bit by bit until it is straight; then take one of its feet and stretch it bit by bit.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi; si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	When it jumps up to the thighs, command it to be grasped, and make it sneeze from conditon; if it jumps further, if God wills.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it does not go further as we have said, turn it little by little until it is according to its natural position.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For then it moves easily.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier; et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz; et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre; puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	And if it does not come out as we have said, take muscilagine of elder, and oil of sesame, and melted gum, and grind all in a mortar; then put the essence of the woman inside and outside this ointment, then make her sit in warm water up to below the ribs; when she is moistened below, apply an infusion of myrrh there, and let it stay for one hour; then make her sit on the commode, then make her sneeze and pinch her mouth and nose, and gently massage her abdomen, for the child now jumps.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	of the child's birth upon his knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc; puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit; et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval; et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains; et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	When the child comes in this manner, place its hands gently bit by bit; then lay it on its back, and let the feet hang down, and have it lying on the bed; and bend its hands bit by bit, and then take its hands to its belly, and remove the cushions underneath until it is prepared downward; and if the child does not jump, lift its feet and move them forward, then move its belly upward, then place your hands there; and bring out the child bit by bit; and instruct the woman to hold on as much as possible until the child comes out.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	of the birth of the child who emerges with one hand hanging out
I covient engignier a ramener la main: s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler; s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment; puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit; et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main; et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	It is necessary for the engineer to return the hand: if it cannot be returned, make the woman stand and walk; if she cannot walk, lie her on the bed and straighten her legs completely; then administer the muscillation as I have described; and if she does not give birth, make her sit on a chair, then study how to return the hand; and hold the child according to its natural form, and make her sneeze, and command her to grasp firmly until the child comes out.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	from the exit of the child onto its neck, and have her spread out her hands, and her face turned towards her mother's back
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement; et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc; et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	It is necessary for the baby to hold her hand, then turn it little by little, and move it gently; and when it is even, apply the natural muscillation of heat and oil as we have said, then command her to move it little by little; and when you have done this, make her sit on a chair, and command her to grasp firmly; and make her sneeze.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	In the same manner to the entire second part
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie; et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes; puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois: adonques si istra legierement.	When it comes to applying force in this manner to the entire second part, cut the second part with your nail until the moisture is emptied; and if the child can be brought up on its face and neck, cut from the mouth so that it is not retained, and move the child; then place the child inside as it should be, and instruct the woman to grasp it several times: then gently extract it.
de l’issue des gemelz	on the outcome of twins
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent III ou IIII; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	You should know that twins are often born, and sometimes three or four are born; and this is not a strange thing, and it can happen.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom; je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude; et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	Two are strange things, and do not live, if one can call them that; I know they multiply, and are separated by the surface which divides them, which is attached to the bud; and sometimes they issue as naturally as other shoots, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait; et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	And if they emerge roughly, treat them as we have said, and let the nurse be subtle, and do quickly and gently what she does; and act as it is necessary for health.
de plusors enfans	of many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient; si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	Sometimes they are formed in the month I or II or III or IV or V or VI or VII, or more up to XV, and are completely formed in the shape of a child according to the measurement of the wise physician, and it is necessary for the nurse to know all this, because similar things may happen; so act accordingly.
de l’enfant mort	of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains; si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort; si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees; et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant; puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges; puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief; si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes; et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide; et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	When you treat the woman of the dead child in her womb, as I said in the division, and it does not come out, and you are constrained to work with your hands; then it is necessary that you know if the woman has good health, and has no accident or fear of death; then the woman must be laid on her back, with her knees bent downwards, and her legs raised; and the assistant holds the towel from two sides, where she lies on the bed so that it does not touch below the child; then smear her mouth with marish oil mixed moistly with muscilla of hellebore and fenugreek and flax seeds, then anoint her palms with these oils and these muscillae; then gently place your hands in the marish, then find a suitable place to make the incision where the child is prepared to come down headfirst; if it descends feet first, insert the needle between ribs or at other appropriate places; and you must hold the needle in your right hand, and put the loop between two fingers of your left hand, gently move your hands, then insert the needle at one of these places until it reaches the empty space; and this is the form of the needle:
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz; et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	Then place against the other hook, or a third one if you need it, so that the extraction is equal; and then spread them equally by moving from side to side, for the muscles to come out, and let the hooks be toothed to hold the muscles, as shown in this form:
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie; et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	And if a part remains, anoint the edge with some of his two oils, and place it in that part, and pull out the other part; and if any part remains, attach this hook to a higher position, and do so until everything comes out completely.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote; puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	And if one hand comes before the other, and he cannot return it for grasping, you must wrap around the finger until it completely comes out; then place a bandage at the joint of the palm or at the base, and similarly you must do this with the other hand, and on both feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue; ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui; et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment; et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer; et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues; et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	And if the head of the child is large and it is tight in the passage, or there is an acute accumulation in the head, then you must pierce with a pointed spatula between your two fingers, cut open the head, and extract the fluid; or shave it with the instrument called "almidach," of which the form comes with the instruments in the chapter that follows this one; and likewise do if the child has a large natural head; and then pull out the bones with forceps, and if the head jumps out and is stuck to the forceps, cut them off so that the moisture coming from the pus passage can flow; and if it cannot come out, cut it in pieces as much as you can; and if it swells in the belly or under the ribs, then you must pierce it until the moisture runs.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if the child is on its feet, then the traction is light, and the adjustment to the mouth of the womb is light.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main; et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre; et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris; puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer; et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses; et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	And if he is tight in the abdomen or breast, then you must stretch him with a sling wrapped around the hand; and cut the abdomen or breast until the moisture that is there flows out; and if another part is removed, and the head remains, then put your hand in perfectly to the mouth of the womb, and pull it up to the mouth of the womb; then put your thumb or two fingers in, and pull firmly; and if the mouth of the womb is narrow due to a hot abscess that has come, then there must be no work done, but rather moisture and fat should be administered; and administer plasters, and apply them with liquids that soften and moisten.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif; et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	And if the child is on its side, and you can make it even, then treat it as we have said about the living child; and if one has no power over it, then cut it into pieces, and leave nothing of the second skin.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris; et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	And when you have done this, treat it as we have said about large abscesses that come with fever; and if bleeding occurs, apply cold compresses, and then treat with other remedies.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut I autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman in whom the fetus had died in her womb, then another was conceived after that one, and even this other one died.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time, abscesses came in her mouth, and it swelled so much that it burst, and began to severely rot.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called to treat it, and I pondered long, and could not heal the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I applied a plaster of strong attraction, and out came one bone, and after several days another.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I marveled greatly, for there are no bones in the abdomen.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	I thought it must be the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point; et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu; et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	I examined the wound and extracted many bones, until the woman was in a much better condition; and she remained with me for a long time, and occasionally a bit of fluid would come out from there; and I recall this chapter only because when masters encounter something unusual, they should seek to understand it.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	to return the joint to its place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a II tornans as II chiés des II liiens.	Here follows the form of the binder, which the books have; and for two turns to the two shoulders of the two arms.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux; et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi; et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus; et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	Nevertheless, the horns should be finer than the binder, and made of ebony or boxwood; and the mouth of the shaft should be two fingers wide, and the margin of the trees one finger, and a length of one palm and a half; and between the two arms there should be two fixtures of the same wood, which are securely fastened in each, about half a palm long or slightly more; and these two fixtures are positioned at the mouth of the joint to open when the two horns are turned.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles; et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large; et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes; puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	Another form, more subtle and lighter in appearance, should be made of ebony wood or boxwood, resembling pincers; and let it have two heads with attachments as you see, one palm long and two fingers wide; and when you wish to open the mouth with this instrument, seat the woman on a bed, her feet hanging down and legs spread apart, then insert the two attachments together into the mouth, holding the head of the instrument beneath between her thighs; then work your hand along the entire instrument as you did with the pincers equally, according to how wide you wish to open the mouth of the patient, until she gives a sign that it is enough.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	These instruments are all equipped with attachments, and their forms are varied; and when the physicians have them prepared, they perform their work more quickly, and are more effective for people according to their needs.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	Do not despise the instrument because you have not prepared it, for their needs are not excusable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis; et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	When the afterbirth is retained during childbirth, you must instruct the patient to hold her breath, and then make her sneeze by using something appropriate, and hold your hands over her mouth and nose; if she jumps because of this, it is well.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire; toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	If not, take a pipette and make holes in its cover, then place herbs that can open the mouth of the mare inside it, such as camomile, rue, anise, chamomile, cassia lignea, and centaury; all these herbs or some of them should be boiled or infused in water over fire; then put one end of a tube into the opening of the pot, and the other end into the mare's mouth, and hold it so that the vapor enters inside the mare; then make her sneeze as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	The second bone jumps quickly.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction; mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	And if it remains after this treatment and does not yield, as the nurse should moisten her left hand in linseed oil or mastic of hellebore, and then put it into place naturally, and seek the second bone; and when she has found it, she should take it and extend it little by little straight, so that the mass does not fall during extraction; but it must be moved gently to right and left, and then drawn out; thus it will come and release itself.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes; et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire; mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon; si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	And if the mouth of the mass is tight and closed, we have described the cure to sneeze and fumigation with herbs; and if it does not yield from all that we have said, be careful not to forcibly pull it; but instead tie what is at the mouth of the mass to the woman's thigh, then administer an ointment enema as a tetrafarmakon; this will purge and reset it, and it will come out; however, if foul odor comes from the stomach and head when it purges, it may harm the patient.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	Therefore, suitable fumigations are necessary for these cases: some of the ancients have tested fumigation with fresh herb and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The form of the instrument used to fumigate women for the retention of their flow and menstruation is as follows:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu; et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	And it is made of glass resembling a tube, with the narrow end placed in the body and the wider ends over the fire; and place the fumigation over the coals, and let the smoke be inhaled until it is exhausted, then start another.
de percier lou fondement	to pierce the fundament
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac: si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche; puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many children are born without a pierced anus, instead having a small membrane: therefore, it is necessary for the midwife to pierce that membrane properly, and not too sharply with an instrument, being careful not to injure them; then apply wool moistened in wine and oil, followed by ointment until they are healed.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you fear that it will not stay in place, put a chain of lead through the hole, and leave his hands free, and remove it when the child wants to go to bed.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	And sometimes this obstruction comes from a sudden closure of a wound or an abscess; it is necessary to cut that closure: it should be treated as we have said about the lead chain.
de la fistule dou fondement	of the fistula of the anus
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	Fistulas that come from inside the anus are nodations, and those that come near or between the two parts often have one fistula or more; when this nodation is old, it works, and even now retains moisture, white pus or fine blood, and sometimes these fistulas are persistent; they are known by what comes out during defecation or flatulence when the patient has a bowel movement, and occasionally a worm may come out.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	And if there are fistulas that penetrate to the bladder, and up to half of the shaft; and they reach to the joint of the thigh, and to the root of the belly.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant: et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	And thus one knows whether the fistula penetrates to the anus or not: and it is that you insert your index finger into the anus, and insert a fine needle of silk or iron into the fistula when there is no curvature.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit; et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit: saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	And if there is curvature, insert a thread of fine linen or horsehair until you feel the thread or hair with your finger; and if you do not feel it, and no discharge, wind, or ver comes out as we have said: you know that it does not penetrate; then hurry to treat it.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula reaches to the bladder or to the conduit of urine, then it leaks urine, and cannot be healed with medicines.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu; s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement; et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	If it reaches to the joint of the thigh, then the swelling comes up to that place; if there is no tortuosity and the pain remains around it, then it will become a boil immediately, and medicine or ointment does no good; and in these perforated fistulas there is no cure except labor, and vanity of foolish physicians who interfere with them.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre; puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	In the case that is not perforated and is not old, there is hope for healing by iron, as I have experienced, and it is that the patient lies on their back; lift their legs up to their thighs, and incline their thighs toward their belly; then insert a probe of lead or silver if there is tortuosity, until you know where the probe stops.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans; si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	If the patient feels it around the fundament, then you should place your index finger there; if you sense that the skin has been pierced; and where you feel between your finger the surface or flesh, then you know it is perforated; do not tamper with it as it cannot be healed.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc; et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit; et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil; et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	One often says that some can be well healed, but this happens rarely; and the aid given is to heat the cautery subtly according to the width of the fistula, as was mentioned before; and insert it very hot into the fistula until it reaches near the fundament; and do this two or three times until you know that the unhealthy tissues are burned, which appear like a feather; and then cure with wet dressings in butter until the flesh grows back, and afterwards use an ointment to heal and mend.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If he is thus sound, it is well.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez; et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur; si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente; et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	If that cannot be otherwise for him to be sound; and if the fistula enters, but does not penetrate all the way to the bottom which is at the foundation, and there is a thick covering of flesh or fatty tissue between your thumb and the fistula, and you see the fistula under this covering of the heart; then cut from the beginning of the fistula, and push it forward until you reach the top of the fistula, and apply the cautery afterward until it reaches the head of the fistula; and the fistula will be freed and fall out; then clean the damaged flesh that looks like a bird's feather, and leave none behind.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if the flesh fails you, and there is an opening between you and the work, then cauterize it with fire or with a sharp medicine.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor; puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe; puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	For the fire cauteries assemble two good things: namely, the burning of these tissues attached, and the stopping of blood and drying of moisture; then treat with moistened bandages in butter or crushed substances until the wound weeps, and heal the tissue burned in the wound; then treat the wound with hardening ointments made from solid ingredients.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it is restored, it is healed and does not return.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if a fistula comes up from deep within the anus and is distant from the body, make a poultice of it and treat it.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres: ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit; puis le cure, si com nos avons dit; par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé; puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues; puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	If you feel the tent and it is between two layers of tissue or flesh, and it is close to piercing through, there must be no hesitation in proceeding with one of the three methods: either cauterize as we have said, cut it down to the base, or if you can place a bandage and treat it as initially instructed; do not go too deep that you might cut into the tissue holding the anus, and let evacuations occur naturally; then treat it as we have described; perhaps it will heal, or remove the covering once it has been cut near the anus, whether by dressing or another appropriate instrument; then clean the affected tissue in the wound as much as possible; then work to restore the wound and keep the fistula outside of the anus: this is a lighter task for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	And sometimes there are fistulas in this manner: and it is when you insert the probe into the fistula, and it reaches the bottom of the foundation near the skin above, then take a probe perforated at the tip according to this form:
Et i boute I fil tort en II, et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And you wind the thread in a twist from I to II, and insert the probe along the entire length of the thread into the fistula until it reaches the tip.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement; et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II; et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent; puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	If it is passing through the margin of the foundation inside, then draw out the thread from that passage, such that you press your finger into the foundation; and pull the tip of the thread, and bring the two ends together, and hold them tightly to each other, and leave it for one or two days; and tighten it at times until the thread cuts through the flesh between them and they heal; then treat the wound until it is sealed and healed.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not open, pierce it in all ways that you can, if it is not too deep.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it is not appropriate to cut too deeply for the treatment and then care for it as we have said until it is healed.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans; et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	The shape of the spatumile spine from which one makes the fistula is very sharp on one side and cutting; and not so on the other side, for that which should not be cut must not be cut, as you see here:
des emorroydes	for hemorrhoids
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors; et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz; si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines; et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot; et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere; ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement; cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere; et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	Hemorrhoids are of two kinds: those that are inside the anus, like grains of resin, and they can be small or large, and have blood in them, and there may be one or several; some are near the anus and at the head of the anus; but those farther away contain less moisture, and often a little yellow liquid or a little blood, and their color is that of the skin. The treatment for these inside the anus is to instruct the patient to sit in baths until the hemorrhoids swell out, so they can be seen clearly; then quickly grasp them with your fingernail, and cut them at their roots; if hooks cannot hold them due to moisture, use a cloth or cotton or a piece of camel wool; then pull them out with your fingers, and cut them, and sprinkle warm powders used for cautery on top; cauterize as described in the chapter on cautery, then treat further until healed; if the anus cannot be opened, administer a harsh enema to cleanse what is inside the anus so it can come out freely; when the patient feels better, and if the threads have come out of the anus, treatment is easier; grasp them with your fingernail or with forceps, cut them, then treat as we said until healed, and fear incision with iron.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc; puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose; et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	So you should treat the suture in this manner: take twisted thread and put it on a needle, then pull the thread above and have the needle pierce from another side, and twist both ends of the thread under the needle, and let it be loose; and tightly draw the thread, then tie the thread, remove the needle, and do so for all others, leaving one to drain excess blood; then place a moist cloth dipped in rose oil or cerate on the foundation, and put it on the foundation, and instruct the patient to rest; and then leave them until they defecate, and when they have done so, cure them with ointment and other treatments until they are healthy.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	from the dryness of the feces or foundation
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Often there is dryness of feces in the intestine, and by the constraint of nature, and when the illness is old and medicine does not help.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient; et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	You should cut with the point of a scalpel or your nail on the surface above it, without letting it moisten; then treat it until it is dry as needed; and if it cannot become dry, you should shave more forcefully than before, until it bleeds much and becomes inflamed; then treat it until it heals.
dou fremit	with trembling
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont; et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	Formice is a small itchy rash on the body, and spreads very quickly; and sometimes the cold causes it, and one feels it like death from trembling, and it comes over the whole body, and more in the hands than anywhere else.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor; puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	And the treatment is that you take a thread from a goose feather or a strong vulture feather, and place the thread around the boil so that it encircles the boil completely; then turn your hand along the entire length of the thread until you cut around the boil entirely, and remove the boil by its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you wish, do this with a thread of linen or iron according to this form, and let it be fine underneath and drawn over:
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	do not pierce it, to hold the hairs in place and press them, And if you wish, cauterize the boil as mentioned earlier in the chapter on cauterization.
de la forme dou clistere	of the form of the enema
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	Sometimes a douche of silver or buckthorn is made, or of melted brass or oatmeal; and sometimes these instruments are made small and large, according to those to whom they are administered.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Those who are treated in the care of children and those who are weak and painful are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The form of the douche, small and large, is as follows, wide, where the belly is bound in this manner:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I; et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre; et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	and there should be a space where the belly is bound as you see, and the tip should be pierced inside; and on one side it has two holes, and on the other side one hole; and let the belly, in which the medicine is placed from an animal bladder or parchment, be pierced all around with small holes, and there should be one digit of space between each hole, then insert a strong thread through these holes twisted ten times or so, and tie up the belly like a goat; and when the medicine is inside, attach it to the instrument in front with a strong thread, then administer the douche; and this is the form of the circle:
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement; puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	And let the medicine not be too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head with a poultice of oil or oak leaves, or something similar, then cover it gently; then lift up the patient's head with both hands as much as possible, then remove the poultice, and raise the patient’s legs against the wall, and if the medicine needs to come out, hold it in for as long as he can; and if he sleeps a full night, it is greater help.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you give him an enema in a case of diarrhea, and the medicine hastens to come out, then repeat it until he is well.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	And if the hemorrhoids are at the fundament or abscessed, then let the enema be as fine as for a child; and this is the form of the fine enema in which the skin is stretched:
des plaies	of wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	We have already discussed in the division the treatment of wounds; now we will tell you about the treatments of hands and medicines, according to their completion.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse according to how they are made, and according to the places where the wounds are made, and of what they are made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses; ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres; et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	The things by which wounds are made are from falling on stones, and cutting with a sword or knife, or lance or staff or arrow, or similar things; they are made according to the places of the body, such as a wound that falls on the neck, or on the head, or foot, or belly, or liver, and similar members; and I will tell you the treatment for each wound, and begin with simple wounds of the head, because the memory will come in its chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree; et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	I say that when a simple wound comes to the head and the bone is not broken, take care if it is from falling of stones or similar things, and the skin is entirely torn and the wound large, and you suspect the formation of a hot abscess: then I treat it immediately with the cephalic method if there is little blood coming from the wound, and let the dressing be contrary to the injured part; and prevent the patient from overindulgence in wine and heavy foods.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char; et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice; et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés; et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if he does not wish to be bled, then reduce his meat intake, and let him drink no wine or eat flesh; and place on the wound, if hot abscesses come, cotton soaked in rose oil only, or in styptic wine; and if there is no hot abscess, then apply to the fresh wound, if it has not been exposed to air, powder, which I will mention a little later; and if inflammation has affected it, then apply some ointments until he is healed.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large like a sword cut and similar ones, and the edges cannot be brought together by stitching, then sew them together, as I will explain for belly wounds and suturing.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	If the wound is exposed bone and can only be held together at one point, cut it away; then treat the wound with medicine, and replace hard flesh where leather was, and instruct the patient to eat hearty foods, such as brains and boiled wheat, like porridge, and similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure; et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil; et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	And if you find putrid flesh on the skin that adheres not to the bone, cut it away entirely, then apply a poultice and treat it; and if there is an artery or vein in the wound that cannot be stopped by medicines, tie off the vessel, and if you find it dislocated, mend it with thread; and if this does not help, cauterize it.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if these wounds are small and simple, then the treatment is easy: it is that you put in this powder which seals as soon as the heat has drawn it.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon II parties; chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc; et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And the method of the powder is as follows: take incense one part; dragon's blood two parts; quicksilver three parts, and mix the powder finely, and apply it to the wound, and press it firmly until it adheres well and joins with all its blood; and then tie it tightly, and do not loosen it unless it swells; for one does not remove the medicine until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And sometimes one does this with quicksilver alone, when one does not have the incense or the dragon's blood, but that the heat has drawn the wound.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre; mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe; puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound has moved or changed, especially in summer, do not apply this powder; but put on some prepared ointments, or poultices made of barley flour mixed with water and honey, until it discharges pus; then treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz; et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	And if the bone fracture comes with the wound, and it is small, then extract it with fine forceps; and I will tell you about head fractures hereafter.
de la plaie dou col	of the neck wound
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If the wound is on the neck and it is simple, there is no difference compared to a head wound, but if the neck nerve or artery is severed.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire; et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres; mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	If it is the nerve, then there should be no treatment other than leaving it alone and not applying anything constricting, for this harms the nerves and causes them to retreat; and do not apply anything cold to the wound, because the substance of the nerves is cold, and their continuation is with the brain, which is the highest part of the body; but let the medicine be warm, such as hot water mixed with sweet water, and rose oil, and boiled wool also in sweet water, and other minerals according to this method, and moist ointments.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, then stitch and bandage it, then treat it until it heals.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu; et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est; et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel; et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier; et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue; et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	And if the wounds are deep and filled with pus, then open them at the lowest point; and if an artery is cut, causing blood to flow out, then open it, ligate it, and cauterize it if necessary; and if the spine in the throat is cut, or the windpipe, and the path for air is blocked, then stitch the wound above the windpipe, but do not touch the throat, only reset it according to its natural shape; and then compress it gradually, and leave it for some days, then treat it with drying ointments until it heals; and if the wound has made an impression in the bone, then reduce it; and if there are pieces of bone, remove them forcefully as much as you can, and those that you cannot remove, leave them until the wound becomes pus-filled, then separate and align the exit points; and if the wound is fresh, sprinkle on the powder I have mentioned.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there is bone in the wound and there is an abscess, treat it as I have said in its chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	of the wound from a spear or knife
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz; et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide; mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor; et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors; si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne; et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	If it is a wound from a spear or knife, and the wound is deep, then look to see if windiness comes out of the wound along with the blood: you will know that the wound is fatal; but if it is not deep, and the blood flows fresh throughout, do not put powder on it at first, nor bind it for the blood that does not come from a great depth, as it could return to the heart and kill the patient; instead, apply an adhesive ointment, and change the bandage twice a day. And if you have no ointment, place old cotton in the wound to absorb the moisture, and allow the patient to rest on the wound for three days, or four, or more; this way, there will be no spasm, nor trembling, nor strangeness of breath; and when you see good signs, you will know that the wound is saved.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	Treat it then with tents and other treatments until he is healed; and if it cannot be healed, operate, and you will know that there is an abscess; treat it as one should.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant; s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez; et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions; et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	And if the wound is from a sword or knife cut, and it is simple, whether on the front or back, treat it like any other; if it is large, stitch it up; and if it is small, apply powder, and if it is pressed against the bone, and has severed pieces, then cleanse the wound, and repair torn tendons; and if they are not torn, let the wound heal on its own, which will ease the extraction of foreign bodies; and for other wounds on other limbs, judgment is as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	of the rupture of the abdomen
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis; de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus; et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut; por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres: les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies; et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	The rupture of the abdomen is great and medium and small; from the large wound sometimes the intestines or the nerves of the intestines protrude, leading to intestinal perforation; and the suturing is more difficult. Sometimes a smaller wound is worse than a larger one because if the intestines are not returned frequently, they are pushed back in too much at once; for when they feel cold, they swell immediately and are pushed back in harder, so a smaller wound can be better, as it allows the intestine to return gently to its place more often. And you should know that there are four types of rupture: two common sutures happen with abdominal suturing, and the other two specific to other wounds; yet all are particularly suited for abdominal sutures, and I will describe each one and explain them.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres: ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	I say that when the wound is small, and some part of the intestine protrudes, and it is a difficult thing to replace, this can be done in one of two ways: either because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestine is swollen due to cold.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere: moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee; et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	And when it is cold, warm it in this manner: moisten a sponge or some thin cloth with hot water only, which you cook with hot vinegar and cypress and spikenard, and rinse the intestine until the swelling subsides; and sometimes use wine that constricts to make it less swollen.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose; et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes; et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait; et c’est li estrumens por le fendre: si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	And when you see the swelling depart, moisten the intestine with water in which hellebore and mallows have been cooked, for this gradually opens the entrance; and if it cannot enter, make a small incision in the wound with the instrument used to cut hemorrhoids; and the first treatment should be such that one does not cut unless there is great necessity; and here is the tool for making the incision: cut inward along the curvature without going out, and see here the form:
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestines jump out, place them back according to their natural form in their proper place if you have the power, for that is better.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief; et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre; et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	When the wound is large, and it is in the back part of the abdomen, you should have the patient lie on their back with their legs higher than their head; and if it is in the front part of the abdomen, raise the head and feet higher than the affected area; and also if there is a rupture of the abdomen in one of the two parts, arrange so that the injured part is higher than the other; and thus should be treated what I say about large and medium wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres; et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort; et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble; puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille; puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte; et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer: por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes; et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure; et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee; et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien; et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras; et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi; ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	In small wounds, apply what is appropriate to you, then hold a minister who holds the entire wound with their hand and brings together the edges; this is the common method of suturing. Take one or more needles according to the width of the wound, leaving an inch at the beginning of the wound before inserting the needle with strong thread; pierce both sides of the skin with the two inner layers of tissue beneath it until you have pierced through the entire section, and bring together the four corners; then twist a double thread around the needle on both sides, and then join the two edges of the wound, leaving an inch of space before inserting another needle. Tie the knot of the thread as you did with the first needle, and continue this process until the entire wound is sutured; the needles should be medium-sized, between fine and thick, because too thin needles cut through all flesh, and overly thick ones cannot enter properly: thus they should be medium-sized; do not insert the needles too far from the skin and tissue so as to damage the wound before it heals; then cut the ends of the needles short so that they do not hurt the patient when sleeping, and place cloth or fabric over them for protection until the wound is healed. This method of needle suturing is more suitable for small wounds, but a second common technique involves bringing together both sides of the skin and tissue on one needle with strong thread; once you have pierced all four corners, tie off the needle as you would sew fabric; leave an inch between each stitch. A person can do this suture method, and I myself stitched up a wound that someone had in their abdomen which was cut by a knife, larger than a palm's width, with intestines protruding two palms' length from inside the belly, located right at the center of the abdomen.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	I returned the intestine to its place after it had been outside for twenty-four hours, and the wound was sealed up until fifteen days, and I treated it, and he was well.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle; et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines; et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	And the doctors had judged that he would die, and this was a miracle; and I did not treat him with ointment, for I was in a place where none could be found, nor any medicines; and I placed old cotton on the wound twice a day, and washed it with honey water until he was well.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture: pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens; quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer; et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	Now I will tell you the two proper methods of suturing: take the needle, and pierce from the outer part to the inner; when it has pierced straight through the skin, place the head of the suture where you have inserted the needle, and make it pierce again from the inner part to the outer; and the understanding of this suture is that you sew as the tailor does with furs, and leave once the side on one side, and return to it from the other, until the entire suture is completed.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere: fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac; puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac; puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit; et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	The second method of suturing, which Galen describes properly, is as follows: one joins the two parts naturally together, and applies one end to the other in such a way: insert a needle at the nearest chief part of the muscle, piercing only that spot while leaving the two ends of the suture; then turn the needle and pierce from the outer part inward through both ends of the suture; then pierce each side from the outer part inward through two more parts of the muscle on the opposite side; and this is the safest method of suturing and the most common.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune; et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies; et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	Galen says this and some attest that one should sew the abdomen with two needles, each having thread; and one must insert one needle from one side and the other from the opposite side, in the manner of those who sew belts; and note that when the rupture is inside the abdomen, the suture is more difficult than in other parts of the abdomen.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies: et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe; et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach; puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	The judgment of the wound is like the judgment of other wounds: and it is that when you find the wound fresh with all its blood, as if the flesh has not been moved, then reset the intestines, and sew; then put on healing powder, and if the flesh has been moved, then apply any ointment that is present until the wound heals; and stitch the wound, and let the sifac and the muscle heal together; then treat the wound like others, until it is healthy; and if you do not have medicines, then place old cotton as soon as it begins to discharge pus, and change it twice a day until it is healed.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples; et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles; et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine; et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	For you do not need other medicines in many cases where the wounds are simple; and if you fear that the wound may affect the principal members, it is necessary to moisten light wool in heated rose oil or olive oil, and place it around the angles and under the armpits; and if there is pain or putrefaction in the bowels, which often happens, then administer a black tea enema of wine, especially if the putrefaction reaches the intestines; and pierce inside, and know that when it is the large intestine, it heals more easily than the small.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	The intestine called "jejunum" cannot heal when it is pierced, and this is because of the smallness of the veins that are there, and because of the subtlety of the entire body, and the proximity of its nature to the nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres; et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres; puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	And if the spleen jumps out of the wound, put it back as you would with the intestine, while it is fresh; and if it is old and has turned green or black, then tie off the black area so that no blood seeps through, because there are veins and arteries; then cut around the ligature and hang both ends from below the wound to facilitate extraction when the spleen falls out, and the wound will heal.
de la routure dou boueil	of the fracture of the eye socket
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance; et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez; je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	When the intestine is cut and the wound is small, it can sometimes be restored in some people, for I saw a man pierced in the belly with a lance; and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and it became inflamed and turned into a fistula, from which excretions and gases issued; I treated it according to what I could, and did not stop suturing until he was healed, and the flesh grew together.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre; et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans; et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere: pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus; et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise; et cout la plaie.	And when I saw it heal, I feared the patient would have pain in his belly; but he felt no discomfort and improved in health, eating and drinking normally. And some experienced practitioners say that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it should be treated as follows: take large-headed clamps, then bring together the edges of the wound, and when the clamp opens its jaws, place them over the two edges so they press tightly; then cut off the head, and this holds fast so it cannot come undone. Do this successively in the same manner until the entire wound is closed, and sew the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere: pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure; et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance; et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	If the head of the intestine is inflamed and causes no harm to the patient, it can be tied with a fine thread that matches the intestine of an animal in this way: take the tip of this intestinal thread which is very clean, then wrap around it a thin linen thread tightly, then put the thread on the needle, and sew the intestine, and pull it together at the wound; and this method of stitching does no harm except according to the path of trust and hope; and if the wound is large and wide, especially when it is in one of the main intestines, there is no remedy or cure unless with subtlety.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	of fistula wherever it may be
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	Know that any wound or abscess, when it matures, is generally called a "fistula," especially when it has become hollow and sinks inward.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil; et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse; aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez; et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes: c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors; ou por sa malice; ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char; ou il i a trop de bowe; ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit; ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure; ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence; ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature; ou il i a voinnes ou os: et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	And a fistula is according to the truth an improper knot hard and white, where one does not feel pain, and it is also feathered like the quill of a bird; and sometimes it swells clear, and other times thick; sometimes pus is little, and other times enough; and I have already spoken in the division of wounds that every wound that is not healed, and there is no flesh, except for one of the IX causes: namely, because of the smallness of the blood or body; or because of its malice; or because there is hard flesh within, and on the lips, which does not allow new flesh to grow; or there is too much pus; or the place is rotten, and the matter has poor quality; or the medicine used for treatment is not good; or because corruption resembles a pestilence; or because the property in the region is slow digestion, and late healing, and swollen by nature; or there are veins in the bones: and I have already shown all these causes, and signs, and treatments of medicines in the division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	It is necessary for me to tell you about the treatment of a fistula which is done by hand work.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors; car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez; et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	You should know that fistulas can occur in all parts of the body; for there are fistulas that come from large veins, and arteries, and nerves, or on the surface, or in the intestine, or bladder, or some ribs, or spine, or joints of the hands or feet; and some affect the principal part of a limb, and similar places.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance; et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier; et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit; et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie; puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent; et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens; et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons; et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	And all the fistulas that are of this kind are difficult to heal, except through labor and ignorance; and if there is any fistula that does not reach the places I have mentioned, and you trust in its treatment, and you wish to know it, take a probe of brass or iron, if the fistula is straight, and insert it; and if the fistula is curved, use a delicate probe made of lead, because lead can be bent around the curvature; and if the fistula has multiple openings and you cannot properly explore it with probes, inject through one of the openings, for moisture passes from one opening to another, and cleanse it; then gently press it within your power to know if there is bone or nerve inside, and feel thoroughly, and ask the patient carefully about the pain they feel when pressed by your hand, and where they feel it; and when you truly know the location of it, and whether it is far from a joint, nerve, artery, vein, or any of the places I have mentioned, cut it out according to what I have said, and remove the unhealthy flesh that is inside; then treat it until it heals, and if the fistula is deeply straight, you must cut it thoroughly as much as possible, then insert moistened probes in a medicinal acid to corrode the excess left at the bottom; and then apply healing ointments for healthy tissue until it is healed; and if it is not healed by this means, cauterize it as we have said, and if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, cut it out.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit; et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font: si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu; et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If a vein or nerve does not trouble the principal limbs as we have said; and if the bone is exposed, and there is corruption and blackening, then cut away until all corruption is removed, then cure it with applications of flesh-restoring substances until it is healthy; and if it is not healthy, and returns to its original state as before, know that you have not reached the depth: uncover and search until you reach the bottom, remove all corruption, then restore the place; and if it is thus healthy, it is well.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir; si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature; et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un; et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	If not, know that the corruption is too deep for you to reach; there is no other remedy but to leave it to nature; and if there is a small corrupt bone that you can pull with forceps, extract it with suitable instruments, and if there are many bones, remove them all without leaving any; and if the moisture opposes you, and there is no error or fear, cut away both corruption and flesh, and free the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os; et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie; et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os; si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez; et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	And if you cannot remove them at once, place on the wound something that promotes putrefaction, and leave it until the flesh is rotten around the bones, and then the bones will be more easily removed; and if it is a large bone, such as of the leg or thigh, cut away only the corruption until all black matter is removed, then restore the wound; and if there is much corrupted part remaining, reaching to the bone marrow; you must scrape and cut away all the corruption, and then cure it until it is healed; and I will tell you about a fistula that happened in a man's leg, so take this as an example and help in your work.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir; mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors; et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors; et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	There was a young man around thirty years old who had pain in his leg due to something that came inside the body, so that the substances reached the leg and it swelled with a large abscess, and there was no reason for it to burst on its own; but the physicians, out of their foolishness, operated excessively until they opened the abscesses and removed much matter from them, and it became a fistula, and many holes appeared through which all humors and moisture of the body flowed; and several doctors treated him for two years, and no one had any skill in the art of hands, until I was called to see him, and saw his leg and the medicines used to treat him, as well as what came out through the openings in large quantities; and the young man's skin turned red, and he had a yellowish complexion.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	I pitched a tent in one of these holes, and then searched all the holes, and found that they came against each other from all parts of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens; je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai; et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder; et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu; mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	I then hurried and cut into one of the holes until I discovered a part of the bone, and found it corrupted and perforated, with the corruption reaching inside the bone; I cleansed what appeared to be the corrupted bone, thinking there was no further corruption besides that which I removed; and began to treat the wound with astringent medicines over a long period, but it could not heal; then I started again, cut into the bone as before, found the corruption continuing in the bone, cleaned it out, removed it, and tried to close the place; but I was only able to do so around one palm's width of the bone, treated it until it was completely healed, and then applied medicines to close it; and it quickly became healthy and closed, and there was no need to start over except for the patient's weakness, which could not bear it, and out of fear of death that I had for him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	For although the evacuation of blood was often done, he remained entirely healthy, and in place of the bone grew hard flesh, and he had good constitution and suffered no harm or contraindication at all, neither going nor coming.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere: pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut; et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char; et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue; et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	And if the bone is broken in any part of the body, it should be treated as follows: take some linen, and pull it at the end of the visible bone, and have someone stretch it upwards; and place another piece of coarser flax over the skin covering the bone, and extend the top so that you draw the corrupted flesh inward, and expose the flesh where you wish to treat, so that the poultice does not damage the flesh; and put a cautery or a table beneath the bone to remove the corrupted flesh; and continue to treat until one can see and feel no more corruption, and treat again if necessary.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute; puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit; et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part; et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper; et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert; et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire; et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce; et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument; et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies; si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	And if the bone is corrupted and it appears so, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part of it, then uncover all the flesh; then place a firebrand underneath, and then use silk from one side to the other for the corruption, and let the length of the silk be as we have said; and if the corruption is at the joint, then cut off the corrupted joint, and suture the bone on the other part; and if the corruption is between two joints, there is no remedy but cutting; and if the corruption is in the finger or toe, it is very severe, yet you must inquire into that corrosion as it appears to you; and clean it by all means possible, but do not let the vein or nerve oppose you; and know that the instruments for cutting these bones are many, according to the position of the bones and their appearance, and their size and fineness, and their length and shortness, and hardness; therefore you must prepare an instrument suitable for each kind of work; and know that your work will show you which tool you need, according to your knowledge of this art and the evidence of the manner of diseases; so consider the instrument you need according to what is necessary.
dou feu	of fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer; et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre; et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	The head may rot from within or from without; and when you have treated that corruption with medicine but it does not help, then you must amputate the limb at the place where the corruption begins, so that the patient escapes either death or the greater evil of losing the limb; and the sign is that the limb turns black as if burned by fire, and rots after turning black, for this corruption spreads from limb to limb and takes over the whole body; therefore hasten to amputate it, and if this is due to a venomous creature's bite, such as a sea scorpion or a viper and similar, and the corruption reaches the head of the arm, then cut it off and do not give it time to reach the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras; et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut; et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe; et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet; et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil; et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort; et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers; puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	And if it comes to the hand, cover at the joint, so that the corrosion does not reach the arm; and if it comes to the arm, cut with a knife; and if it passes the knife, it is death, and there is no remedy except for the quantity of its power; and do all this as well when corruption comes to the foot: if it comes to the first joint, cover after the second joint; and if it comes to the foot, cover the whole foot; and if it climbs up the leg, cover at the knee joint; and if it comes above the knee, there is no other remedy but to let the patient die; and the way of cutting or covering the limb is that you tie above and below, and extend one minister with a ligature downwards, and another minister upwards, and cut the flesh between the two ligatures at one span wide, until the bone is uncovered; then cut or cauterize it, and place a strip of linen on each side so that the cauterization does not touch healthy skin and cause another injury or abscess.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet: il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet; et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez; et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions; et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere; et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez; et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	And if bleeding occurs while you are working, cauterize the area quickly or apply some powders that constrict; then return to your medicine until it is completed, and bind the injured limb with an appropriate bandage, and treat it until it heals; and I will tell you what happened to a man in such cases: he suffered from a blackness which seemed like a burn by fire, and this corrosion started on his big toe first, spreading to cover his entire foot; when the man saw the corrosion, he hastened to amputate his foot, and was healed; and after some time, the corrosion returned at the thumb of his hand, and he came to me, and I applied repelling substances after cleansing his body, but could not stop the corruption; and he decided that I should cut off his hand, and I refused because I hoped to repel the matter; also feared that if I cut his hand, he would die, since his strength was weak; and in despair, he returned home and amputated his hand himself, and healed; and I have not been satisfied with anything except for those who act differently when there is a need.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe; et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz; et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»; mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»; et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz; et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	Sometimes an abscess appears in the flesh and remains so long that it forms a large collection of pus; then it ruptures and drains, leaving behind a cavity like a vessel; and the skin above is as thin as fine cloth, not extending to the bone or nerve; such a disease is called "sain" and is not called "fistula"; but if it extends so far that it reaches the bone completely, then it is called "fistula"; and the skin can be cut around entirely, even when it is thin like cloth; and it does not adhere due to its corruption.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi: regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite: prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel; et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus; et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant; fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor; et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez; et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet; ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain; et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin; ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens; et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez; et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	And if you trust that the skin adheres and the corruption is not complete, and the skin is thick with flesh, then treat it with a clister as follows: check if the breast is large and the pus coming from it has a foul odor; then administer an Egyptian medicine clister in this manner: take equal parts of myrrh, oil, and litharge, put them to heat in a container over fire until they turn red and become as thick as honey; then use this according to your need, mix it with water and honey or wine, and administer the clister while holding back the anus; let the medicine remain inside for two hours, then expel it gently; do this repeatedly until the breast is cleansed of its foulness; if the patient cannot tolerate this, or Egyptian medicine is unavailable, use a mixture of water and honey with a little ground litharge; or you can administer a clister made from honey and mixed wine where honey has cleansing properties and wine aids in adhering the skin; once this is done and you trust that the breast is thoroughly cleansed, then administer something that promotes flesh growth such as an emollient plaster made of rose oil and vinegar, or other medicines and ointments whose properties I have discussed when treating ointments; if the opening for the clister is too small, enlarge it slightly with a probe and place a dressing of Egyptian ointment or basilicon ointment until it fits; and if the wound is too wide, suture it leaving only an area where the clister can enter; if the pus discharging passage is above, cut lower down where there isn't such discharge.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char; et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe; et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain; puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois; et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste; et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez; et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	For when the bowe is deep, it does not allow flesh to regenerate; and if you cannot cut the breast as desired, prepare in such a way that the bowe flows downward to the lowest place where it is. For when the bowe is deep, it does not allow flesh to regenerate and if you cannot cut the breast as desired, prepare in this manner: so that the bowe flows slightly downwards, leaving nothing of the bowe; then take consolidating medicines to put on the healthy part, and stretch a piece of linen cloth covering all the healthy area; then cut at the forceful place the aperture of the breast one bit wider than the first, and spread an ointment according to the size of the aperture over the aperture of the wound to alleviate the bowe, and do not remove the large cloth outside until after several days once; and that which is on the aperture of the breast, take often to remove the bowe, and know what flows from the bowe, whether it is venom or little or enough, or digestible, or indigestible; and be wary if the patient feels pain or not, and whether there is an abscess or not, and when your medicine has been extended in this manner and you see the nature that jumps over the aperture of the wound, know that the healing is now beginning, and approach health; and then loosen it in the morning, or on the third day, and when you loosen the wound, change the other cloth, and renew the ointment.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the stomach throws up undigested food after many days, know that the stomach does not settle.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	And if subtle venom is cut after a long time, do not despair of the health, for health is approaching.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire; et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie; et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine; pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance; puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu; et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire; et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use; et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens; si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	For there are people for whom food heals their wounds slowly, and others who do the opposite; and if undigested food comes up from the stomach after many days, know that the stomach does not settle; and if digestion is delayed and prolonged, add medicines that are dry in substance but moist in virtue, such as a diaphoretic ointment, for it contains a large part of vitriol, and this is the last medicine to use; take a diaphoretic ointment made with rose oil, and dilute it equally with old wine; then boil it and use it; and the same thing works better when thickened if no diaphoretic ointment is present: take murre, aloes, and incense, grind them together, and mix them with honey over a fire; then glue a cloth on it and apply it to the stomach; sometimes administer a long strip of aristology and celestial lily roots, which are like fine wheat and centaury flour; use either simple or compound preparations: grind them into powder and mix with the honey I mentioned and use it; if treatment is prolonged and ineffective, then know that corruption has reached perfection and imprinted on the bone, or in hard members or tendons; then treat according to the method for fistula as we have said before.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	of the abscess of the nail
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois; et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute; et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	Panaritis is an abscess that arises beneath the nail of the finger or toe, or sometimes in other toes; and when it ages and is not attended to, a foul abscess comes, running and discharging pus until it reaches the root of the nail, and perhaps running through entirely; and the corruption reaches the bone, causing putrid pain, and the head of the toe becomes swollen, and its color turns black.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	When you treat it as we have said in the division, and the treatment is of no use, then you must cut away all the excess that remains around the nail, then cauterize the wound afterwards.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne; et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	The cautery is a great aid if the bone is sound and the nail is healthy; and if the nail presses on the flesh, causing it to become inflamed and ulcerated, then you must place the blade under the nail that pierces the flesh, raise it up, and cut away the affected flesh carefully and lightly, then apply the remaining flesh with burning and corrosive medicines to remove everything; finally cure it with ointments until it is healed.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner; et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier; puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor; et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	And if the corrosion is in the bone, cut it out and pull out the pus, for as long as the corroded part of the bone remains, it cannot heal; and if you see that the bone is corrupted, cut it off from one side as was previously mentioned, then cure it until it is healed; and if it is pierced and the patient feels great pain, you must first treat it; then carefully trim the nail diagonally with a sharp instrument, being careful not to cut into the flesh beneath the nail, for the patient would feel too much pain; and if this happens, apply something that soothes.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	the pain of the swelling of the hand
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	The second joints that are born in some people's hands by chance are all flesh, and sometimes there are bones in them, and at times a nail is present, and some of them are born at the root of the joint, where the origin is in some places in the flesh.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet; la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere: taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	Those who are born with any nodule on the finger do not move, and those who are born at the joint of the finger may sometimes move; the size of the one that is fleshy is so slight, in this manner: measure it from its root with a broad spatula.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	Those who are born at the root of the joint are difficult to treat: be careful when cutting them.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	In the one who is born or should be at the back part, you must first cut away the flesh roundly until reaching the bone, then cut the bone in a single stroke suitable for that person, then treat it until it is healthy.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The union that comes to the two bones together comes by birth, or by healing of a wound, or by burning with fire, or by similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz; puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent; ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	You must cut away that union so that the bones can heal according to their natural forms; then place between them two cloths or towels moistened in rose oil so they do not unite again; or put between two pieces of fine lead until the wound is healed as it should be.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	If the union comes to either of them with the palm, you must cut that union as it should be done.
des vils	of worms
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors; et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	Veins are thick, enveloped, full of melancholic excesses that occur in many parts of the body; and they happen more often in the legs of those who walk and work and carry loads than in others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	Therefore, you should administer enemas to them at times, and then treat them with basilicon ointment.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir; et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	The treatment with iron is according to two methods: one is that you cut it and draw out the black blood; and the other method is that you open the vein and draw all the blood out.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil; puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir; et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire; et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	The treatment with the lancet is according to this method: first apply a hot water bath very strongly to the leg until the thick blood becomes thin, then strain the patient's leg from above the thigh down to the area below the knee; then cut the vein in one place or two or three, making a broad incision, and then draw out the black blood with your hand from one side to the other, as much blood as the strength of the patient can endure; then dress it, and instruct him to eat food that induces purging; and repeat the evacuation and treatment when the veins are full, but do not harm the patient at night.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes; et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville; puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent; et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche; puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers; puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope; et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse; et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide; et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The lifting of the vein is done in this manner: raise the patient's leg if it has much hair, then place it in a bath, and bathe the leg with hot water until it becomes red and the veins swell; and if you do not have a bath, heat it by fire, and then cut directly along the long vein from the top of the knee to below the ankle or at the part above the instep; then work the skin with a scalpel, and strip off the vein on each side until it feels firm when touched; and one can see it as red and black, and when it enters the skin it appears like a white cord; then lift the vein underneath, and comb it gently with an uncine, as you did before, and cut another length or more if necessary, then raise it again and cut at the toe joint, pull and lift up to the second length; then strip it from one length to the next until it comes out entirely, and then cut it; and if you cannot pull and lift it, pierce the thread along its entire length with a needle, tie and pull it, place another stitch underneath, and move your hand back and forth until it is done; take care that it does not break because if it breaks, it cannot be pulled or lifted, which would harm the patient; when you have finished pulling it entirely, put on the wound site wool soaked in wine and rose oil; dress the wound until it heals.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	And if the vein is constricted and twisted and wrapped together, and it is not straight, as we have said, then you must cut it sharply, but do not sever it; and draw it out as we have previously stated.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne; et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	The shape of the knife used to cut the vein is curved, and it does not cut through, so as not to sever the vein; and it is thickly curved, because if it were fine, it would cut the vein, but it should be thick as we have said, and this is its form:
de la voinne civile	of the civil vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor; et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	This vein is found in the legs, in warm parts where no herbs or trees grow, and in dry ground that lacks moisture; and by chance it may appear elsewhere than in the legs, and this occurs due to putrefaction beneath the skin, as it spreads within the body like serpents and worms, growing between the skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	And if the signs of the beginning of this vein are such that there comes a very great inflammation in the leg, then it changes its place, and the vein begins to come out as if from a root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe; et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue; car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie; por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors; et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	When the vein is open, it is necessary that you wrap around a piece of cloth from one and a half to two fingers wide, tie it, and leave the cloth hanging down the leg, and every time there is an excess point coming out, then wrap it around the cloth and tie it; if it is too long, cut off part of it, and wrap the remainder, but do not cut it at its root until it comes out completely; for if you cut it, it will go back into the flesh and cause abscesses and corruption in that place, and a bad disease; because such things must be treated little by little until there is nothing left on the body; sometimes this vein when treated is five palms long or ten, and once it happened to me with one who had it issuing out ten palms long, and when you cut it, let one row or hole come out so that everything comes out; and empty the matter inside, then administer medicine there for corruption for some days, then treat it as abscesses.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	And sometimes this vein branches off, especially when it appears at the ankle joint or near the foot, where there is much perforation and from which it branches again; treat it as we have said before.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	worms that are born between the skin and flesh
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer; et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre; et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	This disease is called in our land "buffalo disease," because it often affects buffaloes, and it is a small worm that is born between the skin and flesh, and travels throughout the body moving up and down, and people feel it well as it moves from limb to limb, until it breaks the skin where it goes, causing pain; and it arises from putrid humors, such as worms, serpents, lice, and ascarids in the belly; and one fears its malice, because when it travels through the body, if it ascends to the head, and comes to the eye, by chance it enters, and destroys the eye; and this happens often.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait: si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire; et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit; et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer; et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	When you see it necessary to cure and drain it, one cannot do so forcefully: therefore, tie the area above and below with a strong tight bandage, then cut over it and draw out the pus; if the vein is deep in the flesh and you cannot find it, cauterize it with fire until it closes; and the greatest harm it can cause is that it may affect the eye, as we have said; and if you see it coming near the eye at the head, hold firmly below it the eyebrow, then cut over it, and draw out the pus; and the patient should use cleansing of body with dissolving medicines for purging bad humors, and avoid eating inflammatory foods.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	of the pain that comes from gas or windiness
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	This disease is called "vakirir" in our land, and it is a pain that comes to certain limbs, and can move from one limb to another; and I have seen what I tell you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais; et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre; li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais; puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	I was called to a sick woman, and she showed me her arm, where I saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm; and shortly after, I saw it rise as quickly as a worm to the shoulder, faster than anything, like quicksilver when it flows from one place to another; the pain departed from that spot and settled in the shoulder, and then a short while later spread throughout her body until it reached the other arm; she told me that it kept circling around her body quickly, as I had seen.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I marveled greatly at how it moved from limb to limb, for I had never seen this disease in such a manner before.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme; et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte; et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	However, I have seen many who wished to move pain from one place to another, but I did not want it, as I saw in the woman; and I thought that was because she had dry flesh, and veins uncovered, and therefore this windiness appears constrained; and they do not appear according to this reason in those who are delicate, and who have moist bodies and veins covered.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer; et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	And when you wish to treat this disease, and the patient feels that pain, if it appears as we have said, lift it up and down quickly, and then cut into the place until that constrained windiness is released; and cauterize the spot; and if you do not see it with your eyes, treat it with those who expel winds, such as foul pills, serapin pills, and similar others.
des saiettes	of arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	Arrows are diverse according to their appearances and according to the places in the body where they strike.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees; et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces; et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	The diversity of these arrows is such that there are those with large points, small points, barbed points, and fixed points; and there are those with two angles, and some have tongues, and others have pieces; and when an arrow strikes any limb, it does so in two ways: either it strikes a principal member, such as the brain, heart, liver, spleen, lungs, intestines, bladder, and similar members.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent: si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions; et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	When it strikes in any place of these members and the signs of death, which I will tell you next, appear: then you must beware of extracting this arrow, for death often follows in such cases; and when none of these bad signs appear and the arrow is not deeply embedded, then draw it out and treat the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole; et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix; et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char; et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	And the signs of the brain when an arrow strikes and pierces the bone, and penetrates the dura mater which is over the brain, are scotoma and coma and vertigo and redness in the eyes, and inflammation and redness of tongue, and spasm and confusion of mind, and vomiting of bile; and it may pass without strength from the nostrils or ears; and possibly speech and voice are lost; and from the wound flows white moisture like pus, and also as if burnt flesh; and if these signs appear to you, then proceed with treatment, and draw out the arrow if it is inside.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide; et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope: saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	The signs of the arrow when it strikes the heart are that it is near the left breast, and feels as if it were fixed in something hard, not empty; and possibly the arrow moves like pus, and forms black blood, and coldness and cold sweat come, and syncope: you then know without doubt that death follows.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of the arrow that strikes the throat is that foamless spittle jumps from the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient changes color, and sighs loudly and seeks cold air.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	And if the arrow strikes in the back of the thigh, it is near the small ribs; and there is a great pain and suffering and sighing; and all the shoulder members move.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the arrow strikes in the stomach, it may cause some undigested food to spurt from the wound.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if the arrow strikes in the belly, and no piece of the arrowhead passes through the entire intestine, there is no hope for treatment or for extracting the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	And if the arrow falls into the bladder, and the urine jumps out and comes to leak, and the patient feels great pain: know that the wound is mortal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other limb, such as the face and neck and throat and shoulder and joint and spine of the back and ribs and thigh and legs, and similar limbs, are safe according to many conditions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in the nerve or artery, and it is not venomous, as I will tell you that it happened to me, for which reason you should act differently.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis: je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	It happened to a man that an arrow fell in his helmet at the base of his nose: I probed it and extracted it from the other side under the fat of the ear, and he was fine without any harm.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	And he drew out an arrow that had struck the fat of the eye below the membrane below, and the arrow was buried, and only a little could be reached towards the shaft, and the arrow was large from a Turkish bow, all iron without feathers; the patient was healthy, and no bad accidents happened to him.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles: je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	And he drew an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and the arrow was Arabian with feathers: I seized the barbs, and carefully pulled until I extracted it, and the Christian was healthy.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit; et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition; je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	And he drew an arrow from a man who had it embedded in his abdomen, and I thought he would die; but after thirty days had passed, there was no change in his condition; I incised around the arrow, extracted it forcefully, and no bad accidents occurred.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus; et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	And if you wish to treat a man who has an arrow embedded in his back, and the wound is sealed over; and the arrow remains inside him, and he does not change any of his natural dispositions, nor finds harm in any of his natural functions.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie; et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	And there is another man to whom an arrow fell into his face, and the wound sealed over; and it remains thus without him suffering great pain; and many others similar.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	And I treated an arrow for the king's prince, which was embedded in his nose, and it was slightly deviated to the right side; and the arrow was completely bent. I was called to treat it three days after it happened.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	I found the wound very narrow.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie; et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	I asked her to fully examine it with great care, and I felt nothing; but she perceived pricking and pain behind his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast; et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	I thought it was from the tip of the arrow. I applied a plaster with an attractive and digestive property to prevent swelling; and the area around the arrow became visible.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	I applied the plaster for several days, and reopened the wound again, and the patient remained in this condition for a long time, until he felt the arrow one day inside his nose; and he told me about it.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu; puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement; et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir; adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	I applied corrosive medicine to the wound for several days until it was open, and I examined it, feeling the tip of the arrow that was embedded in the place; then I continued to apply this corrosive medicine at the opening of the wound until the head of the arrow became visible. It took about four months before the edges healed enough so that I could clear the wound and place pincers inside but the arrow did not come out; then I kept trying various methods and instruments, until one day I managed to extract it with well-made pincers according to what will be described at the end of this chapter, and closed the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer: je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	And the physician judges that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored; I repaired it then, and the wound was sealed, and the patient was entirely healthy.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre; mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	I have told you about the quality of extracting some arrows, so that you place your care on what I do not say, for books cannot contain everything; but wise masters compare well with much knowledge, and upon what is present and lacking, they find new work, and new instruments at the descent of strange things which occur in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres: ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part; et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	I say that arrows exit from the limbs where they are embedded in two ways: either through the place where they entered, or through another part; and those that come out through the place where they entered are penetrating arrows, and sometimes come out immediately.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue; et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor; et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	And if it does not move now, leave it until the flesh around it is ripe and the opening is enlarged; and also if it is stuck in the bone, and cannot come out, leave it thus for some days, and soften each day; then it will move, and if it does not move, cut around it with a fine instrument until the area around it is enlarged, and then draw it out.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	And if the arrow is stuck in the bone of the head and goes to one of the ventricles of the brain, and any of the accidents that I have mentioned appear to the patient: do not draw it out, but leave it for some days until it is even, because if the arrow reaches the membranes, it is death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	And if the arrow is embedded only in the bone and does not reach the surface, and the patient remains safe for some days without further mishap, then attempt to remove it.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is deeply embedded and cannot come out, then administer hot applications around it, as I have told you; then treat the area until it is healed.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente; et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble; et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans; et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire; et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	And if the arrow is lodged in a place within the body where it cannot be seen, search throughout the tent for it; and when you find it, remove it with any suitable instrument; and if you cannot because of the tightness of the wound, and the depth of the arrow, and there is no bone, nerve, or vein, then cut so that the wound is large enough; and remove the arrow if you can, and if it has barbs holding it in place, remove the flesh from both sides as far as you can, and then break or bend the barbs so that you may pull out the arrow; and be careful not to break the arrow, which would make it harder to extract.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot do it at once, leave it until the area around it is rotten, then draw it out, for the extraction will be easier.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre; et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	And if the bleeding makes things difficult for you, then follow what we have said about the treatment in its chapter; and beware of cutting the nerve and the vein, and place a guide so that you can remove the arrow without danger, quickly or slowly, firmly or gently; and position the patient according to how they were when the arrow struck them, for this is the greatest help there can be, and if you cannot do this, then place them according to what the signs show you.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment: taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	The arrow that comes from another part, where it reveals something of itself, or the skin is swollen in such a way that it can be seen or felt clearly: cut above it, until pliers can grasp it, and then extract it: do this now.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is held in the bone, turn your hand round, until it enters the bone, and widen the bone, then draw it out.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer; et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust; et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	And if it cannot come out, leave it for now and then continue the extraction until it comes out; and if the shaft of the arrow is there, attach it to the entire shaft; and if the shaft breaks, and you wish to administer an instrument, attach the instrument tip first, so that the point of the arrow enters the thread of the instrument; and then push hard, and if the arrow is threaded, apply the instrument with a pointed end to facilitate the extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	And if the arrow is embedded, it is necessary that you cut away all the flesh around where the wound is, if you can, then treat the wound as is appropriate.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope; et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est; et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if the arrow falls on the foot or in the belly or bladder or ribs, and it is close to the surface, and you can cut over it; beware of cutting the vein and nerve, then extract it, and then stitch the wound if necessary; and treat it until it heals.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The shape of the pliers used to treat arrows is similar to the beak of a bird, and see here the form:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	And there are many kinds: large, medium, and small, according to the size of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	The shape of the hair needle is also like the quill of a bird, to insert at the tip of the arrow, as shown here is the form:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	the form of the pincers for inserting and holding is as follows:
des voinnes dou cors communes	of the common veins of the body
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir: II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»; et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans; et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»; et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis; et les II guindeges qui sont ou col; et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»; et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	There are thirty-one veins from which one can bleed to be cured, sixteen of them in the head, namely: two beating veins that are behind the ears and are called the two "herbech"; and the two arteries that are visible in the temples; and the two veins that are in the sockets of the two eyes, which are called "aspires"; and the vein that is on the forehead; and the vein at the top of the nose; and the two jugulars that are in the neck; and the two veins that are above the lips, and these are the veins called "augeherich"; and two veins below the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras: l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»; et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	The veins from which one usually draws blood are V in each arm: one is the cephalic, and it is on the left side, and the wise people call it "vein of the head"; and the middle one is called "femoral," and is composed of the cephalic and basilic, and the wise people call it "vein of the heart"; and the basilic is on the right side, and they call it the "vein of the belly" by the wise people, and it is above the fossa, and it is this one from which blood is usually drawn, which appears clearly on the wrist.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains; et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei; et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	And the saphenous vein is the one between the little finger and the ring finger, and it has II branches; and in the leg and foot there are III veins: one is below the curve of the left wrist, and the second sophene which is at the ankle of the right side; and the vein called "nexus," which is at the other ankle; and in the other leg are III veins below those.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine; et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief: quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche; puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues; puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee; et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	The bloodletting of the veins that are behind the ears helps with chronic catarrhs and headaches; and the quality of bloodletting, as I told you, is that you raise the patient’s head, and rub the area where the veins are with a rough cloth; then bind the patient's neck with a strip of cloth so that both veins become visible behind the ears: press them gently with your fingers where you feel the pulse under your thumb; then take the lancet and puncture just below the vein up to the bone, then lift your hand along the entire length of the vein, cut through both skin and vein well two digits deep, and let out as much blood as you wish; then press and tie it tightly until it is healed; I have already mentioned incision and cautery in the first book.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz; et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis: et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement; et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche; puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit; puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton; et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	The bloodletting from the two arteries that are in the two temples is good for chronic migraine, headache, and habitual ophthalmia with aqueous tears; and the quality of the bloodletting is as I say: it is that the patient tightens his neck so that the two veins appear clearly; and feel the pulse below your thumb, then cut into it; then lift the hand above the vein on top of your thumb index finger, and place the lancet underneath, and raise the vein up, and cut it, as you have done in the other two veins, and let the blood according to your necessity; then untie the patient, and put your thumb over the vein for an hour, then put cotton on it; and then tie it firmly, and leave it until it is healed; and we have spoken about their cutting and their extraction at the beginning of the book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor; et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere; puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	The vein of the forehead is worth as much as the cephalic vein in treating old facial diseases, and for migraines, and redness; and its quality is that the patient strains their neck by twisting it until the vein appears prominent; then take the instrument which is called “fosseur”, here is its form:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues; puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	And place the point on the vein, and press with your hand or something else, and let the blood flow according to the quantity you wish; then release the patient's neck, and tie the vein until it is secure, sometimes use a broad flame.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	Nevertheless, it is not appropriate for the flame to be too sharp; and the vein should be treated across, because the bone is nearby, and by chance, the flame might break when it is fine.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice; et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant; puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	The blood from the two veins that are in the two lacrimal bones helps with the eyes, and for tinea, and redness, and sties in the eye, and diseases of the face; and the quality of their blood is such that the patient compresses his neck by twisting some kind of ligature, as before; then let it bleed, and let the incision be transverse, a little long in flame shape a little wide, because there is no flesh.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if the incision is fine, it may break; then let the blood flow, as much as you need, and then bind it with cloth, and tie it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree; et c’est li forme dou flaime:	The blood from the vein of the nose is useful for fever, and for violent sores, and for diseases of the face, such as migraines and redness that comes to the face, especially when it is old; and the quality of this bleeding is that the patient compresses his neck, then presses his nose with your left hand, take a fine long incision, and place it in the space between the two nostrils, because the vein does not open well otherwise, and the blood will now begin to flow; do not go too deep, and let the blood flow according to your necessity, then bind it for one night, as it heals very quickly; and this is the shape of the incision:
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit; et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est; puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	The salve of the two guindages helps in the constriction of the alaine, and at the beginning of mixing, and for many diseases, and for empetigine, and corrosions, and herpes, and esthiomene; and the qualities of the salve are that the patient constricts his neck under each one, as we have said; and let the master be standing over the head of the patient, and the patient sit on a chair, then apply the vein from afar somewhat broadly, then draw some tempered blood, as much as is necessary; then do likewise in the other vein, then untie the bandage, and constrict all the veins moderately, so that the patient does not strangle; and leave it until morning, when the wound is healed.
de la sainie des leivres	of the treatment of hemorrhoids
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The treatment of veins in the lips also helps with ulcers in the mouth, and corruption of gums, and splits in the lips, and around the nose.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit; puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires: cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	And the quality of the treatment is to have the patient sit before you, and hold his neck as I said; then turn the lip, and look at the two veins, one on the right lip and the other on the left, and recognize them by their black color and by the small black veins around them: so cut each one, and if you do not know them, and are in doubt, cut the largest of each side, and do likewise with the two veins above and below, for it is the same method.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	From the salve remove the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche; et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire: saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	The salve for the veins that are under the tongue aids after the cephalic salve, and it is used in constricting the throat, and for eye diseases, and for mouth ailments; and the quality of the salver is that the patient urinates between your hands facing the sun, and lifts the tongue, and looks underneath on each side at a black vein: heal then one and the other, but do not go too deep, for below are the arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres: ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»; et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	The veins of the throat that are commonly treated are treated in two ways: by piercing with a flame-tipped blade wide and rough, or an olive-shaped fine one like cutting knives, and it is called "anesil"; and they are wide and fine according to the width and constriction of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The form of the small flame is very famous, and it is as wide as you see:
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble; et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	And it is necessary to use for opening veins that are full of thick visible blood, and which contain thick and turbid blood; and this is the form of the olive flame:
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	and it is finer in shape, and is used to treat fine veins, where there is fine yellowish blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre; et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	The basilic vein, which is one of these veins, helps in diseases that affect the throat, and the neck, and the chest, and the abdomen; and it is necessary for the healer to bleed carefully, and to be wary of the artery that is nearby.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit; et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	And if he cuts the artery, and blood flows out, it must be staunched, as I have said; and it should not be pricking at the flame but cutting as before.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre; ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement; et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	And if the basilica is not clearly apparent, then you must extract it and change another; where you wish to take some of it, or heal in its place the vein in the arm: it appears clearly; and cut with the flame as before, as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz; puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil; et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	And if you wish to know the place of the incision, then it is necessary that you extract the arm, touch the place until you feel the pulse; then mark the spot with a sign, and bind the arm, and cut the vein with the flame as before; and beware that you do not hit the artery when you see the area swollen, for this is from the artery: avoid it then.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere: haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient; se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see it spurt up like a child’s urine, and the blood is red and fine, know that this is arterial blood: hurry then, and press down for a long time, then remove your hand if the bleeding stops, which often happens; bind the arm, and leave it thus, and do not move it by the patient; be wary, and do not let him move it until he is healed.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	And if the bleeding is not stopped, and you are in trouble, and no medicines are present, then cut the artery if it is exposed, for stopping the flow at its source; and stop the bleeding.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor; se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc; et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	And take a strip of fig bark, and cut it, and apply one half to the wound firmly until the next day; if the bleeding stops, that is good; if not, treat it as we have said with powders that stop blood; and the bandaging should not be difficult in most cases for the small area of the wound, and the strength of the binding of the arm.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit; et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner; et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	The incision of the vein in the middle helps to drain blood from the head above and the body below, because it is composed of the basilic and cephalic veins, as we have said; and the surgeon must turn away for the nerve that lies underneath, and if he cuts too deeply, and finds the nerve, it swells and damages the healing process, and perhaps cannot be healed; this nerve is exposed many times, and if it does not appear in some people due to its subtlety, then you should treat it with an anaesthetic instrument; and avoid the nerve as much as possible.
Et se il a voinne entre les II ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if there is a vein between the two nerves, then make the incision lengthwise.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz; et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	The incision of the cephalic vein helps to drain blood from the head and aids the eyes; it is necessary to make an incision with a sharp olive or myrtle leaf blade, because it is the safest of all veins, as there is no nerve or artery underneath.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence; et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	However, it is necessary to find the most gentle place, and do not cause any harm even if you need to try for the first time, and then retry; and sometimes the area may swell at some people when trying for the first time, but it does not cause any harm.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of the salve is according to your thought.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir; et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique; et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent; et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	The first thing you must know about bleeding is that it should not be performed for any reason other than to maintain health and prevent future diseases; and the bleeding should be done in one of the three veins that are on the arm: namely, cephalic, basilic, and median; and it should be bled at the beginning of spring, autumn, and winter after eating, when signs of fullness appear; and it should be bled on either the first or third day, two hours or three into the day.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens; et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	The physician who treats diseases has no fixed hours, but must be available day or night, at all times and in any season; and it is not appropriate to treat children until they are fourteen years old, nor women carrying a fetus from the fourth month onward.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez LX ans.	One should not treat the elderly who have surpassed sixty years of age.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz; ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques; et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors; puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir; puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit; et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses; et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans; et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on; puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	And when someone wishes to be bled, in whatever manner, it is necessary that they cleanse their intestines with a mild enema if there is much retained feces, so that the veins do not draw harmful superfluities from the intestines; nor should one bleed those who are too full of meat, or drunk, whether pregnant or not, nor dropsical patients; and if you wish to bleed after colic pain, vomiting, diarrhea, frequent intercourse, labor, staying awake, and intense exertion, both physical and mental; then subdue the humors by food and drink and medicines if you have the ability; then take a bath, if nothing prevents it, to thin the blood, and bleed from the vein of the arm near the elbow, as we have said; and on that day, keep away from labor, sharp foods, and sexual intercourse, and similar things; be calm and joyful, and let the physician be higher than the patient being bled, and rub his arm two or three times, then loosen the bandage moderately, for if it is too tight, the blood cannot flow; then stroke the area with your hand until the veins swell and can be felt; then moisten the lancet with a little old oil, then place the thumb of your left hand on the vein below where you wish to bleed so that the vein does not move or slip when struck.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus; et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	For there are veins that behave like cords to the barber, and some are full of airiness, such that when one applies fire, it withdraws from heat, and thus one cannot open the vein; and if one works on the vein, the wound is too narrow, for this reason it is necessary that barbers be cautious in these matters.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if the vein is opened the first time, it is good; if not, then begin again a little below that place hastily, if the area is not swollen.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras: par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait; et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement; et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	And if the area is swollen and the patient is afraid, let him rest for one or two days, and do not bind his arm: perhaps soft abscesses will come; nor enter a bath, then begin the bleeding again if it pleases him; and if the opening is small, touch that opening directly with fire so that much blood comes out as you wish, but work quickly so the area does not swell; for this often happens when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile; et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc; et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	If you see the area swollen, do not restart the bleeding, and put a little poultice of oil on it, for it lightens the body of blood, and at this place the poultice of oil is soft; and thus administer the poultice of oil each time you bleed to stop the flow of blood; and similarly make triacle and boil them when you apply them to the area; it subtly thins the blood and disperses it when it is too thick.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre; et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie; et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	And if there comes a large abscess, which often happens, especially when the bleeding is not severe except at the time when the vein opening is small, hurry and put on the area a sponge moistened in water and salt slightly warm, and press it for an hour; and you must do this after the blood flow from the vein stops, and if after some days any blackness or greenish discoloration remains, it does no harm; and if you wish, apply something of aloes or myrrh dissolved in juice of calamint, mustard, or similar.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And many times an abscess and swelling occur at the base of the spine: place then your hand there, and if you find the area soft upon compression with the hand, it is that sign a bad one.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai I emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Avoid then placing anything of what we have said, for it may cut into the artery; but apply a dry poultice to harden the area, then treat with another treatment until it is healed.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And draw out blood from each person according to the quantity of its virtue and the color of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	For if the blood is black, let it flow until it becomes red; and if you see it thick, let it flow until it becomes thin; and if it is too warm, let it cool.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges; et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant; et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	And for the one who is full and strong, and needs bloodletting, make a wider incision, and let the flaps be wide; and for the weak one, do the opposite, and it is necessary to bleed them gently and frequently, and one must do this by cutting across, not deeply; and this method of bleeding saves from fainting due to loss of blood and damaging nerves, and is worth more than letting blood lengthwise or widthwise.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	And for the one whose body needs bleeding, give him moistened bread in pomegranate juice; if he is overheated, let blood three or four times. And if he has a cold constitution, give him moistened bread in muscat syrup, or aromatic honey syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chickpeas, and strongly fragrant syrup before bleeding.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	And if he faints after losing a lot of blood, it is necessary for him to drink broth of meat, and fragrant syrup, and use the other things that we have said in the section or chapter on syncope, for the evacuation of veins.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he wishes to bleed his arm and bleed again, it is necessary, when he is weakened by much bleeding, that he bleed little by little according to the quantity of his continued strength.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine VII houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And who wishes to bleed his arm after the first bleeding, and he has a strong body, should bleed seven hours after the first bleeding, or after the ninth hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And who wishes to bleed from another place should bleed on the second day or the third.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson; puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens; et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus; ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz; mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	For there is much blood within the body that is already heated, and it causes fever; thus much must be drawn off, and the passage widened until it flows freely; then when you fulfill all conditions of safety, and place your hand upon the pulse while it bleeds, that death does not come in its stead, for this often happens when the bleeders are negligent; nor should you press forcefully when you wish to loosen the arm and draw blood a second time, and the passage is closed; nor if it is curved, should you extend the arm quickly, for that would be worse; but leave it until it bleeds the second time; or you point with the tip of flame, until the congealed blood within the vein's opening exits, and place upon it a poultice of salt remixed in water, and press lightly upon it.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein is swollen, let it be and do not constrict it, until the abscess is appeased.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if it is necessary to draw blood a second time, do so from the same vein, or from another vein, or from the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein on the arm is bled in place of the head vein because it is well-composed.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges; puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc; et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez; et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit; et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	And the manner of bleeding is that the patient immerses their hand in warm water until it turns red; then wrap moderately so the vein swells well, then bleed now across, not from width nor length; and make the punctures wide, and bleed close to the joint of the hand, and if blood does not flow, immerse the hand again in warm water, and let the blood run in the water until you have enough; and if it is summer, do not bathe the hand in warm water, for it is done more often in winter than in summer; and bleeding from this vein is safer than all other veins, as there are no artery or nerve near it.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere: estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie; et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	The treatment of the right hand vein is valuable for all diseases of the liver, and this is the method: draw out the vein, and place it in hot water until it swells, if it can be seen; and if the blood flows sideways, and you cut it entirely across, it will cause no harm; and do not proceed too deeply, because the nerves are beneath completely bare of flesh, and then put the hand back into hot water, if the blood is congealed in the wound, and cannot flow out.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have drawn as much blood as is necessary, place the vein in oil and seal it quickly to stop bleeding, and do this for each incision.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The treatment of the left hand vein is valuable for diseases of the spleen, and do it exactly as I have told you for the right hand.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	The salve of the sophene is effective for all diseases that are below the body, such as ailments of the legs, retention of urine, and disease of the thighs, and old diseases of the knees and legs, and similar illnesses.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains; saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	And the qualities of its salve are such that the patient should pour some on the foot in hot water, and rub it onto the vein until it breaks out, and place it above the joint of the foot; and if the vein is at the ankle, and from above the foot there flow many veins; apply it then to the widest vein, or at the ankle, which is most effective.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you apply the salve on the foot, be careful of the nerves that are below, and apply it across as when cutting; and let the flame be slow.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if the blood cannot come out, place the foot in a bath of warm water, and let the vein be properly opened.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz; ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	And if the incision fails the first time, then start again slightly higher up, for the area is salty; do not worry about hitting a nerve, as we have said, and do this equally for the incision on the other foot.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The site for the sciatic vein is at the ankle on the inner side, and its incision relieves hip pain when it is due to hot blood.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant; et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	And the quality of its incision is such that the patient enters a bath, and presses four fingers above the ankle while twisting, for otherwise the vein will not appear; and if it appears, then cut it in all possible ways, including across; and be careful not to shave it, as the site is below, and it tends to reappear in many people.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners; et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	And if you do not find it, take a piece of linen from the place on the back of the foot and towards the little toe, and be careful of the nerves; and let the blood flow as much as you wish, then untie the bandage, and put on cotton and bind it tight; it is now healed.
des sainies de ventouse	cupping treatments
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc II manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Cupping devices are made of horns, or linen, or glass; and cupping is performed in two ways: one by drawing blood, the other without drawing blood.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu; et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col; et II autres en II costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton; et li ventouse des II espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies; et les ventouses emmi les II bras; et les ventouses des II jambes; et les ventouses des II chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne; et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	And this cupping without drawing blood is performed in two ways: either at all places or without fire; and the cupping done by drawing blood and extracting blood is performed on fourteen parts of the body: one is on top of the head; another is around the neck; two others are on both sides of the neck; one is under the chin; there are cups for both shoulders; there are cups above the kidneys; there are cups in both arms; there are cups in both legs; and cups in both ankles; and this cupping does not draw much blood, except from small veins scattered throughout the flesh, and therefore it does not weaken a person as bleeding does; and it is not necessary to perform it with or without fire on any disease caused by congestion until the entire body has been emptied.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens; car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief; et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz; et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc; et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	And if by necessity of illness it is necessary to bleed, or by custom, let us do it every hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and also in each period; for there are such people who, when they need to be bled, have a heavy head; and there are those who experience swelling and redness on their face, and on their head, and neck, and darkness in their eyes; and those who find a drop of blood in their mouth, and have swollen tongue, and cough up blood; and there are some who dream, and see by night blood and wounds and death and similar things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés III houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, especially at the end of the month, we instruct them to be bled after three hours of the day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors; et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement; et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	The massage of the temples helps with headaches that come from the eyes, and it should not be done after the evacuation of all the body; and this ventilation is in place of the cephalic massage, and should not be used by those who have a cold complexion or who suffer from catarrh, because it causes them great harm; and for these people, it should not be used, nor by those who have cold diseases in their head.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who frequently heal from it become forgetful, and for this reason the cupping should be placed a little lower due to the risk of forgetfulness.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion; et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	Cupping on the neck is in place of massaging the head and basilic areas, and it benefits those with tightness in the back, rib cage fractures, and general fullness; however, one should be careful not to apply too much pressure, as if it holds too firmly, it can cause forgetfulness or indigestion.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	The ventosation between the two ribs of the neck is effective for headaches, ophthalmia, and migraine, and for choking, and for pain at the roots of the teeth, and it is in the place of the basilic vein; and you must instruct the healer to apply pressure with his hand when placing it, so as not to cut the artery, and avoid bleeding.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des II levres.	The ventosation below the chin is effective for mouth diseases, and for gum infections, and similar ailments that are in the mouth; and it is at the location of the veins of the two lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The ventosation of the shoulders is effective for diseases that come from heat and congestion.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes; et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	The ventosation of the ribs is as effective as that of three veins of the arm, because it draws blood from these large veins; and instruct the healer not to press too hard in this place, for the area lacks flesh, and lies near nerves and arteries.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The suction cup placed on the rump is effective for hemorrhoids and diseases below, and it should be large, made of metal, as it requires strong suction; and if it were delicate, it might break; and thus it causes large wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des II sophenes, et des II chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	The suction cups on the legs are very effective, as they draw blood from the entire body, and are useful for chronic pains in the thighs, and of the bladder, and alleviate tumors; and they are placed at the two hamstrings, and at the ankles, and over time they weaken the body and cause fainting in various conditions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	The method of applying the suction cup is to first place it empty, then draw blood gradually, and apply it quickly, moving it evenly, without stopping until you see the area red and swollen, and the color of the blood bright; then stop, and reapply the suction cups, and be cautious about the condition of the body, because there are those who have thin flesh and clear pores: it is necessary to prick only once, and make large incisions, somewhat deep; and suck gently.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir II fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	And if the vein is thick, it is necessary to strike twice: the first time to make a path for the thick blood.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And if the vein is very thick, it is necessary to strike a third time; and when we want to draw blood slowly, we only pierce once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif: se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite; et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	And if we want a lot of blood, we start over often; and if the vein is thick, pierce deeply, and make sure that the incision is such that the patient feels it sharply, which is necessary for those with thick and hard skin and small pores, that you anoint the areas around suction cups with appetizing and dissolving oil: if it is in summer, violet oil, or almond oil, or cucumber seed oil; and if it is in winter, oil of chicory, or lily, or chamomile, or similar.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the excess is thick and cold, then take oil of ambergris, or balsam, or anise seed oil, and similar things.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	And if the person to be treated has tender skin and large pores, no oil should be applied; instead, they should be washed after ventosity with rose water, or cold water, or mulberry water, or cucumber water, or porcelain flower water, or similar.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And those who have much moisture should rise from a bath of water laced with myrtle, sumac, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans; et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	And those who have thick excesses should rise from old wine, or water of honey, or decoction of anise or chamomile, or similar; and it is not appropriate to treat with ventosity before the bath nor in the bath, but one or two hours after the bath; and do not sleep after ventosity, and it is necessary for them to exercise, when they should be ventosed and when they are ventosed.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez; si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses; et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	And watch if the person who is to be bled is choleric, and if the blood is too sharp and inflamed; then it is necessary that they take cold things, such as sour apples and endives and lettuce in the morning, and similar things; and eat thrushes, and meat of pike, and moist meats.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons; et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier; et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz; et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	And those who have a cold complexion should take syrup of honey, and sweet wine that is between old and new, and eat dove, and eat thrushes and small birds and pigeons; and on the day they will be cupped, they should drink more than they eat; and it is necessary to give some people occasionally triacle or nutmeg before cupping, or after, to comfort the principal members; and let the blood be subtle, but those who are hot should not drink it.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre; et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu; et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	The suction cups that are placed without cutting are those placed on the liver, and on the spleen, and for gout, and on the abdomen and stomach and intestines and thigh, because these limbs do not tolerate being cut, and we only use them to draw blood from one limb to another, as we place them on the breasts when milk flows; to remove the viscosity that is in the limb, just as we apply suction cups to the abdomen and stomach to reduce swelling; and they also relieve pain when there is a blockage or stone, removing it possibly by their attractive power, thus displacing the blockage or dislodging the stone from its place; and similarly when applied to the liver and spleen in cases of retained gas, these suction cups are administered empty for the purpose of sucking only; sometimes they are heated with fire together, and at other times filled with hot water, as in cases of pleurisy, and in such a way that the cup is filled with warm water or water in which suitable herbs have been boiled.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The form of the cupping vessel administered with fire is as follows:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre; et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent; car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	And it has two fingers wide and half a palm deep, and on the side there is one small hole, as if to insert a needle, and it should be made of brass, thin enough so that it does not burn the patient when placed on the limb; and in the middle there is a crossbar of brass or iron for holding a candle, and they come in different sizes, large and small, according to the diseases and age of those who use them; for cupping vessels for children are different from those for the elderly, and for thin people than for fat ones.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre: empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide; et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse; et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	And one should place this cupping vessel on the limb in the following manner: take a candle of wax or salve and put it inside the cupping vessel across the crossbar that is within it, so that the flame reaches the bottom of the cupping vessel without burning the patient; then place the cupping vessel on the limb with your two fingers over the hole we mentioned, so that when you want to do so, steam can escape and allow removal of the cupping vessel; then take the salve as before and repeat frequently if necessary.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement; et c’est li forme:	In the treatment of pleurisy with cupping, there is no rod or hole, and it is not applied except when it is full of fluid, and it is placed only on the limb; and this is the form:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus; et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans; et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren; et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres; et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues; et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	Cupping glasses are applied only to parts where cupping vessels cannot be placed due to their small size, such as lips and gums, and similar areas; and in bare flesh areas, such as the toes or nails, and other similar places; and when you find cupping glasses that are in mild fluids clear without impurities, take them; place them in warm water until they feel familiar, and ensure there is nothing inside their cavities; then let blood from a vein and use a cupping vessel, rub the limb until it turns red, and apply the cupping glasses; when they are full and fall off, if this area can accommodate a cupping vessel, place one, for it is very beneficial afterward.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint; et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés; et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez; ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant; et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	If not, lift the area of the wound, and then wash it with water, very well, and then press it; and if the blood clots too quickly around the wound, moisten a piece of linen in cold water, and place it on until the blood is absorbed; and if the bleeding continues, apply ground vitriol, or gallnuts, and similar things until it stops; or put half a handful of peeled beans on the area, and leave them until they heat up there, which will now stop the bleeding; and if you need more remedies, take other means to stop the blood.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent; et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	And if the clots do not want to form, rub the area with fresh blood, or insert a needle until the blood flows out, and then place them on, and as soon as they feel the blood, they will heat up; and when you see that they are dropping, sprinkle some aloes and frankincense powder, or ash, which will now make them fall.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	Here begins the book of fractures
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and it pertains to the restoration of fractures and dislocations.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent; et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin; et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie; et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	Know this, dear son, that the foolish physician falls away from this chapter, for they have never seen any of the ancient books or read any letter; and because of this, science is estranged in our land, for I have found no good one; and I know nothing except by the science of the ancient books, where I studied much to understand it, and through experience, and by the custom of my life; and I have clearly described in this chapter what is contained within, and abridged at the end, and shown clearly the forms of the instruments that are mentioned, as I have done in these two chapters before.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	It is therefore necessary that we say in the prologue of this book the outlines of the speech and the chapters where the wise man places his understanding, and remains on the truth, so that those who are experienced know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars; ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	I say that when a fracture or dislocation or twisting or injury comes to anyone, it is necessary that you hurry to heal the patient from both sides, if nothing prevents you, such as weakness of body, children, or elderly; or if the time is not very warm, or too cold; and eat cold things, namely cold broth, and meat of birds and kid, and do not drink wine, nor eat any fatty meats, and do not overfill yourself with foods that fill the veins with blood, until you have no doubt about a hot abscess or spreading matter in the limb; if the patient returns to his first proper treatment which he has used.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken bones begin to heal, it is necessary to nourish the patient with foods that promote thick nutrition, such as viscosity, like boiled wheat in water, rice, headcheese, feet, belly of fish, eggs, fresh fish, strong wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For such nutrition promotes healing and the broken bones will heal more quickly.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans; mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	And know that broken bones of the elderly and frail do not heal well or join according to their nature due to the dryness of the limbs, nor those who are too soft, such as the bones of very young children; but take care, reset the broken bone with a thick splint that holds the limb together until it strengthens as it was before; and do not hurry its work, and for this one must nourish them with hearty foods, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And know that fractures are diverse in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the fracture of the head is different from the fracture of the spine, or of the leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all manners of fractures.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there is a fracture that goes along the grain, and another against the grain, like the splitting of a quill for writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And there is a fracture with a wound, and a fracture with just a small crack.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu; et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main; et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure; mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	And each kind has its treatment and proper instrument in the restoration, according to what memory dictates; and a bone fracture is known by the deformity of the limb, and it appears clearly by swelling, and sounds hollow when pressed with the hand; and when there is no deformity or sound upon pressing, and the patient does not feel great pain, then there is no fracture; but there may be some twisting, or crack, or minor fracture.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	It is not necessary to move it with your hand, but place the medicines that come next, and then gently press it now.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne; et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez; puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	And know that the fracture that goes into the bone, and are the two parts disjointed, they must now be set equally, so that if there are soft abscesses it does not come; and if soft abscesses do come, leave them for some days until the abscess is healed; then place it equal to the movement you can gently and wisely, and know that the restoration of this one is lighter than the restorations where pieces are present; then press it as required hereafter.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main; et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor; et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	And if there are bone pieces broken into two parts, whether it is a hand or foot, or use your hands for smaller members, or use two cords, or one cord and your hand; place the member according to its natural shape, so that when the parts of the fractured member are separated, reset all attachments in their places as you can move them, and ensure that through your work no injury or pain comes to the patient; and join the two ends of the bones according to the best forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	And you can feel well with your hand if it seems to you that it is not right: so straighten it properly, and do not pull too hard, nor press as those do who cause by their work a hot abscess and contraction of the limb, as we have seen many times.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere; et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	And when the limb is properly set, instruct the patient well not to move it, neither while awake nor asleep, nor in turning, nor in any other way; and ensure that the limb is so secured that it does not feel any pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor; et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez; et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	For when it feels any pain, it is not properly set, and it must be placed in such a condition that it does not feel any pain; and guard against it being improperly aligned so that no curvature comes about when it is restored; and the quality of the broken limb depends as I tell you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	Know that broken limbs are diverse in smallness and largeness and in form.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz; et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche; puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure; et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet; puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus; puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	For there are small limbs, such as arms and thighs: they must be bandaged with soft and thin linen cloths; and those that are large, such as the thigh and leg: they should be bound with a broad and hard cloth, for wide bands encircle the entire large limb evenly, so that there is no gap; then wrap around light wadding, three or four times according to the limb, and tighten your hand slightly all over the bandage, then go above the break and tighten it less, so that the break moves away a little from the break; and soften the bandage little by little until you cover most of the healthy area, then take another bandage, and wrap around again over the broken area; then return to the part below the break, and tighten moderately, neither too hard nor too loosely, as we have said in the first chapter above; then place between the bandages wadding made of linen or cloths until it is all even, then tie everything with a strip, and then put your well-made splints on if there is no abscess or swelling.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors; puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	And if there is swelling or an abscess, place a heat-soothing poultice that reduces the swelling, and leave it like this for several days; then incise over your wires, and let them be half the width of a finger, or from wood used to make combs, or from palm ribs, and they should follow this figure:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres; et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor; puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure; plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol; car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	but it is necessary that the wire placed over the fracture be slightly thicker and wider than the others; and let it also be as long as required by the size of the limb whether small or large; then incise over the wires just as you did for the first layer, then apply a thread to go around, as on the first layer over the fracture; the tighter above, the looser below; and it is necessary that the threads be medium-sized, neither too thick nor too thin, and should be of soft flax; for if the threads are thick, like I mentioned regarding the work of fools who make their ligatures from twisted linen cords, and this is a great error, because the ligature cannot be equal if it is too fine, and it does not suit at all that there be less than two fingers' space between each wire.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is pierced by the points of the stars after they have been tightened in their places, then place underneath them lint balls, or wool rags, so that they do not become loose.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is with the breaker, and the bone is broken, I will describe the treatment hereafter.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And you must know that it is not appropriate to extract all the broken members with splinters on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant; et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	For when the limb is large, it is not appropriate to place splints before 5 days or 7, or more according to your judgment of a hot abscess that might arise; and here you see the manner of ancient plasters for restoring fractures, dislocations, and twists: which is that you take flour that is kept at the walls of the mill, and mix it abundantly with eggs, and apply this mixture, neither too thick nor too thin, and use it, and this is the common method of a plaster for restoring fractures in various conditions, especially for women and children, because it is not too hot nor too cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana V З.; alechil VIIII З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Another way to make a plaster restoring fractures and dislocations and twists: take benzoin and storax and enule and asafoetida and gum arabic and mastic, each X drams.; myrrh and aloes, each V drams.; alembicated vinegar IX drams.; and make powder, and mix with egg white; if the constitution of the person is hot, use this plaster, for it is well composed, and hastens the healing of broken bones, and benefits many people.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.; acaice VI З.; bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Another way to make a plaster for twists: take mastic and wild spikenard, each X drams.; myrrh and aloes, each IX drams.; acacia VI drams.; Armenian bole X drams., and grind well, and mix with water or egg white, and administer it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	Another way to make a poultice for joints and bones out of place, and to ease the pain that occurs, and the wear on the bone, and fractures: take new wool, moisten it in oil and grease, and apply it to the area.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	This poultice does not heal, but it is good for soothing a hot abscess and properly alleviates the pain.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another way to make a poultice that heals broken bones: take dried fig leaves and herb leaves, grind them together, and make a poultice.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	Another way to make a poultice for the healing of a broken bone and to reduce the remaining abscess.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Take root of vervain, chamomile, violets’ flowers, flour of oats, of each one part; and grind, and mix with wine, and if the limb is heated, mix it with moist coriander water, or with water, and use it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	Another way of making an ointment stronger than the first one, when a hard abscess comes during the restoration of the limb.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Take roots of vervain, and seeds of flax, bastards, hellebore, and fennel, and flowers of violets and chamomile, of all an equal part; and grind, and mix with salt water, or sweet water, or with wine, according to the heat of the limb, and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Hippocrates states in his book that one should not place anything on a broken limb to restore strength except for cerote made of wax and oil, and nothing else, and he says it should be neither too hard nor too soft.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And Galen seems to suggest that for restoring a broken limb, dry and slightly warm things should be applied, such as myrrh, aloes, and incense, and similar things, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another plaster that is good for injuries and pain: take mutton suet and human hair cut into small pieces, or bird feathers, and sage, in equal parts, and grind them together, then make a plaster with it.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor; puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut; et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then loosen it a little after that, and be careful if the patient does not feel any pain or if the bone is not in place; do not loosen it by hand for several days. And if pain comes to the area, or itching, without rest or swelling, hurry and loosen it, and remove the plaster now; take a light cloth, and sponge from the sea soaked in water, and apply it to the area until the itching stops, and the pain is eased; then let the limb rest for an hour, then put on dry wool soaked in water or rose oil, and tie it up with a bandage, until you are sure of a hot abscess; and treat the inflammation of the limb, and remove the pain, then restart the gentle wrapping, and a little plaster, and do not tighten it as much as before; and gradually until he is healthy.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that the abscess is red and swollen and painful and has been thoroughly cleaned of all matter, and you need to apply an emplastrum and linen, then do so as you did first equally.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII; et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus; adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir; arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure; par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	And if nothing happens to the limb as we have said, do not attempt to dislocate it until after three days or four or five or seven; and sometimes leave it for twenty days, according to what you see, until the swelling subsides and the flesh around the joint heals; then reset it more firmly than before, and fatten up the muscle as I said earlier; if you see that the area is drying out too much beyond necessity, understand that no new tissue can grow there; soak it with warm water every third day when you dislocate it, and loosen the bandage slightly; through this work, you prevent new growth in the limb, and correct quickly what foolish physicians do, who reset the limb prematurely: this is wrong, and such practices are dangerous, and I see no other remedy but to wait and treat properly.
des diverses manieres de brisure	Of various manners of fracture
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees; car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	There are many manners of fractures and diverse figures, and the causes are distinct; for there are fractures made by the blow of a sword, where the neck removes all the bone up to the spongy part that is inside the bone, as if it were hewn from a staff; and therefore this manner of fracture is called "haichure".
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces II brisures grans ou petite.	When the sword strikes the bone from above without piercing it, this manner of fracture is called "absolute"; and the wound from these two fractures is large or small.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is an embedded blow, or split by the edge of a stone, or falling upon a stone, or other similar causes.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is a fracture that approaches the membrane below the bone, whether it is on or near the bone, and this wound is either large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»; et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	And if there is a wound in the bone as fine as a hair, and the fracture is small, and for this reason it is called a "capillary" fracture; and if the wound is made by being hit with a stone, or by falling, or similar things, and causes a piece of bone to enter below, and the place where the injury occurs resembles how blacksmiths work when they hammer on their anvils; then a stone enters inside.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant; et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	And this happens more often to those who have moist bones in their head, such as the head of a child; and in all these types of fractures small pieces are separated like splinters; and I will speak about them in their place.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And we recognize all types of fractures by the depression above them, and by inquiry with probes, and by the corrupted flesh that is on them.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The hair-like appearance is known by this: when the bone has been exposed and rubbed over it, the fracture appears distinctly black.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of the fracture, be cautious of the signs of the patient's condition, and if you see any bad sign, such as vomiting bile, loss of consciousness, convulsions, fainting, feverishness, the eyes protruding and reddening, and other similar conditions in many dispositions, then healing cannot occur without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see any terrifying sign and hope for recovery, then begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the wounded person first comes to you, and it is in winter, then remove the bone before the fourteenth day from the wound that you may.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is in summer, then hurry to remove the bone before the seventh day, so that the tissue under the bone does not become corrupted, and the accidents we have mentioned do not occur.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset; et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	And if the fracture of the bone reaches the tissue that covers the brain, then it is necessary to cut the affected part as follows: take the head of the injured person and expose the bone in all ways possible, and around the wound area as deep as you can. If blood seepage or abscesses occur upon exposing the bone, treat them accordingly with appropriate aid; fill the area with cloths soaked in rose oil; let the wound rest until the superficial abscess is alleviated and ensure there is no further bleeding; then begin to remove around the bone, and this is done according to two methods of work: one method is to cut closely along the edges before proceeding, which is the form:
Et puis i boute I autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then you make another incision larger than the first one.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And the second method is that you have various incisions of different sizes, some narrow and others wide, and they should be pointed, and made of iron; and work gently, so as not to injure the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou I cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des III manieres de tareres:	And if the bone is hard and protruding, you must pierce around it, thus administering incisions with trephines, not completely so that they do not penetrate beyond the skull bone, and should have above the point a margin or circle, which does not allow the point to go beyond the bone; and you must have several, each coming in its place according to the thickness of the bone, so that you have trephines for the entire head; and this is the form of the three types of trephines:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes I tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	The quality to pierce around the broken bone is that you place one needle on the bone, and turn it until you know the bone is pierced; then move the needle a little way off, and do this all around, then cut with your scalpel the space of the bone which is between the holes, and do this as carefully and lightly as we have said, until you pull out the bone in your hand, or with some tool that you have such as pliers, tweezers; and be careful not to touch the brain or the dura mater.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire; et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	And when you have pierced and extracted the bone, it is necessary to remove any remaining pieces that adhere to other tools similar to a scalpel, but they must be thicker and more delicate than the regular scalpel; if there are small bones or scales left behind, carefully remove them with your tools; then treat the wound with dressings and ointments as we have described.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And the other manner of work is that which Galen says, who is more skilled; and he praises it greatly, and this is his word.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is necessary first that you expose a part of the bone where the fracture is visible, so that when you have uncovered this part, you place below the head of this chisel, which has the following shape:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz; s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	And do not cut from one side, and the part is beveled on two sides, so that the cutting edge faces the bone; then strike gently with a small mallet, so that you cut around the bone lightly, and take great care of the tissue beneath; if it is loose on the bone, remove it gently, as it can be removed without harm and without fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the bone fracture does not penetrate through to the skin, and the bone is merely cut from above, with small pieces present, then you must remove them behind the roughness, and scrape off the scales using a fine rasp of which you should have various sizes, according to the work and the shape of the fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	Start with large rasps and then use finer ones, and do not stop using them until it is well done.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	In each of the other hair cuts and fine fractures, you must treat them according to their nature; and this is something that cannot be taught to one who has not studied this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie; puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement; et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication; et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	And if the sinus is exposed, then you should take a piece of linen according to the size of the wound, and moisten it in rose oil, and place it over the wound; then take another double layer of cloth and moisten it with wine and rose oil, and place it on top of the first piece of linen; do this gently so as not to burden the sinus, then cover it with another bandage loosely enough that it just covers the wound; leave it like this for one or two days until the swelling subsides, then remove it and apply medicines such as lily root, wheat flour, powdered incense, iris root, and similar things; make a powder from these substances and apply it to the wound, then treat with cleansing medications without causing irritation; ensure that the wound remains clean and do not leave ointment or allow pus to accumulate, for when pus accumulates on the membrane of the brain, it becomes inflamed and causes great harm; because when irritating substances are placed on the sinus, they ferment above.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Therefore, take care if any bad accident happens to the patient, as we have said, it is doubtful without doubt.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac; puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if blackness appears other than from the medicine applied to it, which has such properties, then you should take one part honey and three parts rose oil, and apply a cloth soaked in it; then cure it in ways necessary until he is well.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les II parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont II os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	Know that sometimes the two parts of the nose above are broken, or only one part, because they are two bones; and the lower one is made of cartilage, and does not break but can be pushed or twisted, and then heals.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil; et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	And if one of the two parts is broken, then you should insert your little finger or probe into the nostril and align the fracture with your finger inside, and at the opening carefully, so that the nose regains its natural shape; and do this gently, and be careful that the patient does not feel pain from your work.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the fracture is above the nose, and the bone cannot come to its place, then it must be set equal on top of a thin rail or stick.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues; se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	And if the fracture is in two parts, treat it similarly, and hurry to restore it on the first day if you can; if not, after seven or ten days when the swelling has subsided, then place tents of linen over the nose where the fracture is.
Ou tu boutes I autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	Place another on the other side where the fracture is; and let the tents be thick enough to fill the openings of the nose.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	And some healers say that the tents should be moistened with butter and changed each day.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	It does not seem right to me, but they must be moistened with a preparation of egg whites and powdered flour; then leave the dressing on until the bone is hard and the cartilage is firm.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a I souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And sometimes one inserts goose feathers instead of dressings, and if there is any underbandage around it, and it holds the dressing in place, and the patient blows through them; do as you wish.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en I poc de dyaquilon.	And if abscesses occur in the nose while you are working there, apply cerate or cotton moistened with rose oil, or a poultice of myrrh.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis; et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu; et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if no abscesses occur, apply an external plaster made of fennel flour and powdered frankincense, cooked with egg whites, then place light plugs inside but do not tie up the nose; and if the fracture of the nose is small, and it is broken into small pieces, extract them with suitable instruments, then suture the wound, and treat with flesh-growing and healing substances such as plasters and ointments suitable for this purpose; and if there are no wounds inside the nose, treat it with dressings, and place strips of cloth, until it is healed.
de la routure de la mandibule	Of the fracture of the jawbone
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the mandible is fractured away from its socket, and there is no wound to open up, and the fracture is only superficial, and it is not broken into two pieces, except possibly by small splinters inside, one can easily recognize this.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	If the fracture is on the right side, you should place your index finger in the patient's mouth; and if the fracture is on the left mandible, use your right hand's index finger, gently insert it into the fracture from the outside, and support it with the other hand to make it even.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en II, si covient que tu aministres extension de II pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the jaw fracture is displaced in two parts, you must administer an extension to both sides until they are equal.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus I drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And if the movement of the teeth occurs, or a fracture, then pull them with a gold, silver, or silk thread, then place on the broken mandible wax, and put on it a double cloth; and place on the cloth a large well-made splint, or a piece of leather equal in length and width to the mandible, and tie it securely as you can, and instruct the patient to rest, and eat light food.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en III semainnes.	And if you see that the figure changes, then undo it on the third day and then correctly place what has changed; and apply a poultice of mill powder with plenty of egg or sesame flour after removing the wax; and put light wool over the poultice, and if the poultices hold and the patient's condition does not change, leave it until he is well; many times he will be well in three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if abscesses occur, then treat them as we have said many times.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is both a fracture and a wound, examine whether any piece of the bone has been removed; then carefully remove it with appropriate instruments.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, then widen it with flame according to your necessity.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus I des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have removed all these pieces and none remain, then sew the wound if it is wide, and place suitable plasters on it to promote flesh growth until it is healed.
de la forcele	of the strength
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc III manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en II, et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	The collarbone breaks several times in front of the shoulder, and the fracture is according to three manners: where it is broken and separated into two parts, there are fragments, and this is the easiest to restore; where there is a fracture with a wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies II ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And the work is such that when the fracture is without a wound, you should have two assistants, so that one holds the shoulder where the collarbone is broken; and the other extends the neck towards the affected part; then set the fracture straight with your hands, so that its form is as it should be, and there is neither misalignment nor displacement.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if you need to extend it further, place under the patient's shoulder a round ball of cloth or wool, and make it thick according to your necessity; then stretch and lift the collarbone, and hold the ball with your hand, so that you set the fracture straight as it should be.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule I oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot pull the head of the humerus out due to its position, then the patient should lie supine on his back, and place a medium pillow under the shoulder, and the assistant should push down the shoulder until the bone of the humerus is raised.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	Then align the fracture with your hands, and if you find it fragmented, then you must cut into it; pull apart the pieces gently, and if the bone cannot join due to any elevation, cut it with one of your knives; but place this instrument under the humerus to protect the surface.
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os; et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	And it resembles a spoon, and is not made of hair, and should be as wide as necessary according to the size of the bone and the strength of the work; and let it have two edges, as you see, with one being broad and the other narrow, like the shape of the wound you made when you pulled apart the bones; and when you are sure there is a hot abscess, sew up the wound, and if the opening is small, where you suspect a hot abscess, pack the wound with cloths and tents according to its size.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille I drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if abscesses come there, moisten the cloth in rose oil and honey and place it on.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier; puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant; et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint; et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors; puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	The treatment of the bone when there is no wound and no incision is that you place on the bone the plaster made from mill powder and egg albumen, and put light wool over it; if necessary, place a ball under the armpit. Then take a very wide bandage about one palm in width, then place double cloth and the plaster over the wool. Take a slender stick three fingers wide and long, wrap the bandage around it so that the ends of the bandage hang down. Place the stick across the fracture and wind the bandage around the neck, under the uninjured shoulder and under the injured shoulder. Tighten each part individually until you see that the ligaments hold the fracture in place clearly without the stick moving on the broken bone; then check it daily, when the ligaments loosen, retighten them. Have the patient lie on their back and place a small roll under the armpit while they sleep to lift the shoulder up; this will ease the force of the fracture by lifting the shoulder, where you tie the arm to the neck. Do not untie it unless an unfortunate accident occurs, until twenty days have passed. Then reapply the plaster if necessary and continue restraining it until healing is complete; it takes about twenty-eight days or less for some people.
de la brisure de l’espaule	Of the fracture of the shoulder
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en xxv, Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	It seldom happens that the shoulder is broken either wide apart or in the middle, and it can only be known by touch; then set it according to the shape of the break, and reset it according to its natural form, in all ways you can; then put on the place powder from the mill with plenty of egg, and light bandages; then put a broad and fine splint over it, a little wider than the shoulder, and if the splint has any gaps anywhere along the shoulder, fill those gaps with linen bandages so that the splint lies evenly; and then bind it tightly all around with a large bandage, so that the splint does not move from its place, and check the binding each day; whenever it loosens, tighten it again, and ensure the splint is in place if it has moved; let the patient lie on their side; and the shoulder will be restored in twenty or twenty-five days. And when this number of days is complete, loosen it, and be sure, for this bone does not easily go back to its proper position lightly.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a piece of the bone protrudes and sticks out from near the heart, cut it off, and do as we have said regarding the breaking of the collarbone to treat a hot abscess.
de la brisure dou pis	of the fracture of the heel
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer.	The foot is sometimes broken in the middle, but this happens rarely; however, it often breaks at the side.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	And when it is broken in the middle, it inclines to one side, and the patient feels great pain, and lacks appetite, and sweats, and by chance vomits blood, and the movement of the bones in the fractured area can be clearly felt.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met I cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des II costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en I drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is such that the patient lies supine on their back, and a cushion is placed between the shoulders, then press the shoulders, and bring together the ribs of both sides with your hands, and carefully align them evenly in all ways possible so that the shape of the bone is as it should be; then apply plasters and bandages made from fine salt or other light materials over the broken area, and wrap a cloth around it to ensure it does not move; then tie the bandage tightly around the back, securing it gently, and check every hour the binding, and if it loosens, tighten it again; and if it needs to be untied due to corrosion or itching that occurs in the area, or pain or abscess, act quickly and undo it, remove the plaster, and address what has come about from this method of treatment; then reapply the plaster and secure it firmly until it is healed.
de la brisure des costes	Of the fracture of the ribs
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	Know that the fracture of the ribs comes from force only at their thick parts behind, and at the front, and they break easily because they are hollow; and one feels this well upon examination with both hands.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And the remedy is to place the fracture in alignment as it should be.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	And then apply the plaster, and bind it with a splint if you need to.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And if the fracture of the ribs inclines inward, the patient feels great pain and piercing, as with pleurisy, because the bone pierces the membrane; and they sweat blood, and vomit much clotting blood, and this is a serious condition, and the elderly often suffer greatly from it.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And there are those who say that it is necessary to administer foods that inflate the belly, to expel the rupture outward.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not do this so that abscesses may not come, if they have not already come.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if they have come, then heal them.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And some say that one should place suction cups on the area to draw out forcefully, and this seems reasonable; nevertheless, there is doubt whether the suction cups will attract the excesses to the site due to the disposition of weakness.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And some say that one should cover the area with wool soaked in hot oil, and place tents between the ribs to make the dressing even, then treat it according to the treatment for pleurisy, with food and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient feels great pain that they cannot bear from the bone that pierces the skin, and there is doubt for the patient, then it is necessary to cut into the place of the broken rib, and put an instrument underneath to protect the surface; and then one must cut the bone lightly, and then sew together the two edges of the wound if it is large, and treat with plasters until it is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if hot abscesses come, then place cloths moistened in rose oil on it; and treat the area as needed for an abscess, and let the patient lie on their side where it is necessary, until they are healed.
de la brisure dou col	of the fracture of the neck (or collarbone)
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	Sometimes there is a fracture of the neck bones, and it can happen that they bend; and likewise with the spine.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	And when this happens to someone and you want to know if they will recover or not, observe if you see their hands become soft, swollen, and dead-colored, and cannot move or extend them, and when you prick them with a needle, they do not feel it.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	Know that it is mortal in many cases, and if they move and feel well when they are pinched and pricked, know that the joint of the bone is safe, and that the patient can be treated, if proper care is applied.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	And if a similar thing happens to the spine, and you want to know if they will recover or not, observe if their feet become weak, and if the symptoms are like those in the hands, and on the back there is bloating and involuntary defecation; and when one turns them over onto their belly, there is also involuntary defecation.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	And when he is lying on his back and wants to sit up, he cannot.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	Know that it is deadly: therefore do not labor in its treatment.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if these accidents do not happen to him, then the matter is lighter.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the treatment is that you should apply it if there is a hot abscess, then put on the spine oil of roses or egg yolk oil until it is calmed; then place one of the comforting and drying plasters, and bind it with a cloth, and instruct the patient to rest; and do not let him sleep on the part where he feels pain until he is healed.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if any bone breaks, it is necessary to cut above the heart; remove the bone, then sew together the two edges of the wound if it is large, with a suture, and treat it with an ointment that promotes flesh growth until it heals; and if the head of the bone is broken, which is called the "head of the knee," place your fist in it to make it equal to the other hand as much as you can, then apply the plaster and bandage if needed; then compress it, and if there are any separated bones, cut them away and remove them, and treat the wound until it is healed.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	of the fracture of the hip bone
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	It rarely happens that the hip bone is broken, and if it does happen, there is usually only a little reduction in length; they cut along its course, and it inclines towards the middle, causing pain to the patient at the site, and bruising, and swelling where it is broken.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And the restoration is that you extend your hand upon it, so that you are on the fracture; and recognize what the fracture is and its shape; and if the fracture is only at the head, then make equal that fracture, so that it has a natural form.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the fracture is long, where it inclines inward, then have the patient lie on their stomach, so that the restoration of that fracture can be prepared.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	And when you have made it equal, then apply the plaster, and place a stick or board over it, and secure the fracture so that it does not move; and wrap the area below the ribs, so that the limb is even.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And instruct the patient to sleep on their healthy side or on their back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And if painful swellings occur, do not touch them until the painful swellings have subsided, and then apply what we said before; and then return to restoration, and bind it as is appropriate, if there are no adverse incidents; and this is the method.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	of the fracture of the shoulder
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des II manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren I fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The shoulder is that which is between the collarbone and the top of the shoulder, and if it is fractured, it should be restored according to one of two methods: one of which is that you take a stick filled with herbal poultice, in this form:
Et lie as II chiés II liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus I siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	And tie the two shoulders with two bands, and lift them up, and seat the patient on a chair; then throw his broken arm onto the body until it reaches the armpit, and place in between a curved piece of wood, then lift up some heavy object where the assistants extend downward; then have the physician align the fracture level with his hands so that the fracture returns as it should.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a II ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout I liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And another way is to lay the patient on his back, and tie the hand to his neck, then instruct two assistants that one hold the part above the fracture with their hands, and the other hold below the bandage, and each extend at their own part.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	And if you wish for the extraction to be stronger, then tighten one bandage below the fracture and above it, and each of the assistants extend at their own part.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the break is near the top of the shoulder, you must place one bandage underneath the armpit and another towards the side, under the break; and similarly, if the break is towards the side, you should lightly apply a bandage without labor until the break is level on its place, and on the side; then set the break as it should be, and compress it, unless harmful abscesses come from it.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a VII jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	And if harmful abscesses appear, do not compress them for VII days, and place linen soaked in lard and rose oil on it until the harmful abscesses are calmed; then compress it, and the method of compression is that you apply a poultice to the break, then bring the arm up to the shoulder, and put your hand on the shoulder or breast; and cover with a cloth, and bind over the shoulder, and over the arm, so that the arm is in place of splints, unless something prevents it, or if the bone has moved.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele I doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure III dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	And if you doubt that the bone does not move, use splints, and place above the fracture a splint wider and stronger than the others, and have between each splint one thumb's width space, and let each splint be so large that it passes beyond the fracture three thumbs' width on each side; then pull up on the splints as I said at the beginning of the chapter about the fracture, more forcefully and less in spreading apart.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	And if you see the placement of the splints and the binding as we have said, while you restore the broken limb, and you fear an abscess may form, leave it tied up until the seventh day, as we have said; then check the bandage every three days to ensure no itching or swelling occurs at the site, where the new tissue cannot grow due to it being too tight.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	If it is reduced, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	And if no such accident occurs, do not attempt to dislocate it again until after three days or more, and have the patient sleep on their back with their hands on their stomach; place a cushion filled evenly with wool under the shoulder blade, and check every hour of day and night that the figure of the broken limb does not move or weaken its ligaments; reduce it by the power of medicine, and give them the food we mentioned earlier, in such a way that the food is initially very fine; and when they begin to recover, let the food be more substantial.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	And it is customary that the shoulder and the leg should be reset over forty days in total; and then they must be dislocated and administered baths and ointment medicines to heal the area.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	And if the constriction is tight and stuck, then wait one day or two months.
de la brisure du bras	of the fracture of the arm
Li bras est compos de II os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the two "forearm" bones, of which one is small, and it is the one near the wrist; and the other is large, and it is the one below, towards the little finger; perhaps only the larger forearm bone is broken, or the smaller one, and sometimes both together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	When the smaller forearm bone is broken, the restoration and healing are easy; and when the larger one is broken, the healing is difficult, and worse than when both are broken together.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	If it is the small phalanx that is merely broken, then it must be gently extended, and placed evenly.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	And if it is the large phalanx, then it must be more forcefully compressed; and place him on a cushion, and elevate the pouch of the hand higher than the others, and the small one lower than the other two, and let the patient lie crossed over himself, and the cushion in front of him raised so that the patient does not suffer any labor; then extend the practitioner's arm to the part below his hand, or at the joint, and another practitioner above.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And then place the bone evenly, according to its natural form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if there are multiple fractures, place each piece in its proper place, and if any are displaced causing pain to the heart, and you cannot restore it to its place, then cut them out and remove them, as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if with the trepanning for wounds, I have spoken of it in a separate chapter; then take that treatment.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	And if in the beginning of the restoration abscesses occur, apply a strip of cerate made from rose oil and white wax, which should not be too hard or too soft; and place this strip gently, until the hot abscesses are eased.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	And then remove the cerate and apply a plaster made from mill powder with plenty of egg, then place the strips, and make sure the strip over the trepanning site is slightly thicker and a bit wider than the others; and note that there should be six strips for the arm in various positions: whether on one bone or two; and hold it tighter over the trepanning site than elsewhere, gradually decreasing as I said at the beginning of the chapter; and ensure that the cloths covering the trepanning site are soft and moist, not hard or rough; and let the thread from which it is made be of linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have stated.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And examine the limb and its joint after several days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	And if any bad accident happens to the limb, such as itching that comes to the limb, then it is necessary to rinse the limb with hot water until the itching subsides; and allow the limb to rest without being too tight.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And then restart the compression, and if the joint is weakened and the bone dislocated, or similar issues, address them.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses I poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if the swelling cannot reach the limb because it is too tight, then you should loosen it slightly, and leave it like this for several days until the swelling can flow, and then compress it again.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	And if none of these things we have said come to the patient, do not undo them until twenty days have passed.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	When it is around the neck, then he can hold his hands to his neck, and let his necks be even, and beware of movement and stretching, and sleep on his back; and know that this fracture is restored in thirty days or thirty-five, or perhaps in twenty days, according to the compositions and the constitutions of the virtues.
de la brisure de la main	Of the fracture of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	Know that on the back of the hand and the sides there are few fractures, and mostly it becomes a sprain many times.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en I drapeil de lin.	And when the palm of the hand is fractured or sprained, it is necessary that the patient sit with their legs crossed and sit upright facing straight ahead; then place his hand on a stretched cloth, and the attendants should extend the broken bones and make them even, until they are well aligned; then apply a plaster and bandages, unless an abscess appears, and then place a splint according to the size of the area; wrap it in one piece of linen.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	And if the fracture is in the middle part around the palm of the hand, make a sphere of bandages, and instruct the patient to wrap it around his fractured hand; then bind with a long strip, and let the pad under the hand be as large as the palm of the hand, and bind it, as is appropriate.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the fracture is on the side, you must place a pad above and another below the palm, so that the hand remains open and straight, then bind it tightly around the hand, and secure the binding between the two pads.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en I tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	And if the fracture is in one of the two bones that form the wrist, if it is a crushed bone, place them evenly as is appropriate; and bind it with the palm, and if you wish, place a small straight pad to lift the fractured part, so it does not move; and if the fracture is in any other bones, such as the index finger or another, place them evenly, and bind it with the healthy bone next to it; or bind all of them together as they fit, or place a pad under them like for a crushed bone; be careful during restoration and in dealing with hot abscesses, and support whoever comes to you, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	of the broken thigh
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie I liien desus la briseure, et I autre desoz.	The bone of the thigh is often broken, and this can be seen when it turns frontward and backward; and the restoration is such that one ligament must be tied above the break, and another below.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And the patient lies on their back, then each assistant extends his ligament equally on either side; and this is when the break is in the middle of the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	And if the break is near the root of the thigh, then one of the ligaments should be towards the groin, and the other ligaments below the break.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	And if it is near the knee, then the ligaments should be near the knee, and the extension downwards; then place the bone evenly with both hands, as it would naturally align, and then apply the plaster, and bind it, unless abscesses arise.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	And if there is a hot abscess, let it subside before returning to your work and treatment; the healing occurs in such a manner.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	You should wrap the fracture with a thick bandage in two or three layers, and remove any excess material; then position the leg so that the heels align with the base of the calf, and insert a long thread between the thigh and the leg just below the knee, with the end of the thread above; then wind the bandage around the leg and thigh, place splints over the fracture; then fill the space between the leg and thigh with soft fabric to ensure even compression, then begin tightly binding three or four times across the fracture; as you move further up from the fracture, bind less tightly; then tie off at both ends of the thread you inserted between the leg and thigh, and secure three splints that are above, then return below to the top of the thread until you reach the foot; tighten it so that it does not move out of place, then leave it as is, so that no abscess or swelling occurs.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	And if it happens, dislocate it and address what comes as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of bone that cause pain, they must be removed if possible; and if not possible, the area must be cut open and sewn up; and treat it as we have said until he is well.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	And sometimes the thigh is broken in such a way that splints are placed, as with the shoulder and arm; however, in this kind of restoration, the patient does not suffer.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en L jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And know that the thigh is restored in 21 days, or a few less or more, according to the diversity of constitutions.
de la ruelle dou genoil	of the groove of the knee
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	Know that in the joint of the knee there is a small fracture, but it bends many times.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	And if it breaks, it is just a crack, or an aperture, and it happens to all wounds, and feels like a wound, and this people feel well.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is such that you place even those who are lying on their sides, until they assemble as much as possible; then apply the plaster, and if needed, put a round stick, and bind it properly; then attend to all the dispositions we have mentioned for other fractures, such as hot abscesses and similar ones; give each case what is appropriate until he is healed.
de la brisure de la jambe	Of the fracture of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	Know that in the leg there are two bones, of which one is called by its proper name "mustelz", and the other is called "foscile"; and every kind of fracture happens as it does to the arm, and for this reason the restoration is equal to that of the arm, and the work is done accordingly. And if both bones are broken together, then the leg is restored from all sides.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the delicate bone is broken, then it is treated at the front.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz.	And if the larger bone is broken, then there is great pain, and it can be seen clearly; and it is treated from behind.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	Then treat with extension, and place it evenly, and bind the splints equally; however, if the fracture is severe and there are many pieces, the extension should be lighter and gentler; and proceed according to your strength.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren II faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en II leus I bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent I bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have completed your work, take two strips of wood to support the leg from both sides, and let them run along the length of the leg from the knee down; then wrap it with two layers, one above and one below, and tie it in the middle as well, so that the leg cannot turn left or right, and thus it is secure; some administer a bandage along the length of the leg, and if it is made of wood, place it on the leg to prevent movement, and properly done this is used for fractures where there is an open wound; and move the leg each day to check for abscesses or other accidents; treat as needed until it is healed.
de la brisure des os dou piet	of the fracture of the foot bones
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle there is no fracture, but at the foot bones there may be a fracture and in the two joints, and it does not occur that they are crushed in many conditions.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a II chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	And if it happens that the foot bones are fractured, and you see these bones overlapping each other, then have the patient lie his foot on the ground as if he wants to walk, and then place now your foot upon his, where the bones are raised, and press them until they return to their places; then apply a poultice and bandages, and under the belly of the foot place a small board filled with two handfuls, then bind it tightly to the foot after you have wrapped it in cloths, and other things as needed.
Et quant III jors ou IIII seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when three or four days have passed, undo the bandage, for you will find the bones even, whether broken or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a II ou III, ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en I drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	And if one of the two is broken, repair it as we have said for both hands; then place a splint along the length of the leg, and make it slightly wider, then place under the foot the board that I mentioned, and secure it properly; and if there are two or three, or more, broken, then place on each one a splint according to its size, wrapped in a piece of linen cloth, and secure the board under the foot; and let them be placed at the head of the board above the heel so that it covers well.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And you must not forget the other things that I have said to other fractures; and treat each case as is appropriate.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	of the fracture of the bone of the thumb
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the bone of a woman's urethra is broken, make her sit extended, then lean her towards the part of the back, and hold her from behind; then fill the urethra of the patient with cotton, and place there pieces as thick as beans; then stand the woman up, and lift her back little by little, until the cotton reaches the entrance of the urethra, and return the bone along with the bean-sized pieces; and when she wants to urinate, remove the cotton, and after she has done so, replace it; and do this for seven days or around that time: the fracture will be restored. If you wish, take a bladder of a lamb, tie it at the opening with a tube, and pour all the bladder into the urethra; then blow strongly through the tube until the bladder is inflated inside: her urethra will return to its original state; then fill it again with cotton and leave it so for some days until she is healed.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	And when the bone of the thumb of a man is broken, or of a woman, restore it as we have said about the thigh bone; and these nearby fractures are not hidden from one who puts his study and practice into them, and take heed my book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	For the fracture indicates in many ways the proper way of restoration: understand then.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse III jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	In the shaft, when it is broken, take a goose quill and insert the bone into it; then wrap bandages around it, and leave it for three days or until it heals, and it will heal quickly.
de brisure avec plaie	of fracture with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is necessary for one who has a fracture with a wound, especially if it is large, such as the bone of the thigh or shoulder or similar, to be treated immediately, so that the treatments we have mentioned are evident.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound heals, then cauterize it with vitriol, if you have nothing else, and then resume restoring the fracture at the same hour, or on that day, unless abscesses come.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if abscesses occur, then delay the restoration until a new day, until the abscesses are appeased, and do not touch it on the third or fourth day, for you would cause a harmful accident.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the broken bone is apparent on the exposed chest, then it must be carefully set by hand, with slight extension.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a VII dois ou VIII de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne III ou IIII, selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if the extension is not available to set equally by hand, then use this instrument made of iron, which is seven or eight inches long, and the width is according to the size of the wound; and for this, it is necessary for the doctor to mark three or four, depending on what is needed for each fracture treatment; and let it be smooth and a little thick, so that it does not bend under compression on the limb during your work, and let it be sharp in front, and thicker from the middle forward, as follows:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	And it is called "palainche", for which the curved head must be placed on top of the visible bone; and push it at once, until it returns, and they are equal to each other.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And if the fracture is subtle, and the instrument cannot properly grasp the bone, then you must cut the head of the bone until the instrument has sufficient hold.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you cannot return the bone as we have said, then cut it with an appropriate instrument, such as a scalpel or knife, to your ability; then remove what remains in the bone of hardness and small pieces.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	And when the bone is returned, and the patient feels great pain afterward, know that it is not in its natural place.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	If you place it in its proper place, then moisten the membrane with black styptic wine, and carefully if it is in summer; and do not put cerate or anything else on the wound that has oil, for it would cause putrefaction and corruption; then administer splints when you have restored the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and cut the covering all around, according to the size of the wound, and take great care that the wound is not constricted with the fracture; and many times foolish physicians have done this to the patient causing death or corrosion sometimes; and let the constrictions be softer and deeper than other fractures.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	And if the wound is bad or large, and you fear that harmful accidents may occur, as we have said, and you find pain in the area, then it should not be covered with splints; but wrap around, instead of splints, hard cloths, and bind them.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And when you see after one day or two that the wound is starting to form pus, remove what you have placed over it with wine entirely, and put on healing ointment, such as tetrafarmacos ointment and similar.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre II fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And it is necessary to loosen the limb twice a day, in the morning and evening, until it is healed and healthy.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And the limb should be positioned in such a way that the pus flows down gently.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if many days pass and it does not heal but continues to pus, know that there are small pieces of bone, for which you must clean the wound with a probe, and remove all these displaced fragments that cause pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	And if a fistula comes to that place, or any other form of corruption, then it is necessary that you treat it according to what he says in his chapter above.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And when the bone is broken and exposed on the limb, such as the bone of the thigh or shoulder, and other similar ones of the larger limbs, do not attempt to extract it, for many times death results from doing so, but leave it until it rots; perhaps it will fall out after twenty days or thirty, then treat the wound if you can; and if you cannot, leave it.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	of bruises that come upon the joints
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	We often see this after the healing of the fracture, especially when it is near the joint, and it is a terrible thing to see the shape of the limb; and perhaps the limb cannot perform its natural functions.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Take care then when the skin is fresh: if the administrator applies astringent medicines such as aloes, incense, and myrrh, and sarcocolle, hellebore, and similar others, take some of these things or all together and confit them with astringent wine or with plenty of egg white or with cheese; and place them on the swelling in bandages, and bind it tightly, and do not loosen it for several days; then remove it and start another one until the swelling is gone; or you can compress over a piece of plaster well made; for the property of plaster is that it removes all the swellings above the limbs; and if the swelling has already turned into hardness like stone and needs to be removed, cut off the surface, and let the excess appear; or you scrape it with some scraper until it is gone, and treat it until it heals.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	of the limb which is weak after recovery
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the fracture of the bone is restored, and the limb remains weak and delicate afterwards, this happens for many reasons: one reason being that it was bound too tightly, and not as it should have been; or there were too many bindings, so nutrition could not reach the limb; or due to excessive washing; or from too great movements at an improper time; or because he has little blood in his body, thus making him weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the treatment is that you make the patient eat and make the body soft, until the blood multiplies within him; then give him baths and provide joy and rest; place pitch on the limb so that it attracts great nutrition, and wash it frequently with warm water, until the nutrition reaches the limb; and let it return to its natural form.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	of the limb twisted after the sickness
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai I emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	When the limb is twisted after restoration, and the bone broken clearly, and the form of the limb is ugly, nevertheless it does not lose its natural function: do not believe those fools who say one must break the limb all over again, and many foolish physicians have done this in our land; and these practices are condemned, and great evils come from them, and perhaps death; however, if the joints and ligaments are fresh, they should be soaked in hot water, or herbs that soften should be boiled, such as sage leaves, roots, meadow-sweet, and similar things; make a softening ointment, as well-made mithridate, and take the muscilaginous of sage, and mix it with honey and oil of cumin, and apply an ointment on top; or take fat figs, and grind them with flaxseed meal, and similar medicines that reduce swelling.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	And sometimes the knot is removed to rub continuously and for a long time with wet hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And let motion be given to the limb every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if the tortuousness is swollen and hardened, like a stone, and needs to be removed with iron, then it must be cut down to the bone with a fine and gentle incision; and apply caution and care in the treatment.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book of dislocations
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation occurs to someone, one must now reset it without delay.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors; toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	For if one delays, the area swells, and perhaps it is reset with difficulty to its place; therefore, it does not suit that one move it while it is swollen: many times it brings about spasm and other pains; nevertheless, when this happens, cause the patient to be bled, then leave him until the abscesses subside; then wash the limb with warm water and oil, then reset it gently, and treat each member as the cure will come in its place.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have arranged the chapters on dislocations from the head down to the feet.
des mandibules	of the mandibles
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc II manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	It rarely happens that the mandibles are dislocated at both sides, and the dislocations of both are according to two manners: where they are slightly removed from their places, and softened slightly; or where they are completely dislocated, and hang towards the lower part, and cut off the saliva from the mouth so he cannot hold it, nor can he close his mouth, and envelops his tongue with speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is small, it returns to its place on its own in many cases.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie; et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	And if it is complete and thorough, then you must reset it quickly and do not delay; and in such a way that the minister holds the head of the patient, and puts his fingers into the root of the dislocation of the mandible inside the mouth, if the dislocation is on both sides; and the other hand should be behind to balance equally; and instruct the patient to soften his mandibles and move them in all directions.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And the physician should place it evenly, so that it returns to its place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les II mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And if it is difficult to reset, especially when both jaws are involved, soak them in hot water and oil until you can gently reset them; do not delay in resetting them as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens; et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules; et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	And when they are reset evenly, and the patient's mouth needs to be kept closed to soften, place cloths moistened with a salve made of rose oil and wax over them, then bind them gently with soft bandages; let the patient sleep on his back, and have their head supported by two cushions so that it does not move left or right, nor should they attempt to speak or chew until the pain is gone and the jaws are healed; and then eat whatever he wants lightly, without forcing himself to open his mouth for eating and drinking, until the jaw is fully healed.
Et se les II mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two mandibles cannot be fully reset at once, and are not returned to their places, fever and habitual diarrhea may result, and by chance vomiting of pure bile.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en VIIII jors.	And when you see this, then you know it is a prediction of death; and many times the one to whom it happens dies within nine days.
de la forcelle	of strength
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The dislocation cannot be reset from the chest within the continuation of the ribs and spine, and it is sometimes displaced outward, which can be felt.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint; et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez; et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	And the restoration is as follows: the patient lies supine on their back and extends their arms; then press the area firmly with your palm, and it will return; then apply the emplastrum and bandage, and secure it tightly; and the head that is near the side cannot be reset; if possible, and if it does reset at all, reset it to its place as we have said; then apply the emplastrum and bandage, and secure it tightly, and instruct the patient to rest until they are well; and similarly, the shoulder joint when dislocated from its place is restored.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc; et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	Know that the shoulder is dislocated in only three ways: one of which is that it dislocates at the part of the socket on the back side; and the second is at the part of the humerus; and sometimes it dislocates above, but this happens rarely; and it does not dislocate behind the shoulder, nor inside towards the nerves; and more often it dislocates below towards the socket, especially in those who have little flesh, because for them it tends to happen quickly; for those with sufficient flesh, it occurs with difficulty, and returns with difficulty.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And sometimes it happens to some men that they suffer a blow or fracture, and the shoulder swells with a hot abscess, and they think that it is dislocated because of this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	It is necessary then that you test it until you are certain; and then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste; et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens; et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier; et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	It is known that the dislocation occurs when it moves downward towards the socket, and there is a difference between the diseased shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find their difference evident; and you will find at the top of the shoulder a hollow, and below the socket upon touching, as if it were an eye; and the patient cannot return his hand to his side or move in any way; and similarly, when it is dislocated upwards, it is not concealed, for you find it manifestly upon touching; and this manner of dislocation cannot be remedied when it is new, or if a child is sick.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	And the method is that the minister lifts the patient's hand up, then places his fingers under the wrist, and raises the joint forcefully to its place; and the minister lifts the hand, and stretches it upwards, then puts it back; thus it will quickly heal.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree; puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide; et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere: et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar; et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	And if it does not come as we have said within a few days, then the patient should be bathed in hot water; and the minister applies soothing and softening ointments, such as a decoction of wormwood, fenugreek, and honey-suckle in water, which is then applied; then the patient is swathed on his back, and placed under the wrist a pad of wool even, not too soft nor too hard, then place your heel under the pad, and raise the shoulder forcefully, and pull the patient's hand; another minister should hold the patient's head so that it does not move down; this shoulder will return immediately, and if you wish to reset it according to this method: have a man present who is larger than the patient; stand facing the side, and place your shoulder under the wrist of the patient, then lift the wrist upwards, so that the patient hangs from the arm; another minister should pull the patient's hand downwards towards the belly.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And if the patient is too light, he may hold something heavy with him, and now the dislocation returns.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile; puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment; et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	And it is reset in another way as follows: one drives a long stake into the ground, which should be as thick as a spear, neither too thick nor too thin; then place it under the patient but with cloths beneath to protect them, and have the patient hold onto the long part of the stake firmly; then extend their arm downwards from the other side, and the joint will quickly return to its place; and if it does not want to return despite all these things we have said, I do this cure: take a stake two arms' length in height and four fingers wide at the base, with the top end rounded for smooth entry under the armpit, as follows:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus I eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	Then bind over the head of the body with a cloth that does not hurt the patient, then place it under the seat of the patient; and extend his arm on the long stick, and bind the shoulder to the stick, and the arm to the head of the hand, then put the arm on one side of a wide ladder, and let the hand hang down, and leave the body hanging from the other side: the joint will now heal gradually.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is in place, however that may be, you must put under the seat a sphere of even wool, then apply the prepared poultice of powdered miller's flour with incense and egg yolk around the entire shoulder, then stretch the bandage gently under the seat, and wrap the cloth over the poultice, and secure the hand to the neck, and let the hand remain in this position.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés V jors ou VII, et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And he should eat little until the limb is strengthened, for it will heal more quickly; and then after five or seven days, increase his food intake and move him; if it is firm and not softened, he is healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint is dislocated due to moisture that has come into it, or for another reason, you must administer cauterizations with three openings, as described before in the chapter on cauterizations.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés VII jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And if you do all this, and after seven days the joint remains loose, and he cannot raise his arm, then know that the nerve at the top of the shoulder is severed or stretched or weakened; and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The dislocation that is towards the hip, and the breasts, or behind, is done by impulse, and extending of hands, and another minister assists there; and treat until it be healed.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after healing the member becomes stiff and slow in movement, the patient should take many baths until the stiffness is alleviated, and returns to its original state.
de la dislocation dou coute	of the dislocation of the elbow
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	Know that the joint of the elbow is dislocated by points, and returns to them; and if it is dislocated in all directions, especially front and back, and the dislocation is not resolved, for one can see and feel it well; and it dislocates according to each figure.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	And when you join the diseased part with the healthy part, then you can see clearly.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	For the joint is displaced, and he cannot bend his arm nor touch his shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And you must reset it as if for abscesses that come from the front, for if they came from the back, it would be difficult to return them; and perhaps they cannot be fully restored, especially when it is at the rear; it is worse than other dislocations, causing greater pain, and death may occur.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes II mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And the restoration is as follows: when it can be returned, extend his hand with both your hands; and let his arm be outstretched, and hold his wrist around the joint, above and below, and push the joint to its base or at the root of his palm until it returns to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is to the front, it returns when he doubles his hand against his hand, and pulls from the base of the palm the knife that is dislocated.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large; et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne; et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	And if it does not want to return to its place, administer strong extension; and when two ministers extend the arm, and they grease the arm so that it does not move during the extension; then turn the arm from each side, after you have enveloped a double long and wide cloth; and when the joints meet at the hand, apply some ointment to soften the joint, then push the joint firmly until it returns; and when it is in place, put on dry plaster with an egg mixture, and press firmly, and bind the arm to the neck of the patient, and leave it for several days, then release it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	And if the joint is firmly in its place, undo the binding and leave it; and if you see that the joint does not hold well, reapply the plaster and the binding, and leave it thus for some days, until it is securely set; then undo it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain; et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	And if he feels stiffness after the joint is returned and it moves, bathe and rub it well, and press until it is relieved; then place a fat sheepskin on the joint, leave it for one day and night, then remove it, and have him enter the bath; when he sweats, gently rub the joint, then put the sheepskin back on, and have him enter the bath again; do this two or three times until he is healed; if you wish, place moistened birch leaves warmed with butter over it; thus will he return to his condition.
li dislocation de la main	The dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	The dislocation of the hand, and its reduction is easy, more so than other joints. Nevertheless, it must be returned to its place quickly, within the same hour that it was dislocated, before swelling occurs or an abscess develops.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	And the reduction is done by placing the injured hand on a table, and the assistant extends the hand, and you place your hand over it evenly, so that the palm rests above the appearance of the joint, and you press until it returns. Nevertheless, you must check if it is in its proper place; then have the patient place the back of his hand on a table during both extension and reduction.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	And if the dislocation is on the back of the hand, the patient should place the back of his hand on the table, and the physician places his hand on that part of the joint.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If it returns now, that is well; if not, apply emollient plasters to soothe the abscesses, and leave it thus without restarting.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte; et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	And if he cannot bear it, and you cannot put it back in place after several days, the joint remains dislocated; and it does no harm to the patient as long as the hand is swollen, and cannot grasp anything at all: then you know that the nerves are severed, or the artery; there is no other remedy but to apply cautery near the case, and perhaps nothing else may help.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse V jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when it is in place, apply the plaster we have mentioned, then press and leave it for five days, then unbind and leave it thus.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if he cannot move it well and there is some stiffness, moisten with warm water, and rub until it is free.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	of the dislocation of the thumb of the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre; adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins; et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	Sometimes the thumb of the hand is dislocated in every direction, sometimes at the back or front of the palm; then place the thumb, and push the dislocation towards the pouches until it returns, then support the head of the thumb, and pull it towards the part where it is dislocated; leave it for two days, and then make it equal on that day; tie it as we have said, and unbind it daily, and make it move, and bind it again; do this often until it becomes tight, and similarly do so if it is dislocated at the front of the hand, and do as you did before, until it is healed; and do the same when it is dislocated in another direction.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	of the dislocation of the back脊椎脱位的复位
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the dislocation of the back or neck is reset, if there are many resets, there is no cure, for death quickly follows the patient.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»: li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	And the signs are that the patient faints uncontrollably, cannot hold it, and sometimes certain limbs become weak, such as both thighs or both arms or one. And often the dislocation moves to four parts; that which moves to the back is called "gibbosity": the cure is to check if the gibbosity has come from childhood: then there is no cure nor healing altogether.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit; mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	And that which comes from falling or blows or similar things, the ancient methods of treatment were described with grand words, in which there is little benefit overall; but I have abbreviated them according to my understanding, and have fashioned instruments in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit; et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis; et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece; puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles; et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons; et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	I say that in the gout that comes to the big toe, there is no remedy or treatment; and likewise for the one that comes directly to both sides, and it cannot be treated except by that which specifically affects the back, as I said; and it is that the patient lies stretched out on his face in an even place, and has something hard under him so he does not hurt himself; then put a torch at the head in the ground firmly, and another at the feet, and tie a rope beneath the armpits of the patient, and one at the hips, and at the knees, and at the ankles; and two ministers hold the ropes, one at the head and the other at the feet, between the two torches; and they should be well secured, the torch as we have said, and the physician places his palms on the spine firmly, until it relieves.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee; et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	And if it does not return through this cure, take a board three arms long and place cloth underneath it, and let the patient lie on their side, then put the head of the board under the armpit, then place the middle of the board over the spine; and have the patient's feet on the other end of the board, and press firmly until it returns to its place; and if you wish, do it with a turn that turns towards the hand.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc; et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet; et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	And when you fix two torches at the head of the patient from one arm's length, and near the feet two others, and there should be between each torch, above and below, a palm's space in length; and have in each torch one hole where the rope turns, and let the torches firmly in the ground so they do not move; and between each of the two torches place a turning torch on which the ropes turn, and at both turning torches place two small torches of a palm's length to turn the rope; and then tie the rope that is among the stakes to the turning point near the head, and the other rope towards the feet to the other turning point, and each assistant turns their own turning point over all the ropes, and the master places the spine evenly as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	And when it is even, apply a desiccative plaster with an abundance of egg, then the plugs, and then a stick from a tablet three fingers long, which should reach the site of the hunchback deformity and the healthy part of the spine, followed by the juice of a linen cloth as we have said, and let the patient be cared for gently until he is healed; and if any condition arises at the end of the healing process, it is necessary to administer softening and soothing medicines with the stick mentioned above; and sometimes one administers a piece of lead, and sometimes an appearance occurs in the rear vertebrae of the back, and people think it is dislocation; but this bone protrudes outwardly, so there should be no presumption about it: perhaps it might bring death.
des dislocations de la hainche	Dislocations of the hip
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc IIII parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	Know that at the joints of the hip and at the joints of the shoulder, only dislocations occur, not as with other joints; and the joint of the hip is dislocated according to four parts: inward and outward, and front and back; and more inward than otherwise, and slightly dislocated front and back.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu; et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	And the knowledge of this inward dislocation is that when you join the affected leg with the healthy one, it is longer, and the patient's knee appears more bent than the healthy one, and the patient cannot bend their knee to the fire; and the area nearby is swollen with an abscess and hot, because the thigh bone comes there.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the signs of him who comes to fainting are contrary to those mentioned before.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the signs of him who has an issue before are that he straightens his leg according to its completion; however, he does not double it at the knee without pain, and if one wants to make him go forward, he cannot advance, and retains his urine, and his ankle swells, and when he walks, he steps over the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of him who has an issue behind are that he cannot bend his knee or double over, and this leg is more bent than the other, and the ankle is softened, and the head of the thigh is in a position below the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	The remedy for this similar case of dislocation is that you observe whether the dislocation is old, and it remains according to its condition, with no need for treatment; and there should be no presumption.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des IIII manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	And in the one where the dislocation is fresh, and it is of the four types of dislocation, hurry to return the joint, and place it within and outward, and move it right and left; perhaps it will come back, and there is no need for other treatment.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil; et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien; et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	And if it does not return in this manner, you must prepare one minister to firmly hold the leg with two hands, or tie it above the knee; and another minister places his hand on top in such a way that he pushes his hands under the thighs, then tightly binds them with a single strip around the thigh; and someone holds the head of the binder; and they extend upwards and downwards all at once, until the patient is lifted off the ground in one motion, and remains suspended.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as IIII semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This method of extension is common to the four similar cases, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is well.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele; puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	If not, you must treat it according to its likeness. When the dislocation is in the hip joint, you should lift the patient on their healthy side, then place the bandage at the root of the affected thigh and below the groin area; then stretch the bandage upwards towards the groin and the front part of the body. Then take another assistant by his arms and have them embrace the thick part of the affected thigh and pull it forcefully forward: it will return to its place now. And this type of dislocation is lighter than others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres; puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc; puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	And if you cannot secure it in the manner we have described, then bind the two feet of the patient together with a strong bandage under both heels and above both knees; let the affected leg be stretched out two palms longer than the other. Then suspend him by his head from a post, and lift him off the ground by two arm lengths. Then command one assistant to embrace the upper part of the thigh, and have another assistant hang with the patient, who should firmly embrace the thigh, for the joint will now return quickly.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi; puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme; et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	And when the dislocation is out of place, let the patient lie down, as we have said for those who have gilbositeit, and bind one bandage tightly on the affected leg, and also on the foot; then place two torches, one at the head and another at the feet, then insert a torch between the thighs of the patient in the proper form; and let wet cloths be placed around it so that it does not burn the patient, then each assistant extends towards him, and the physician places his hand equal to the dislocation.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	If it returns, it is good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If not, place him on the table and press as we have said in the case of gilbositeit, and let the patient lie on the healthy side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when the dislocation is in front, it is necessary to extend the affected leg quickly, as I have said; and place the physician's hand on the affected side, then press with the other hand, and stretch towards the knee.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches; et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table; et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve; et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And if the dislocation is to the side, one should not extend the affected leg downward or lift it up off the ground, but rather place it as if the hip were dislocated to the side, as we have said about lying on both hips; and let him lie on his face, with the limb extended as we have stated previously, and press on the joint against a table; it is done properly when the patient extends their legs equally; then join the thighs together, apply a plaster, and secure them with a bandage so that the hip does not move; rest for three or four days, then remove the bandage, and reapply the plaster; if they are still equal, secure them again as before, and leave it for three days; then release the bandage and allow him to walk gently until his limb is comfortable.
de la dislocation dou genoil	of the dislocation of the knee
Li genous est desaluez selonc III manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The knee is dislocated in three ways: namely, inward and outward, and backward; it does not dislocate forward.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez; et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez; puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement; et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And the signs are such that you instruct the patient to bend his leg at his thigh, and if it does not bend at the thigh, then you know it is dislocated; and the restoration of all these cases is that you have the patient sit upright, and extend his leg if he can, and place your back against his back, and put his foot on your feet; then take his knee in your palms, and pull between your hands, then bend the two sides of the knee firmly; and another assistant extends his foot, so that the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that it bends well at the thigh lightly; and apply a plaster, and bind the leg to the thigh tightly for three days or four, then unbind him; and do not let the patient work on walking until the limb is strengthened.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	And if the limb is not properly aligned, apply strong extension, as we have said in the treatment of the thigh, until it is healed
de la dislocation dou talon	of the dislocation of the heel
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The heels are sometimes bruised, and sometimes completely dislocated, both internally and externally.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee: li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	And the signs are that the ankle is swollen, and tense in the area where it is dislocated; the reduction is light, and one should gently extend it with their hands when it is only bruised.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville; puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut; et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient; et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide; puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet; puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent; puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	And when it is completely dislocated, you must have the patient sit upright, and hold him firmly by the thigh with your hand above the ankle; then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, then twice with your left, then extend upwards, and forcefully push the foot upwards; do this twice as we have said, pushing and pulling the foot; if it returns, that is good; if not, continue the work, for it will come back; and if it cannot return thus, make the patient lie on his back on the ground, and firmly place a lever between his thighs, tying ropes around him so he does not move; then hold one thigh with your hand, another assistant extends the foot with their hands or uses a strap to secure it at the ankle; both assistants extend equally, and the lever remains steady between the patient's thighs to restrain the patient when extending; then place the dislocation in your hands equally, and have another assistant hold the healthy leg behind, and the dislocation will return quickly.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois; puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors; et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	And when it is ready, place the poultice and plugs on it, bind it firmly, tie the foot to the leg, and watch the nerves above the heel so that the bandage is not too tight; then leave it for two or three days, and if the binding loosens, tighten it; then untie it on the third day or fourth, and forbid the patient from walking for four days; and if he walks before this term, it is not certain that it will not dislocate again.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if foot abscesses come, you must treat them as we have said elsewhere, until they are healed.
des dois	of the two
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When both are dislocated, they must be gently extended without strain, and this is an easy task.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne; et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the dislocation is at any joint of the foot's back, it is necessary that you make the patient sit on a level spot or on a .ie. table straight, and place your foot under what appears of these joints, then press with your foot firmly, until it returns; and when they are equal, and there does not appear anything, put under the sole of the foot a board of II fingers, then strain firmly, and leave for III days, then release; and make them rest, until they are healthy.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	of wound and dislocation together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert: si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis; et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit; et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne; et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis; et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples; et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	When a wound comes with dislocation and one wishes to restore it, many times the patient dies: do not be presumptuous in treatment if you are not wise in the art and have not used it for long, and if you are not pitiful and merciful and cautious, not bold; and use at the beginning soothing things for hot abscesses, and leave the patient in God's hands if there is no hope of health; and when you see hope, now set the limb in place as though hot abscesses would come; and when the limb is in place, administer soothing things for hot abscesses, and treat the wound with ointments as is appropriate; and if along with dislocation there is a fracture and small bones displaced, remove them and do what we have said about simple diseases; and guard against entering the path of fear according to what I have said, because it befits you more according to your Creator, and for the knowledge of your art and your body.
Amen	So be it
