Oh, children, let me fulfill this book to you as the final part of the science of medicine, for the completion of which your health is sought, and through its exposition, and through your declarations, I see it necessary to complete this treatise that I am presenting to you, which is a part of my work, so it's surgery.
For the operation on the hand is confined in our region and in our times to be private, through which great danger prevails in the science of it, and its vestiges are remaining; and one would not have heard much about it had there been no occasional small descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which corrected their most errors and misconceptions in which the understanding of it is confined and the effort goes beyond its force and skill.
And I see that I should vivify this order of this treatise according to the way of exposition, declaration and abbreviation; and for bringing it up with the forms of the tools of cautery and other workshop instruments like adding a declaration, and for preparing them, which is necessary.
The reason why not many skilled craftsmen are found in their hands in our time is that the art of medicine is extensive, and one needs to be trained before becoming proficient in the science of anatomy which Gualia describes where he knew the joints of the limbs and their forms, as well as their connection and separation; and had knowledge of bones, nerves, and blood vessels, their number, and their function; and of pulsating veins and quiet ones, and the sites for their insertion.
And that's why it is said by Hippocrates that in his name, the operation exists, but more so in practice and predominantly in the art of the hand.
May we have already mentioned this in the introduction to this book; whoever does not know what we have said about anatomy, cannot be excused from falling into error which can lead to the death of men, as I have seen too many of them, where some are formed in this science and abandon it for their own science and experiments.
I have seen a surgeon who has been involved in treating an abscess of the scrophula on a woman's neck and cut some neck arteries causing large amounts of blood to flow, resulting in her death amidst his patients.
And I have seen another doctor who was about to take out a stone from a man who had been suffering in his state, and the stone was large, it came out alive and dried that stone with a piece of bladder, as a result, that man died on the third day.
And I already attempted to remove that, and I saw that due to the size of the stone and the position of the patient underneath him, he would die.
And I have seen another surgeon who was taking payment from the Duke of our land for surgery, and he attended to a black soldier who had broken his leg in the thigh area; the surgeon, due to his lack of knowledge, removed the fracture, on the wound, with splints and pins made of strong material, and did not allow air into the wound.
And he then removes it according to his wishes, and then he dresses the wound, and allows him to rest for several days as instructed to remove the bandage; this also occurs when bone and flesh have formed an abscess, leading to loss.
And I have attempted to do this, and I was able to remove the bandage, thus achieving calmness and alleviation of her pain.
However, the corruption had been confirmed in the limb, so I could not contain it and it did not stop spreading the corruption throughout the limb while the patient's life was at risk.
And I have seen another surgeon who punctured an abscess of cancerous origin, and became inflamed within several days, causing great concern for the lord of his patient.
This is because the disease affects only melancholic humor, so it does not penetrate through every part of the body, but rather targets a limb that allows everything to be affected from within.
And for this reason, children, it is necessary for you that the operation on your hand be divided into two: one associated with health and another where danger lies in major positions.
And I have already established this throughout this book in which there is an operation where errors and fears occur; so it is necessary for you to keep this in mind and refrain from this, so the pages do not slander or defame you.
And therefore take your weapons for solicitude and protection of God, and your patients for happiness and strength.
And use the best means through God's grace for the sake of health and achievable success, and leave behind your patients' terrible illnesses that are difficult to cure, and keep away from your weapons on what causes fear in you, because stability is found in your faith and your name will not abandon you: so it remains at your glory, more so among people and further among your sanctity.
Gualia had already spoken in some of his proverbs: "Don't treat bad patients with bad medicine, for it's not the doctors who are named."
And I have completed this book according to three chapters.
The division of the book begins, and it starts with the first part. The first chapter ordered concerning the feet, in the forms of the tools and in the materials of the cautery instruments, and what is necessary for the operation.
The division of the second part. The second chapter, concerning dryness and puncture, as well as blisters, and leeches, and the extraction of arrows and their resemblance to those, all detailed and organized by the forms of the tools.
The third chapter, concerning restoration and dislocation, as well as the treatment of twists and their resemblance to those; chapter ordered concerning operations in the feet, and the forms of the tools.
Let me tell you about the quality of those parts of the cautery and their natural development, as well as when it is forbidden to use a cautery.
So I say that the discussion on the nature of the cautery's youth and its natural development is long and exhaustive, subtle in science, and secret hidden; and many great sages have spoken about it before me, differing in their opinions. Enough for me to understand a little from these discussions, as they fear prolonged discourse.
And I say that the cautery is in harmony with all substances universally, whether they be simple matter or compound matter, except for two substances; these are the substances of the tail.
In the tail and in dryness there is simple matter that would be dried out; some argue that a cautery should be applied to those parts, while others argue against this claim, stating that it's not appropriate for maladies characterized by their quality and dryness. For fire itself embodies quality and dryness, and it would therefore be inconvenient to apply it to the tail and keep it in a state of being burnt and dried up until it is healed.
And argues against what you said by stating that when applied to the entire tail and dryness in every bodily malady, fire makes youth appear on all of them. When comparing the body of a person and its humidity to the nature of fire, you find that the body is frayed.
And I say according to the discussion of this, something that has already been discovered by me after some experiments for many times.
However, I do not delve into what has already been discussed extensively in the chapter on cautery for recent examination, and have come to understand the variety of bodily conditions among people and the disposition of their maladies in different parts, as well as the causes of these, the incidents related to them, and the time period required for such matters.
For other conditions, there is no need for concern, especially in cases of oily and wet maladies, which have already been agreed upon by all doctors, they are not divided on the matter of using a cautery for youthfulness in those.
Know this, children, that the secret of healing through cautery with fire and its goodness lies in the use of burning medicine with it; because fire is simple, its action only affects the member being cauterized and not other members, so its impact on them is limited to minor harm.
The action of the burning medicine reaches up to those members that are affected by it, and strongly tends to cause difficulty in healing and strong disturbance in the diseased member.
Fire, due to its simplicity and goodness of substance, does not do anything other than overflow. We have come to know this through experiments and the long duration of service and study in the art of understanding the truth about causes; and that's why I excuse myself for the length of the discourse. If it weren't for the fact that such a secret was not written down freely in my book, concerning fire and its quality, as well as the nature of the operation within bodies and its expulsion through which you expel diseases, this philosophical demonstration would be beneficial to your inquiries.
And know this, children, that they disagree about the time when it is convenient to perform cautery and prefer the best springtime.
And I say that cautery is convenient at any time, because the harm caused by accidental time periods is drowned in the youth of what is attracted to the cautery, and especially if the cautery is for pains or necessary pains, strong and pimples, which do not suffer from delay as those that cause mischief are greater than minor harm entering through time.
And don't worry about this in your inquiries, or children, those who only value the common people and mere doctors do not consider that it is not always beneficial to heal with cautery for every malady, they simply follow a rule based on that.
And the reason is not as they fear, for cautery is simply another kind of medicine that alters the condition and dries out the humidity which causes pain.
However, unnecessary cautery over medicine for the sake of its effectiveness and virtue of its operation, as well as its large lordship.
And it is possible that their malady might return at some point in time, according to the nature of the malady and the location of its occurrence, as well as its virtue, what is prepared within them from the addition of superfluities, and what is received by them through food and similar causes leading up to these issues; unless the malady treated with cautery is a subtle malady in parts with few superfluities and humoral substances, like dental cautery for pain and its resemblance to that, it might not return the same kind of pain within them, although this happens on a smaller scale.
The common language is that cautery is the last resort of medicine, and this term is professional, not one I understand in them, they believe it's not a cure that enhances with medicine or any other cause leading to cautery.
And the cause is against that; and I understand that cautery is the last resort of medicine only when administering the methods of treatment in some illnesses, and those medicines do not provide relief, so at the end of the case one administers cautery, enhancing to that. And here comes the understanding that cautery is the last resort of medicine, not according to my understanding which I comprehend among common folk and many doctors.
And they would say that cautery with gold is better than cautery with iron, and they wouldn't say otherwise simply for the similarity of gold and the inferiority of its substance.
And they would say that the place for cautery doesn't hurt like what they simply declare as absolute truth, which I have already proven and found out that it only hurts in some bodily parts not others; cautery with that is good and better than iron similarly as they said. But however when you do cautery with fire using gold, it's not as it was declared, it depends on the quantity you want based on the heat of the gold, and what needs to be received by the flame; and if you place the flame over it the gold melts in the fire, and inside the fire some sheets are formed so that the artisan can adjust for the occupation of that.
And because of this, you should do cautery with iron more gently and more precisely in the correct operation.
And I have already organized this chapter on cautery according to chapters, I have arranged those of the section within the feet, for you can ask me what you want from them.
The first chapter.
This cautery allows the humidity and coldness to have an unfortunate impact of two causes, which are the cause of pain and multiple traumatic discharges, called gushes, from the head to the parts of the body and ears, and multiple sleeps, and toothache and stomachache, and universally for all illness caused by coldness, as well as paralysis, pain, and stroke, and resembling those illnesses.
The form of this cautery is like this, which we first command the patient to be given an emollient medicine on their head for three or four nights according to what suits the patient and their age and custom.
And then command him to shave his head with a razor, and place that sponge between your hands on a padded bench, and have him place his head on his own pillow.
And then place the palm of your hand close to that spot on the top of the nose between his ears. However, when you have told me about the right place, you mark that area with a test, and then apply olive oil cautery of which this is its form:
And then place that on the spot where the test has indicated, in such a way that it goes down, as your hand is gradually forced, and you rotate that.
And then lift your hand gently and look at the spot, and if you see that some amount of hair has been uncovered from the head, as much as the size of a pea, then lift your hand, and if you cannot find any iron in this or another place, if it is cold, within which I have told you to observe what I have said to you.
And then take a small amount of salt and dissolve it on the spot, then leave it for three days.
And then place on him the burned chest in a damp environment, and leave it so that the burnt skin is destroyed by the fire's scabs. And then treat the area with the fourfold ointment until it is healed.
And they would say that when the wound has been opened like this, it gets better so much more quickly that it is better and more rejuvenating.
And they would say that the cautery has been applied inside the jawbone, and it should be kept in place until some part of the bone is hardened.
And then take this part that adheres to the bone, and proceed to treat it.
And they would say that once the cautery reaches to the end, until it penetrates into the bone strongly enough for the bone to break off, and this is how you apply small cautery: And they estimate from that area the vapor escaping from the head.
And keep the wound open for a long time, and then proceed to heal it until it is consolidated.
Now to me you do not show these two types of cautery for all, but in some cases according to their fear; leave it alone, my friend, much better is with health, when possible; so the head is purified by the solution of continuity like we have testified in other members, and even more so when the patient's head has a cold nature.
And the first type of cautery is more saved and better for me; from that one take it up and do that work with health.
Second chapter.
Regarding head cautery.
When a chronic and long pain occurs throughout the head, and this lasts in the patient's body for an extended period, and they use hot baths, saunas, head compresses, bandages, hats, veils, and similar remedies, especially if it has been treated with one cautery which does not react to those causes, then consider that if the head is robustly created in its nature; and does not endure much heat, then this head is treated with another cautery; leave this one a little. And then apply a cautery on that above the forehead, inside the head where the wound has split. Saw the wound and revealed the amount of the bone that we have measured, then apply a cautery on it with an instrument behind the head in the place where suction is called - and this is the place where suction takes place. And hold your hand in this way, do not expose the bone, for the patient may experience a great variety of pain due to different from all other head cauterizations.
And I shall describe this cautery in its place, that because·l cautery is such that when you apply it to the horns of the head and the occipital bone requires a finer cautery than that which is applied to the mid part of the head; and this is how he should do it.
Head treatment.
Regarding non-traditional cautery for migraine.
When there is pain in the back of the head or an ache inside the skull, it should be treated with medicines that reduce headaches, and then other treatments are administered; those were described in my writings on diseases. If all these measures do not alleviate the condition, then the treatment for this would be by two methods: either by applying a hot medicated cautery or using iron.
A medicated cautery using a hot substance involves taking one dol of aloes, crushing it and then separating the ends of its two heads. And then pierce the area of pain on the temple with an awl into that spot where you make the wound, inside which you hide the injury.
And then strengthen it on you with the constraint of descent and allow that to pass through for the space of three hours; and let out the water from it and leave the wound for two or three days, and place a cover under your hand submerged in water until the place feels firm.
And then treat that with ointment once it is healed.
And if you see this, do as I have written about certain hot medicines in my treatise on hot medicines.
The cautery with iron follows this method: using fire for the cautery, which is in this form:
This is called a ring cautery; the head of which resembles a thorn, with some curvature, and in the middle part of it there is a small elevation.
And then place your hand on the area of pain, hold it back - so that the metal rod you're using doesn't stick to the surface being treated - and move the small iron tool gradually, with speed.
And if the amount that sticks due to the resistance of the injury is as much as half its length, lift your hand so that the artery doesn't stick either, so that no blood flow stops.
And then soak your hand in salt water and place it on the area, leave it for three days; and then let it rest with a cloth in water, and treat with ointment once it is healed.
And if you see fit, apply the cautery to the end of the blade according to the cautery method, and be careful not to cut into an artery in this non-traditional migraine.
Head quarter.
Regarding the old tradition of treating migraines with cautery.
When you treat migraines as described in the previous treatments and according to the descriptions of diseases, if these measures do not alleviate your condition, or due to illness where what we said about the first cautery with medicine or the one using fire is insufficient for it, then consider igniting the blade cautery until it becomes white hot, so that you apply this over the area of pain along a line whose length is most similar to what was discussed, or do as described; and hold your hand up for a moment and force that into contact with the artery before penetrating the bone.
However, it is necessary for you to guard against the continuation of the jawbone, which becomes accustomed to chewing, and that the tongue does not stick and the nerve that controls it is not affected, and that there be no spasms.
And if it's about the care and caution of blood flow from the artery that is cut, which causes fear during its operation, especially in those who do not know what they are doing and are careless; leave the operation as it began.
And I will come back to remind you of the regulation for blood flow in case of an artery accident according to its method, in this manual.
And if you see that this illness does not respond to this cautery and when treating the patient's body is tolerable, apply the cautery in the middle of the head as we have measured it, and treat the wound until it heals.
And if you see fit, administer the cautery that we have described in the chapter on strech of arteries with hot cauteries, and this is a better and more accurate cautery.
Chapter V.
Regarding the treatment of ear pain through cautery.
When there is pain in the ear due to friction and if it is treated with draining causes and other treatments which I have described in the division section, and the pain does not increase, then use fire for the cautery, and this is called 'puncture', whose form is:
And then puncture close to the ignition point, and let it move around the entire ear like a wheel or in any part if the pain is in any location. Continue applying the earlobe cautery little by little until you succeed in placing it where needed.
And if the cautery is applied to all parts of the earlobe, and then fixes it in place, then you should also treat the areas inside so that they heal.
Capitol .vi. (This could be an abbreviation or part of a larger text, possibly related to medical terminology where 'Capitol' refers to the head and '.vi.' stands for "viscera".)
Regarding earlobe cautery.
The earlobe which is treated and by cautery is nothing other than the specific substances that pass through phlegm, as we said in the divisions of illnesses.
Avoid earlobe cautery for the substance that passes due to drying or due to spasm of the nerve.
When you treat that earlobe substance with jujubes, calms and cures, without confirming your treatment, then it is that you cauterize the patient with three cauteries: the first should be at the earlobe, the second a bit in his ear canal, and the third should be on the junction of both lips.
And pause your cautery for the opposite side of the affected ear, where mollification does not come but in the part that appears healthy.
And the method of cautery is that you cauterize there at the earlobe's tip for a bit above on the corner of the head, and in the ear canal elsewhere, the length of which should be according to the length of that lump, then place your hand inside until the amount of the substance of the disease is burned.
And this is the method of cautery, and it's a speciality of the surgeon, whose form should be on front table. However, it's rather subtle that one needs to do this a little bit with the earlobe; and you should notice when it gets rid of excess roughness.
And then treat the area where what is before passes, until it heals.
Capitol .vii.
Regarding old apoplectic cautery.
When apoplexy is old and you treat it as we've said without confirming your treatment and the patient doesn't have fever, then apply four cauteries: over all the corners of his head; like we've said also for the middle part of the head; and do so on the stomach. And the method of cautery is done according to what was mentioned above.
And when it has been cauterized over the mouth of the stomach; and more behind; then treat what you have started.
Capitol .viii.
Regarding cautery for forgetfulness caused by phlegm.
And when given to the patient during meals, large jujubes and pills should help in their digestion.
And then shave the head completely of the patient and place a plaster in their stomach as described in the treatise on plasters.
And let that stand for some times, which is the method of cautery. And do this according to that order of methods I've already mentioned.
And if through these good healings; and otherwise, then do this to him three times on the last part of his head, those that descend from the more prominent part of the head into the less prominent part of the neck. And pause between each cautery for as much time as it takes to do that, and then treat the resulting cautery as necessary.
And if you increase the tolerance of the patient and the disease is manageable, then apply the cautery in the middle part; and if your addition is greater, then do so over both corners.
And treat that until it heals; and let the olive oil cautery be as described in front.
Capitol .ix.
Regarding cautery for parasites and overall healing of the entire body.
And when you proceed with digestion of the head with jujubes and as we've said; then shave the head of the patient, and then apply cautery in the middle part of the head, and do so over all the corners of the head, and do so on the last part of him, and apply three cauterizations on the neck.
And if it is necessary in the disease of healing the body by many people and the disease is strong, then apply four cauterizations over both necks, and subsequently apply cautery until it burns out from the patient's inner parts, and raise your hand. And treat that until it heals; and let this be olive oil cautery.
Capitol .x.
Regarding cautery for epilepsy.
Cauterization is not done for epilepsy, except when it's due to phlegm.
And when you digest the brain at the beginning of his meals with jujubes and another treatment as we've described in the division when the patient is tolerant to medicine side effects.
And if it's a child that doesn't tolerate the medicines, then administer calms and chewable pills to help with digestion, before that for several days, in preparation of food assimilation.
And then shave the head of the patient, and apply cautery in one place on his head according to the previous method, and do another cautery on the back of the head, and over every corner of his head he applies cautery. And if the patient is strong and can endure it, then apply a cautery point as I said, with paralysis-inducing and calming effects on the heart over the cervical spine's vertebrae and the thoracic spine's vertebrae.
And let there be an olive oil cautery as previously described.
If the patient is a child, then apply a subtle cautery according to this manner.
Chapter XI.
On the treatment of melancholy with a cautery.
When the causes of melancholy are dampness corrupted and flesh weakened, then apply a cautery point as we have said in the presence of paralysis-inducing effects.
And if the cause of melancholy is excess declining to melancholy, and the patient's body is damp, then let them drink what purges the brain as we have described in the previous section.
And draw near to the head of the patient, and prepare decently to apply tar on this side over the circle, and place that tar in the middle of the head.
And let the patient be sixty years old, and take care of them from every part.
And apply liniment; it is more worthy to use an old remedy for sheep. And heat that over the fire until you have prepared a suitable warmth by measure, which makes the patient feel more when it becomes too much. And apply that in the middle of the head on this side in the circle, and let him stay inside until it is cooled down.
And do this to the patient every week once, in accordance with his other regimen of drinking water until he is healed; or if you wish, apply this method by making small punctures according to what suits him best, or else keep your hand on an ordered cautery: this is a type of cautery that moistens the brain equally.
And apply that cooked butter in fat or in grease.
Chapter XII.
On the treatment of descending water with a cautery.
When you have been informed about the beginning of water in the stomach according to the symptoms I described in the previous section, then start and give the patient what purges their head, and protect them from all dampness.
And let that sugar dissolve in water for several days.
And command the patient to clean their head, and apply a cautery on this side of the head; and then apply two points with two cauteries if it is the beginning of water in two stomachs, or one point if it is the beginning of water in one stomach.
Apply the cautery to all veins and arteries that are left from the chain; and let the points be as long as the temples.
And watch for bleeding during cautery; and if you see the patient's blood flow, stop temporarily with some medicine, which is available to you.
And I will come with knowledge on how to extract from arteries and remove those, as well as caution about bleeding.
Some times the neck is cautery-treated in such a way that two bones are placed with two points for subsequent production.
Chapter XIII.
On the treatment of old tears.
When tears from the stomachs are mild and through veins and arteries located manifestly on the head outside, and it is confirmed that this excess produces phlegm-producing mucus, then apply a cautery point with the one we have described in Chapter XII for beginning water treatment catching in the stomachs. Apply the cautery to the middle of the head and two points on the neck with two temples each, and two points on the neck with two bones each. And if you are lacking in addition, then apply the cautery across the entire length of the stomach under the eyebrow at a small point.
Chapter XIV.
On treating nasal odor with a cautery.
When treating it with what we have said in the previous section and does not improve your treatment, then prepare and give to the patient three nights of cod liver oil; and draw near to the head of the patient, and apply a mid-point olive oil cautery. And apply a thorn oil point with two points on the two eyebrows leaving some hair, and these should be small.
And take care not to ignite that artery.
And this is how the thorn oil cautery should be done.
Chapter XV.
On treating eyelid swelling from the stomach with a cautery.
When the eyelid is swollen due to illness or dampness, then apply a cautery point on this lunar cautery; and here is how it should be done for the patient:
And if you do it, apply the cautery on both eyebrows a little with two points all around and let them be long like the temples. And let the length of each cautery depend on the size of the eyebrow.
And do not press your hand too much on the cautery, rather according to how hot the inner part of the eyelid becomes.
The Sixteenth Chapter
When the skin turns into parts inside and on the hand, and pain affects the eye and hand.
When the skin of the eye turns into parts inside, I puncture the eye; two ways to do a cautery are used for this: one is to apply a hot iron or use medicinal substances that burn.
If a cautery is done with fire, instruct the patient in front of this that they should feel their skin as if they were experiencing the removal of impurities by those who cleanse them, until they extend and equalize; and if you place your hand at its birth point, then strengthen the eyes of the patient under a covering so that it does not burn when their skin is born.
Then when they are born and equalized, then place the head of the patient in your seat, and in the vicinity touch the eyelid of the eyes with a sign, draw the mark which resembles a holly leaf figure, and make the starting point of the sign near the skin.
And place a cut in the belly or in pus from a boil on the eye.
And apply the heat of the cautery, which is this shape for it.
And apply the cautery over the figure which you have marked, little by little, in patches visible, until the surface of the boil appears like a holly leaf entirely seemingly.
And a sign of health in your work is when you see the eyelid of the eye already contracted and the skin of them rise above the puncture of the eye.
And raise your hand and leave it there for three days, then place the cut over it with a border until the scab is formed. And care for that with ointment until it heals.
If any cause returns for the skin near its birth and the eyelid is softened, then do another cut with the cautery on it exactly as you did initially.
If the skin is in the eyelid and remains there, then apply cautery to it until it rises to its natural place and equals, so that the skin does not pinch the eye.
If you use a burning cautery like this: command the patient to feel their skin until it extends and equals, then prepare a patch in the shape of a holly leaf.
And take soap known and an animal's fat. .1., Or do this, and then mix those causes well, doing it quickly so that it does not cool down; spread this over the paper which has been made in such a way as to resemble a holly leaf shape, place this on one or both eyes; place the eye under where you cut or both; place the eye with a cut made into almond fat under the head of the patient.
And place the same over the medicine and press it a little without burning so that the patient feels the taste of the medicine, which taste is in them as if from fire.
And when the patient gets used to this burning taste, then take away the medicine and place it under your seat; thus when the burning stops, then reapply the medicine with water on the eye. And then consider if the eyelid has risen like when washed with fire or incision, which is now done here. If it does not return to that spot of the medicine on the place where no medicine was applied and does not get burned until your operation equals and the eyelid contracts.
And place the cut over it with a border until the soreness has been eradicated, and then care for that with anointing balm or another until it heals.
And for this you need to ensure during your operation that you maintain careful vigilance so that the medicine does not drip into the eye, and if the eyelid softens after a few days and any skin cause is near the eye, then apply your medicine to that spot on the eyelid which has softened, and do it in the same way as you started, and surround it until it heals.
And this is the shape of a holly leaf.
And know that men's eyes vary according to size and smallness, so according to this you will perform your tightening.
And let it not hide the path of rectitude towards that which is studied in this art.
The Seventeenth Chapter
On the treatment of cautery for fistulas that occur in the tear duct of the eye.
When you treat a fistula with what we have discussed in the divisions of illnesses and do not apply your treatment, then follow this method for cautery: instruct the patient to place their head in their seat, and let one of their servants hold their head between your hands so that it is neither burned nor disturbed by their own head.
And place the cut over almond fat or boil in the eye of the patient.
And apply heat to the cautery, which has this shape:
Which should be curved, as if it were the shape of a cane or a quill of a bird, with the heat applied from one end where the cautery is done.
And if you see, penetrate into the other extremity. And if you want it to be like when trying to do so.
However, he who is humble is better for the work in this world.
And if it's necessary to press the fistula when it's opened, extract and dry that part of him. And if it is not opened, then open it and remove the pus from him.
And place over him the cautery which is made of fire, and hold your hand on this part of you until a little bit of the cautery touches the skin near the nose, so that your hand or the patient does not get upset, then stop the cautery in the flesh and clean it.
And thus if during the start of your cautery it enters into the mouth, it is good; and otherwise, then reapply the cautery once or twice, as needed; and leave that like this for three days, and place over that spot with a bandage around and inside it to keep the dry ointment in until it heals.
If it has been more than ten days and is not healed, then place over the corrosive quick medicine inside where the bone is exposed, and scrape according to what suits in its caput.
And another method of applying a cautery to a fistula, which some early surgeons used: identify the location of the fistula and make an incision there, then place over that fissure a fine thread of which it is the form: And insert in that a quantity of one part of melted lead; and hold your hand on this with good control, so as not to disturb the patient lest the melted lead enter his nose; and cover where you pause above the nose of the patient like a fuse in albumen or water, allowing the lead to adhere to the location of the fistula and heal that through miraculous healing.
And if the fistula has healed with what we have said about the cautery and treatment, it's good; and otherwise, then it is necessary to administer a noseplugs and reduce the fistula into the nasal cavity according to where its location suits.
Chapter XVIII.
On applying a cautery to a cut on the foot.
Wounds that occur are cuts in the lips, especially in children's lips.
So when you treat those cuts as we have told in the sections and do not deepen your treatment, then apply the small cautery with a knife according to this form that suits:
And let the cavity follow the subtlety of the blade.
And place that initial cautery in those cuts where the cautery reaches into the root of the cuts.
And treat it with dressings until it heals.
Chapter XIX.
On applying a cautery to a fistula in the mouth.
When in the root of the uvula or on the palate or at the base of the teeth there's pus and you need to cut, and if it has burst and is old, and if you make a cut and then a fistula forms, and when you treat that without deepening the treatment, then prepare a cautery according to the amount received in the fistula, and place this ignited over the nose of the fistula, and hold your hand so as for the heat of the fire to reach its root, and do this once or twice at the end; and when treating it, follow what we have told about treatment until it heals.
And if the healing is removed and it has healed, it's good; and otherwise, then it is necessary to discover the location and expose the bone according to what suits in its chapter.
Chapter XX.
On applying a cautery to teeth and softening of the gums.
When the gums are softened by moisture and teeth are swollen, when you treat those with medicines and do not apply pressure, then hold the head of the patient in its place, and apply the cautery according to this form so as not to allow any deviation; and when you place the nozzle over the tooth, immediately insert the ignited cautery gently inside it, and hold your hand on this side such that the heat from the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
And remove your hand, and then reapply the cautery several times according to how you wish.
And let the patient moisten his mouth with salt water and hold that for an hour, then rinse it out, so that the swollen tooth is reduced, the gum softened, and the moisture dried.
Chapter XXI.
On applying a cautery to tooth pain.
When tooth pain is due to coldness, or in it there is wax or infection, and if you do not treat the condition with medicine, then apply a cautery in that area according to two methods: either on the surface of oxen, or by fire.
Applying the cautery on the surface means you take an ox's hoof and heat it in iron until it is red-hot. Then hold that over the extremity of a torch, dip it into boiling water, and place it gently on the painful tooth so that it becomes cool.
And then iterate that for several times so that the heat of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
And if you see, submerge wool or fat in the container above it, then place that over the painful tooth, and place the burning iron over it until the heat reaches to the root of the tooth.
May however, the cautery with fire be that you wait for the smoke of wood or iron, and there is some hardness in his heart, and the heat of the fire does not reach to the mouth of the patient.
And then heat the cautery to its shape which will come, place that on the tooth and hold your hand under the heat so it is cooled down; do this several times when the pain increases or in another day or the following day.
And know that because of that heat from the cautery, which fills the patient's mouth with good warmth, leave that there for an hour and have them drink; this is the form of the cautery.
And apply heat as far as you see fit according to what's possible for you.
And this is the form of the tube:
Chapter XXII.
On the treatment of hernias with cautery.
When hernias are caused by phlegm and cold fluids that do not respond to medicines, and you see a slight digestion of those, then heat the cautery according to this form, having two straight ends so that the smoke of the cautery can burn the other end, and place the burning instrument on that pustule once, and if needed do it again until it reaches the root of the pustule.
And if the pustule is small, then place the cautery according to the amount of the pustule, and apply it for three days and place wool or fat in a container filled with water until what has been burned by the fire becomes swollen.
And then treat that with ointment, lint, and cloths until it is healed.
Chapter XXIII.
On the treatment of gout and constriction in veins.
When the moisture enters the channel of the lung, especially when this is due to cold constitution, you should know that the patient needs to be relieved at the beginning with laxative medicines, and then apply heat on the source of the gallbladder in the area where it is compressed.
And remember that you should not let the heat reach the gallbladder nor burn a large part of the patient's neck, just a little.
And apply heat with another cautery on the joint at the top of the last rib of the patient. And the application of the cautery on his collarbone should be according to the previous method.
And then treat that with what has been described until it is healed.
Chapter XXIV.
On the treatment of lung disease and coughing.
When cough and lung disease are caused by moisture that does not have fever or inflammation, but is an old cough, then apply heat with two cauterizers on the sternum in the compressed areas of the thorax and stomach; and on another cauterizer in the middle of the chest between two breasts; and treat the collarbone with heat according to the previous method.
And if you wish, use a puncturing method with the cauterizers which are called puncta, and this is their form as described in ear pain treatment.
And make points inside the cuts; and then treat that with what has been described until it is healed.
And have the cautery have three levels for this treatment: you can do three cauterizations in one place according to this form:
Chapter XXV.
On the treatment of tinnitus that is the head of the auditory canal.
When the head of the auditory canal is dislocated due to lubricating moisture and does not return in its usual time, you should correct its dislocation before it returns to its normal position, and by applying a slight movement it will also be corrected like we have demonstrated. Then know that initially reducing the dislocation, and then having the patient lie on their side or on their back; and then lift the neck which is at the start of the tinnitus, above the parts on top when your left hand fingers touch these areas, if the joint is dislocated inwards.
And then heat the cautery with two tips; and this is its form:
And then apply heat to the neck so that this heat penetrates into the other side; and here comes the figure of heat application as follows with four heated cautery tips:
And some operations are adjusted according to this count, and these are the cautery treatments.
And place over the cautery to add salt powder, and then have the patient lie down on their back, and let the body heal for some time until it is comfortable.
And if the dislocation is on the upper part and the elbow is involved, then do this: apply a cautery over muscle at the elbow or with point cauteries, which confirm the joint and dry up moisture, making the patient well.
Chapter XXVI.
About stomach cautery.
When there is irritation and moisture in the stomach that leads to expansion and multiplication of its contents, if you continue with the methods of treatment without curing it, then you will see that the patient is above reversing his position, extending their hands and things around them, and then apply a three-step cautery: in one step leave the feet as wide as the width of a single hand at the elbow cautery, and in two steps place the two sides of the body of the cautery, so that the triangular figure of the cautery appears; and extend those who are not properly positioned to create abrasion.
And if the depth of the cautery is the amount of the two thirds of the thickness of the roughness of the chain.
And if you like, apply large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this shape; this is a cautery according to the circular shape as follows:
And have the stomach touched by punctures where this cautery scares: and you place points on the stomach according to the amount you want with heat, then apply a cautery at these points; and treat that with treatment that precedes until it is healed.
Chapter XXVII.
About stomach cautery in fever.
When fever is accompanied by pain due to coldness or moisture or excessive wind that causes the patient's normal condition to be disturbed by excessive discharge, if the treatment we have described is followed without causing discomfort, then you will see that the patient is lying on their back with their head raised, and touches three cauteries according to this shape and amount above the fever across the flanks, allowing for the patient's position while lying down.
And let the space between each cautery be according to the thickness of the thumb, and make the cauteries according to the length of the body straight.
And don't mix up your touch with the points at which you apply the cautery.
And if the amount of this heat is equal to the thickness of the roughness of the chain, and is not properly adjusted; and if the patient stands on their feet; and if it is not standing, then they are lying down, which has already spread their things, and raises their arms.
And it is within your ability to perform these cauteries with the surgical knife when you have subtlety and caution in the art.
And be careful not to overdo the cautery process, and ensure that the heat reaches everywhere in the chain so that it reaches every part of the body and spreads through the organs, as this chain is delicate; know this.
Chapter XXVIII.
About making a puncture in fever with a cautery.
When fever has inflammation or abscess and you want to know if that abscess is in the flesh of the fever or on the skin, then if it is in the flesh of the fever, the patient feels heavy breathing and increased pain.
And if it is on the skin of the fever, then the pain is intense and often that already fatigues doctors in treating him.
So have the patient lie on their back; and place over the spot of the abscess with heat; and apply the cautery which resembles a rod, the shape of which was described in another page. And apply this cautery and the second one so that the entire chain is heated through, reaching to the liver, allowing for it to heal healthily.
And then treat that with other wound healing treatments until it heals.
And do not use this form of cautery other than the one studied in the art of medicine which is prolonged, and those with which you are familiar with many symptoms; however, experience some operations might burn over this procedure, but follow that advice, it will be better.
Chapter XXIX.
About stomach cautery.
The ancient stomach cauteries performed on gashes were done according to this method and this is what you should take from the gashes of aristology: take a long sharp tool that can be found dry and long, which has the thickness of your thumb.
And then immerse that in oil and place it in the fire, and apply this cautery at that spot between the continuation of the scapula and the collarbone; and with two small punctures on each side, one inclined towards the part behind where the beard is, and two more cauterizations below that, inclined downwards between the fifth rib and the navel, one slightly inclined towards the back parts; and another cautery in the middle of the chest; and another over the stomach, and three cauterizations at the back parts; and one cautery at that spot which is between the two shoulders, and two more on each side of the chest, leaving the cautery between the two shoulders.
And do not think of touching your hand to the cautery, but rather observe the patient's condition as it is being performed.
And they have said that some men who use iron cauterization simulating rays and fire do this by inserting it into the location between the ribs, where they reach from one to another pustule, as we described in the pustule of the leg.
There is no reason for fear in this perforation with cautery; just as it often happens when you burn the location of the fistula where it does not heal.
Title: XXX
On the cauterization of the wound.
When you treat the foot disease as we have said about treatment in division and do not apply your own treatment, then when you cauterize it is done in three ways, all of which are diagonal. One method involves making three or four lines in a row according to the length of the wound following the pattern of the leg's cauterizations, the figure of which has preceded.
And between each cauterization is the thickness of a finger or slightly less than that. The method of cauterization is the same method as the one we described in leg cauterizations equally.
And do not touch your hand to the cautery; and let the patient lie on their back.
And there is another way to cauterize; you light the cautery with two streams. This method we have described in the chapter on muscle dislocation, and lift the patient so that their weight is evenly distributed over their left foot when it is elevated perpendicular to the wound area.
And for your elevation, which is how you raise the body according to the length of the torso, so that cauterizations are made according to the width of the body.
And then insert both streams into the middle, ignite them, in that place where those penetrate the spine from the other side.
And then remove the cautery; and so it is done by making four cauterizations.
And if you see, cauterize with a three-stream cautery.
And then you treat the wound from the cautery because it has had too much exposure to heat for too many days; more is considered better than the other previous causes in treatment.
Title: XXI
On the cauterization of dropsy.
Cauterize not in dropsy but specifically in swellings.
When you treat dropsy as we have described in the division and do not apply your own treatment, then consider that you should cauterize with four cauterizations around the umbilicus and over the stomach, and another one on the leg, and another one on the foot, and two cauterizations between the ribs of the back, and a cauterization in the middle of the foot, and another one on the stomach. And the depth of the cauterization should be roughly equal to the thickness of the spine.
And then let the wound open up completely so that heat can reach for a long time.
And don't remove the patient from treatment near the cautery as you would for someone who has been treated with two medicines; and it should be well accompanied by healing assistance.
The shape of the cautery over which it is cauterized in the stomach should be similar to that of the one previously treated, and that over which the back is cauterized should be like an olive according to its previous form.
Title: XXXII
On the cauterization of limbs and thighs.
When the feet are swollen with watery dropsy and are filled with saline water, consider that you should cauterize the feet above the back of the foot in such a way that it is between the auricular and annular bones; lift your hand to the cautery and do not twist it; then raise your hand and do not return it completely as the saline water dissolves.
The shape of the cautery is like this: Then make two cauterizations on each thigh, and for every object that you have made a cauterization, do it at the end of the surgical instrument. And make the cauterizations according to the length of the thigh: leave one end and the other halfway on the thigh; and for each thigh, two cauterizations.
And let the opened wound heal over a long period of time so that some water dissolves from it.
And then treat with those causes which we have described.
Title: XXXIII
On the cauterization of abdominal cavities.
When the abdominal cavity is affected by friction and dampness causing distension, these are digestive and retentive functions which reside in the stomach and intestines. It should be treated as described in the methods of treatment and not your own; sometimes the patient suffers from cauterization due to the disturbance of these functions, so you should cauterize this with a large cautery over its stomach according to what was described earlier in abdominal cavity cauterization, with the circumference of the stomach, and four cauterizations around the subtle umbilical area, with a small, subtle cautery; and one cauterization on the spleen above the larger lump or two cauterizations.
And if you encounter excessive moisture and the patient tolerates it, then cauterize this over the navel and over the intestines, enhancing your adjustment of two cauterizations on the stomach and near the groin area; this is a complete cure for youth which you cannot go wrong with.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
Regarding the treatment of old hemorrhoids.
When they are in nature causing old hemorrhoids or one due to large humors or corrupted wetness, and they are cured as we have said in the division and do not give your cure, then apply three cauteries on the pus left on the two small and triangular lumbar areas, and after that cauterize on the navel spot for two fingers.
And if you observe that the stomach of the patient is chilled and the food they eat does not digest well, and their face has become flushed, then apply a large cautery as it was previously mentioned; and after that cauterize on the chest, and apply another cautery on the back, and use a needle-like cautery on the belly area, leave the cautery in place for some time, and soon afterwards treat internally until they recover.
Section 35.
Regarding the treatment of anthers near their absorption site.
When you remove anther, then you ignite the cautery that is ready as a tool. Place the ignited tool within that anther near its absorption site, and continue using your hand until the heat of the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which the disease flows.
And do this once or twice, if there are many, then cauterize each according to what we have recounted, and after that treat those with your prescribed ointments until they recover.
And if you apply a large cautery on the buttocks, it will heal more quickly in young people.
Section 36.
Regarding the treatment of fistulas that occur naturally in various parts of the patient's body.
When nature does not comply with the procedure we recommended in its place, and the patient is frightened by this, they will be cured by using a cautery.
So when someone has a natural fistula in the buttocks, and it is old, full of pus that is both hot and corrupted moisture, then take that pus out with a thin tube, and after that know the depth of the area by using the tool mentioned before.
Place the cautery tool which resembles a ray for heating. And place the ignited cautery into this fistula, according to the depth in which the tube reaches.
And iterate over that area with the cautery until those corrupted bodies are burned out. Do this once or twice or three times, according to your need's quantity.
And protect yourself from burning the nerves and veins; or if the fistula extends to the bladder or the intestine, then protect all those areas; and do this procedure only when the fistula is in a fleshly location and you consider it non-penetrative.
And after that treat the area until it heals.
And if the area is sealed off, and all substances have been removed from it, but it still drains for a long time, then you can know that it has been completely healed.
And if the substances are not from your body's own, then you can know that it is penetrating or in the beginning of your body's corruption, or it relates to those causes which will bring memory of themselves in that location.
Section 37.
Regarding the treatment of sores.
When in sores there is pain due to friction or by large wind, and the belly of the patient becomes pale, then take care to apply a cautery on those sores with a point-like cautery over each sore, using one that you have accustomed yourself to for recall.
And strengthen the application of the cautery on a slight delay, so that three line-like cauteries will come in, and then they heal more quickly in young people.
Section 38.
Regarding the treatment of the bladder.
When there is debility and loss of moisture in the bladder due to friction and corruption such that the patient's urine does not retain, then cauterize it on the area with pus left above the bladder, starting where the skin meets the buttock, and apply one cautery on the right side part and another on the left.
And the length of each cautery according to the amount of pus; apply that with a cautery on the lowest part of both sides. Or use two cauteries if necessary.
And use needle-like cauteries as previously described.
Section 39.
Regarding the treatment of the womb.
When there is friction and corruption in the womb, as well as prohibition for conception, and if her menstrual cycles are corrupted and delayed, causing abdominal pain, then you should have this area treated with three cauteries around the navel region; as we described in the treatment of the bladder. And place a cautery on the area above both sides or use two cauteries, using needle-like cauteries.
Section 40.
Regarding the treatment of dislocation of the anus.
When corruption seeps into the area of the anus and causes reasons for its instability, a sign is that the buttock extends over the other when compared between them. The location of the dislocation is found in their thigh joint.
Then you should burn the patient's buttocks around the junction of the water exit, using a similar cautery. Because when you try this in the circuit of the junction as it turns out, and to prevent the junction from falling off, aim for the middle location of the circle.
And as per the shape described in the treatment for the stomach's cautery.
And if this cautery is not available to you, then use three olive wood cauteries instead.
And make the cautery according to the intensity of the pain in all the chain; and then treat that which is within until it is healed.
Chapter XLIV.
On the treatment for the sciatic vein cautery.
When pain occurs in the junction of water, and it is due to cold and dampness causing swelling in the buttocks, the patient heals with what we have said earlier without consulting anyone else. If this is antiquated knowledge, then when you notice swelling caused by larger fluids in the buttocks, either with hot pills or artificial ones or similar; and then proceed to treat that area.
And the method of the cautery in this case follows two methods: either a cautery with burning medicines, or a cautery with fire.
There are two known methods, of which one involves applying three triangular cauteries on that area over the width of the thigh; and then ensure they have good depth. And between each cautery is the size of the mentioned swellings, whether it's from olive wood or large cauteries.
Consider four cauteries on the middle area over the head of the anus for some red marks from the cautery.
And if you wish, burn around the circle described in the treatment for ankle dislocation, which is a circle containing and burning all the pain throughout the chain.
And this is the method of cautery in cases where pain is confined to the ankle and does not extend into the leg.
And if it extends into the leg, then apply two cauteries on the leg at the location where you find pain in the buttocks; and one cautery on the groove for about four or five of the lateral parts.
And if it's a knife-like cautery, then the depth of the cautery should be according to the intensity of pain in the chain.
And if the swelling makes pain extend within the area near the ankles, then treat that area here with a cautery at three points or four or more if necessary.
And if the swelling causes pain to spread below the knee in the leg, then treat that area here with a knife-like cautery.
And when treating with cautery, be careful not to use it until you burn nerves or large blood vessels, and due to this, there might be damage or contraction on the buttocks.
And I have seen some who apply cautery to the groove and finish with it during the treatment, and the fire-filled bed causes the swelling in the foot, and burns through and corrupts all of the leg. And something like that happens to the belly with strong vinegar solution, and because of this death occurs.
And if the pain is in two parts at once, treat each one according to this method.
And the wise ones say about ankle cautery that this is the method: make it like a circular iron ring where its circumference should be as long as one hand; and its hole according to the thickness of an almond or slightly more.
And inside that circle make another triangle; and the space between them is according to the size of your foot; those circles are made in two parts; and the length of those cuts is one toe or two toes, make grooves of iron appropriately corresponding to the circles; and this is its shape:
And ignite it in the fire until it becomes red and starts to emit sparks, then place it on the ankle joint, with the buttocks over the calf area. And then apply three circular cauteries in one go to that area.
And then smooth that area for three days; and cover the opened wound with bandages for too many days; and treat it with ointment until healed.
Albucasis: or, children, from this type of cautery, we have used it due to the danger in examining them, and because of this, we have found those who examine them.
And for those who suffer from large cauteries on them, find that place on their body.
And for those who apply burning medicines, make two perforated circles where the iron dust goes in. The length of their parts should be as long as two or more of your fingers.
And if the space between each is according to the size of the mentioned swellings; leave them below and above, making sure they contain each other in this manner:
And place the buttocks on the ankle joint while holding your hand over the ankle area; take hot water and pour it between the two circles, making sure its quality is with small fire gradually. Keep that for an hour's worth of heat, allowing the patient to endure the biting and adjustment—like being bitten by fire—until the biting stops.
And then raise your hand to the tool and wipe away all the water residue from the heated water.
And let it lie for three days and place it over that lump inside which the redness of the heated adjustment is intensified, and continue to do this for several more days. This lasts until your recovery; this happens later in youth.
And then treat it with ointment inside which the healing occurs.
And if the pain extends within the thigh or leg, have them lie in the position where water is contained according to how it's done in equal water.
And this is the method of heated water, and I have already written about that in the treatise on the correction of medicines. Mix equal parts of alkali and a white ash, then divide them into two. Place each part in a new vessel where the one you leave should be pierced with a small rod, according to how much fits into their rays.
Place the bottom of the vessel with another layer of boiling water, and add this living alkali and ash to it. Pour in enough cool water so that it covers your hand by a finger's width, and when you grasp those (ingredients) with your good compression, let the hot water from the cooling water drip onto the part left in the boiling water.
And then adjust all that water, and pour it over fresh live ash and another new alkali. Then, this becomes intensely hot, which is administered in parts of medical operations and in the cautery of other limbs. This operation involves using fire.
And there are some medicines in which parts are heated, such as when the skin is burned, or with the use of melted wax and ash mixed together that need to be combined.
And Gaulia recounts an operation and treatment from the ancients for which water pain and sciatica nerve pain are cured, and praises this method greatly, saying that it requires no other treatment, and one recovers in one go as described, giving a person strength and health similar to that of another.
And if it's near to a hernia in the back, and if no vertebra is found, take some raw fig. And then divide this into several parts and place it in water where there is pain, or on the thigh, or on the leg, and tie it up.
And leave it for the duration of three hours or until you notice any change in the condition of your recovery.
And then rub it with oil until the patient's body becomes red, and then introduce heat from the sun, for when the pain ceases, they are healed.
Know that it is not appropriate to use cautery with these medicines but rather for the body's natural expulsion process.
May already Escorides taught that when there is a vein rupture in a goat, it is cauterized; the animal will heal faster. And do this with the cautery according to this method: take wool and dip it in old oil, then place it between the ribs and the back of the neck.
And then take a dried goat's horn and heat it with fire until charcoal is formed; and place the patient over the wool and leave them there until the charred part stretches out. And repeat this process, and don't stop until the sensation of the burn reaches into the water and rests on the pain.
This method of cautery is called cow's cautery.
Capitol .xlii. (This indicates the forty-second section or chapter.)
On the application of cautery for two types of pain.
Some pains in both parts are due to several causes, such as impact or percussion or excessive expulsion, and by similar causes, through infusion of wet and rough matter.
And cautery is not used otherwise but in this single type which is done through the discharge of rough material.
So know that you should evacuate from the patient using fitted pills and similar to them, which are made on both sides where there is pain for three lines according to the width of your body. For each line, if there's a sign in any case, do cautery or more, depending on the tolerance capacity of your body and its effectiveness.
And perform the cautery using point-shaped cautery.
And if you wish, you can do it with three or four points of the medial ligula according to this method:
Capitol .xliii. (This indicates the forty-third section or chapter.)
On cautery at the onset of glibosis.
Some symptoms of this illness in small children lead to glibosis; and a sign that it begins in them is when you notice their structure becoming fluid, along with an increase in swelling and mobility.
And you find it at the end of the spinal column of the back and on the buttocks where it starts to rise above the other vertebral columns.
And when you do this and wish to stop it, then perform the cautery using a round-shaped cautery according to this method: Let the cautery cover all parts of the vertebral column equally.
And if you wish, perform the point-shaped cautery on the circuit of the vertebral column for two or three lines. And make the points in between them.
And then treat the area so that it heals, using what we have said for water treatment.
Watch out that a cautery not be applied in gout caused by nerve spasm.
Chapter XLIV.
On the treatment of gouty pain and joint pain.
When joint pain is caused by cold fluids that permeate every part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
And thus how gout caused by rubbing with the hands is cured using a method of treatment and not leaving the pains unresolved, then they use cautery.
And you will apply the cautery near the evacuation in the circuit of the joint on the foot with hot points.
And an olive-shaped cautery, like this is what it looks like:
And if it's necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. And if the pains climb into the joints or to other joints, and this is how they manifest, then apply the cautery on each joint with three or four points of this olive-shaped cautery.
And if you find that this kind of cautery is necessary for your use, then apply the cautery without pressing too hard with your hand on it before, just around the size of the vein.
And if the pains climb into both joints, then administer the cautery which we have mentioned in our chapter.
And if the pains are only in the hands, and it's called gout, then puncture along the lines as they twist around in the veins, puncturing on those two lines.
And if some of the pains remain in the fingers, then puncture on the circuit of veins over each knuckle and over the thumb.
And if the pains stay for days around the elbows or muscles, then apply the cautery to all parts of the aids.
And do not allow the patient to return to poor behavior and medicine intake, for if proper behavior and sweating occur with this cautery, then health will come about, God helps.
Chapter XLV.
On the treatment of ruptures.
When there's rupture in the veins and telling of hernias appearing before the intestine at its base, and this is how they begin to proceed, then you should instruct the patient to abstain from food for a day and use mild remedies so that the intestine can heal from its abdominal wound.
And proceed with the patient between your hands on their back, and command them to have their breath in that place where there is a wound or an appearance of hernia or intestines.
And proceed to return that between your fingers and test the rupture over the bones of the knee, marking the extremity which is similar to half of a circle in the lower parts of the body.
And then apply the olive-shaped cautery like this:
and let it burn with small sparks. And then return the hernia or intestine to its original position and place your hand over the area to prevent further protrusion.
You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs and placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, one more on their chest, holding their hands.
And then place the cautery over that mark with your hand on the cautery straight, and insert that into where you find the bones of the knee in the middle of the thigh; repeat this process for another round if you have not succeeded in inserting it into the bone in the first attempt.
And observe wisely the movement of the hernia during your cautery treatment, do not forcefully push the hernia that might cause harm or other serious problems for the patient.
And know that when you have the cautery, do not touch the bones, your operation would not be effective.
And consider that the size and measure of children's cauteries should be delicate according to their age and size.
And proceed to care for the area of the cautery for three days with bandages until the scab from the burn heals.
And then treat that with other ointments until it is healed.
And the patient should be resting on their back for 40 days until the wound and the injury are sealed.
And consider that you should withhold nourishment for the patient according to the duration of their treatment, which stretches out their stomachs, and ensure the hernia does not protrude from the effort of healing.
And as it approaches 40 days, then administer medicine properly made and keep the patient for another 40 days.
And if they are reduced by work and overeating, and drink, and strong drinks, then when using this whole regimen of recovery, it will result in their healing.
And I will tell you the treatment for ruptures in other parts of the abdomen, starting off, and it doesn't stop, then cauterize that rupture with an oval-shaped cautery according to its size, and let as much liquid be absorbed from the vein like half of its length; and treat it with what we have said before, and do not adjust further.
And already tell some first that the rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery according to this form, because it is marked for testing:
And a line is held at the width in the middle part of the largest bulge above the rupture, and another line above; after that, place your hand on a point cautery, but the first cautery should be softer and better.
Chapter 46.
On the treatment of applying a cautery to torsions or twists.
When discomfort or pain persists in some limbs due to a blow or impact and does not resolve with the usual treatments over a long period of time, it seems that using a pointed cautery might help.
And apply the points of the cautery according to the size and smallness of each member, its effectiveness and development, as well as the location of the twist and pain.
So if the first treatment with the cautery brings relief, it's good; otherwise, apply more cautery to the area; and usually, for such pains, puncture the affected body part with the cautery where you are near the patient, so that you can get those points of the cautery inside until the patient feels better.
Chapter 47.
On the treatment of applying a cautery to leprosy.
Some leprosy patients undergo cautery treatments due to significant youth, and more so if the type of leprosy is caused by the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
And when you want to apply cautery to that area, consider whether the leprosy is generalised and if it has been treated as we said in the section on treatment and not otherwise, nor here. You should be cautious about the patient's health because corruption could affect their entire body and all parts of them; so apply cautery at this point: one in the middle of the head, and another slightly behind it, place your forehead at the end of their hair; do this on both sides; also apply one at the back, over the neck or between the shoulders.
And conclude by holding your hand with the cautery for a while inside which initiates a small pressure in the mouth, and if their breaths are disrupted, to alleviate this; then apply the cautery on the flesh according to what is necessary.
And if the leprosy is already widespread over the body and becomes clearly visible, it seems that you should apply these cautery treatments to this area as we've discussed for the head; then apply a cautery on the tip of the nose, two cauteries on each eyebrow, two on each shoulder blade, four on the ribs, one large near the pubis, one on the hip bone, two on each ankle, one on each ankle, two on each knee, and two on each muscle; also apply two at his heels. Apply cautery to all joints of these parts and feet, as well as on each of his ankles, and over each of his toes, and over the bony prominences of his body.
And watch out for the nerves that are above the heel so as not to burn those.
Some treatments involve applying a cautery on the bone of the heel and another in the mouth of the stomach, and another on the intestines.
And know that the more accurately you apply the cauteries, the better and faster they heal; and know that the patient does not feel pain in the cautery as you do with your nails, since their body is already numb.
And it seems that the cauteries should be large or small according to the limbs and joints, as decided by the type of tools used.
And after that, treat the cautery with tallow powder mixed with honey and the other treatment until it heals.
Chapter 48.
On the treatment of applying a cautery to a state of stupor or numbness.
When a limb is paralyzed or numb and treated with medicines, bandages, but still doesn't heal, then you should apply cautery to the paralyzed member using cauteries according to the size of the member or its smallness.
And make your cautery penetrate about a little bit into the base of the spine. And then treat that with an ointment until it heals.
And sometimes, certain areas of numbness are treated with cautery that affects the limbs and feet, as well as the shoulder blades, you see the movement of the nerves affecting that member, and the numbness is alleviated.
Do not apply this treatment without understanding the anatomy of limbs and the exit of all moving body's nerves, only those who are knowledgeable should do so.
Chapter 49.
On the treatment of applying a cautery to those that turn white, indicating a condition or disease.
When the whites are old and don't respond to any of the medicines or ointments, then you should apply a cautery to that area for a bit according to the size of the base where it is applied, until the whiteness and color return, and the color of the area changes.
And after that, treat it with tallow and lentil powder mixed with roasted oil, and leaves of horseradish, or the fat from a pigeon or from an oyster, each ingredient is used in part, all are mixed together, then apply lard to one cloth and place it over the affected area until it heals.
Chapter 50.
On the treatment of applying a cautery to children.
When cancer begins and you want it to stop, then apply the cautery in a circular manner around that area along its circulatory path as it has moved.
And the wise ones say that it should be treated with a circular cautery around the middle spot; however, I do not see this way, for I fear it might be an ulcer, and I have seen this in some instances.
And the pustule should be treated by applying a circular cautery around its path as we have said, or with several spots of cautery.
End of chapter.
On the treatment of boils through cautery.
When a boil takes longer to mature, and this is due to an excess causing it, or because of the patient's old age leading to decline, with few symptoms, or through time, and you wish to hasten its maturation; then apply several small pointed cauteries around its path; and place what will speed up its maturation.
Perhaps if you wish to perform the puncturing of it with a cautery, then you light the type of cautery like this: and place that in the middle of the boil so that the probe penetrates.
And if the heat from the cautery in that place reaches you, so that the arm's circulation is relieved; and then treat it internally until it heals.
End of chapter 52.
On the treatment of corroding through cautery.
Corrosion is a spreading decay in a member, which eats away that area like fire consumes dry wood.
Then if you see that corrosion in the place it affects with a fire, then you apply hot metal cauteries small and large according to what is suitable for that place where it corrodes.
And then apply the cautery around completely so that you eradicate all corrosion without causing any harm to it.
And then leave that place for three days, and place your hand over the areas treated by cautery until all the scabs are eradicated and all the decay is gone.
And then treat that with meat healing ointments.
Perhaps if after three days you see that the flesh grows healthy in the place where there was decay, then yes; but if not, then apply the cautery over what is rotten in those corrupted areas again.
And corrosion can be treated with some doses of quick medicine, which is half in the place of cautery. However, the cautery with fire is a slight and rapid action.
And I have already described the treatment of it with quick medicine in the division, so take that when you have need for it from it.
End of chapter 53.
On the treatment of warts and similar conditions.
Warts appear in various parts of the body that are called warts, and it's a large cause, entering in, which affects the skin; and treating them with a cautery is done in two ways, one being with fire and the other with boiling water.
To treat with fire, you ignite the cautery like a small coal, which is made of iron according to the quantity that contains the wart in every part, and it should have fine grooves.
And then place that lit over the wart, and then rotate your hand with the cautery around the wart until the cautery reaches the depth of the wart. And leave that for three days until you start to feel relief in the arm. And then cover that with bandages soaked in vinegar and salt, and leave the bandage over it for a night, once it has eradicated its roots.
And then treat the area with meat healing ointment until it heals.
And if they are non-convertible, and warts occur on the surface of the body, mainly in the armpits and the feet, then you should apply to those with cautery made of earth or iron or coal. And take one of these into a container; place that above the wart; and pour a small amount of boiling water into the container, stir your hand, and move it all over as if pressing on the edge of the container in the root of the wart, and let the boiling water flow through the exit point of the root of the cautery. And wait for the patient to chew on the boiling water for an hour, then remove that; once the wart has eroded its roots, it will be eradicated.
And do this with these and repeat it for all of them until you have applied it to every single one in the body.
And then treat those pustules that have been eradicated by this method, using ointments for the flesh to regenerate.
End of chapter 54.
On the treatment of tremors through cautery.
When experiencing one or more tremors due to rubbing on the nerves or from fever caused by rubbing, or due to another similar cause, you should apply four cauteries or five of them on the ribs of the back, between each rib with a single cautery; and on the feet, over the stomach, apply an olive-cautery.
And the tremors of you will subside, and hasten the recovery of your illness by rubbing.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
Regarding cautery for heart injuries.
When in the body there are boils, and pus-filled wounds that are made from thick, rotten substances; therefore when it comes to treatment at their appearance, it should be treated with cautery over the entire head of the fistula using a fine-pointed cautery under the tip of a rod; or a long resectoscope; or a slow-conical cautery.
And some ulcers are cauterized upon the beginning of their expulsion according to this manner; they do not harden and it breaks down the excess, making those heal.
However, it must be that this is done near blood evacuation through phlebotomy.
End of the sixth chapter.
Regarding cautery for bleeding from a surgical wound due to an artery incision.
Too many ulcers where there is bleeding from an artery that needs to be drained, you should drain the wound itself or make a puncture in the abscesses or the member's cautery, and then resembling it, it becomes difficult to maintain that.
So when it comes to such a thing, you hold your hand over the artery's opening and place your finger there, press down on those particular ulcers inside so that stops the blood flow of the wound, letting your finger there and not let it escape.
And place over the fire for the olive cauteries small and large, by number of points, and exhale over those into which there are flames.
And take from those a small or large one according to the place and wound where the artery is broken, over that vein promptly once you've maintained your finger there, and apply cautery into which it will be cut off and contained that blood.
And if the blood is expelled from the artery's opening when you maintain your finger there and remove the cautery, then take another finely applied olive cautery which are prepared in fire, and therefore do not stop doing this one after another until the blood is contained.
And watch that you don't burn the nerves here, and that it brings about other mischief to the patient.
And know that when blood flows from the artery, it's not possible to restrict the blood in those cases, especially when the artery is large, unless with one of four ways: or use this kind of cautery we have mentioned, or extraction if it cannot be removed, for when it can be removed its ends are burned and the blood flow is contained; or be tied by wax or thread due to strong constriction, or placed on the patient using medicines whose virtue restricts the blood; and strengthened with powder in a decent constricting.
Let that person who administers decent constriction to the patient use thread and pressure with cloths or due to causes of burning effects and appearances, not apply anything but tar.
If this must be done and the doctor or medicine is not present, then open as we have indicated over the opening of that vein in such a way as we have said, and understand to apply a very tight constriction to it within which the blood should stop from most parts of the wound, and above the artery do not maintain your finger; and over the artery be rubbed with cold water for a long time until the blood coagulates and thickens; and consider when it is necessary to use cautery or medicine.
Regarding incisions, punctures, wounds, and bloodletting as well as their appearances.
We have already mentioned in the first chapter all illnesses where fire cautery is suitable and with burning medicine, and their occasions and causes, as well as the tools necessary for those cases, I have organized the chapters on the body's condition within the feet.
I proceed in this chapter for that same purpose, so to alleviate what the one asking wants, then about what they have requested.
And before I start this, listen carefully, that in this chapter it's about what was in the first chapter regarding cautery.
And because of that, you should be very cautious, which in this operation involves draining ulcers where it has blood in which life depends on the application of medicine to the vein or incision over the abscess or opening for discharge or cleaning of the wound, or extraction of a needle or incision of pus and their appearances. And from all those there are accompanied fear and trembling, and in the most extreme case, death.
And I warn you that don't fall into situations where there are deaths, for some ulcers require methods of men and various types of illnesses. And there's some that will die from their illness and it's a light one for them, and also due to the intensity of what they find with their illness, and because of the duration of their illness, fear which means death.
And those are the ones that give you their concern and statement, you expect for that health, and their illness is harmful.
And therefore don't agree to what someone comes to you about in this manner; and your caution should be greater than greediness and your appetite; and do not presume any cause on this without certainty of knowledge that verifies what you believe, and from which it can derive a reasonable success.
In the treatment of all your sick patients, predict and indicate for each their recovery, where in that is assistance to you concerning acquisition of fame and memory, praise, and glory.
Oh, children, may God listen to your understanding and not impose direction and protection upon you, as is in his hand.
And I have ordered this chapter to be distinguished by chapters according to the chapter of cauterization, concerning the treatment of head wounds among feet, so that what you request from this and of which you need is made clear to you.
First chapter.
Concerning the treatment of water that is contained in the head of children.
Know that this sickness, which appears in children's heads during infancy, strengthens the head of the child as it grows.
And some bumps appear due to unknown causes, which are not understood.
I have not seen this sickness in anyone other than children; and for all those I have seen dying from it, it seems like a left-over task on them.
And I have seen that a child's head was filled with water, and the size of their head was always magnificently maintained within which it could not bear to be put because of the size of its head; moreover, than moisture increased within which became death.
And this moisture either accumulates between the bone and the skull, or accumulates from outside onto the head.
When the operation is in that place where moisture is between the bone and the skull, and pus is little, then you have to make an incision in the middle of the head with a crack in the width, and let the length of the crack be two inches so that the moisture flows out. This is the way for the operation:
And if the moisture is more increased and pus is greater, then these are two cracks according to this manner:
And if the moisture is outside of the skull, its sign is that you open all the corners of the head from every side, and when you press that water in your own hand on the parts inside, it doesn't remain hidden like this. And when you make an incision in the middle of the head according to this manner, with three cracks:
And at the site of the incision, extract all the moisture; and then strengthen the cracks with bandages and feathers; and on the fifth day apply grease from above and oil to that area. Then remove the wound dressing and care for the wound with lint and ointment, and strengthen the head with equal consistency; and feed the patient with dry food of low humidity until the member is comforted and healed.
And it is another method for making an incision that takes into account the size of the pus pocket and the accumulation of water. Some bumps may be more in the back of the head (occipital area), or on the front side, or to the right, or to the left; therefore, pay attention to where the pus pocket and the water accumulation appear, and make your incision according to what is best for you.
And observe that do not cut the artery and let the veins flow with the blood of the patient, so when you have a flow of blood, there is an evacuation of moisture.
Second Chapter.
When there is an issue with catarrh or inflammation in the throat or chest, and you are not accustomed to treating this through medicine, then the final cure for these two arteries lies in making this incision.
And when you wish to make an incision where the patient elevates their head and is able to see their own head, then prepare the area with rough cloth so that you can see the arteries, and strengthen the neck of the patient with some cloth; and consider on which pulse the vein lies; and press these areas over those close to the ears, as they are often hidden in certain individuals.
And then pinch on the artery to try, and then pierce each one in the center of the acute part's edge as it approaches into the bone, and do this for the width of the head.
And if you want, insert your needle near the artery and twist it as it hits the divisions above.
And let the length of the incision be two digits adjusted, for when any vein is cut, a sensation will occur during pulse ejection, which beats irregularly, jumping frequently.
If the artery doesn't appear at the pulse point, then gauge that you measure from the elbow the quantity of space as three digits, and then pinch on the artery, and puncture it into the bone.
And what concerns the sensation is the amount of blood withdrawn, and adjust the force of what you take from him or her, and all this is according to the amount that appears from the virtue of the thigh and the filling of the artery above.
And then consider the wound, and if there remains any cause of infection above the bone, then cut that away so as not to produce an abscess.
And then strengthen the wound with needles and with strips of linen, and then treat that with oil until it is healed.
Title: III
About the removal of the arteries which are in the temples.
When something related to this causes old headaches or sharp pains, due to dampness and through quality of those in the temples, or when it is an old headache that resembles them, and you treat with medical healing methods, then if these do not work, we focus on these illnesses: removal of the arteries in the temples, or cauterization of them as we have shown.
And the method of the operation and removal of those arteries is that you lift up the skin which is in the temples; find the obvious artery on the temple as shown by its pulse, and it is hidden in few people due to the intensity of heat.
And if it's hidden from you, then strengthen the back of the thigh with some cloth; and then rub that spot with a hard cloth or boil the area with hot water until the artery becomes clearly visible. And then take the needle which has this shape: And then you burn the string at that spot while facilitating its passage until it reaches the artery; and then drain oil on him and remove it from the surface areas as you remove that from the string and uncover those of the tunics beneath, from all sides.
If the artery is subtle, then wrap that around the tip of the onion, and then cut a part from it according to the length by which its tips are extended and contracted, and do not produce a sensation, for if they are not cut there will be no pulse from all.
And then evacuate of blood, some. Into three.
And if the artery is large, then take that in two places with double strength on each or with cords long, and do not cut towards its putrefaction before the healing of the wound occurs, to avoid a sensation.
And then cut out the surplus that is between two cords; do this either in that moment or another time.
And if you wish, cauterize that with a cautery into the bone with a surgical knife until its extremities are incised, and remain in place of that half-done work.
And it's better if the thigh has fever or is from a cold constitution; for cautery relates to those causes that aid in final dampness, and thus it's better in youth.
And the removal of arteries that you make at an old spot is better, and they should be placed on your pulse in decently made powder, and then it should be treated with dry medicines until the flesh emerges and within which it becomes healed.
And if while you work on another wound, it happens that there is blood flow from the artery, then you should constrict that pulse, or with a cautery, or what fills the spot of the pulse, and hold your hand until the pulse is constrained. And if any of those causes is not present to you at the site, then hold your finger on that spot until the pulse is cooled down, and cover that area with water from strong coldness until the heat subsides, and strengthen as you see fit.
And what is pusier in the removal of an artery is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery having two needles, for you have touched both spots on the needle, and then heat fire until they reach the bone, cut off the vein in two places, so as to extend what is between its extremities, which are not completely hardened by this cautery.
And this is the form of the cautery:
And the heat of the two needles is instantaneous. However, if the sharpness of the two needles is better with two needles each, for they approach to any needle at high speed and do not cut the flesh too quickly.
When there is some lump in those cases, heat from the fire is applied to those areas and the flesh is slightly removed.
And this technique improves all work and even the slightest one.
And those are the spaces between two ribs, the amount of pregnancy in the mentioned case.
Head quarter.
Regarding the treatment of illnesses caused by sharp and acidic tears from the lungs.
When there are acidic tears, and it's the illness of those veins which are above the nose in the forehead, and no reason for the treatment of medicine exists here, often the face of the patient becomes red and walks around their front space as if it were a space for ants to walk. The lungs are exhausted, moistened so that their skin has become known, and their eyelids are scratched by the sharpness of tears. The old ones were irritated in treating those illnesses with this operation, and many people find this treatment unpleasant.
And you command the patient to scrape off the skin which is on their forehead, and then you make three equally spaced incisions on the forehead according to its length. And if the length of the incision is two inches: one incision should be equally distant from the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second according to the length slightly less than the movement of the tears which are in the lacrimal area, and the third on the other side.
And be careful of the veins which are in two sides, and extend your hand from the continuation of both jaws. And if the space for each incision is three inches adjusted.
And if you have a piece of sponge or dry cloth, use it to wipe off the sweat.
And then place the tip of two sharp ends together, this is the form of the incision for them: which goes from the point where it enters to the second incision. Gently remove all the chain that is between two incisions near the cheekbone which is above the eye, and then do this for the incision moving into the second one. And then separate this tip and insert another tool in the first incision; it's called a knife, sharp on one side and not sharp on the other.
And pause at the sharp part you should remove the surrounding flesh and chain, and at the other side inside the bone, insert that to reach the incision moving inwards. Then carefully remove all the veins that descend from the head to the lungs.
Make sure the incision continues up to that opening of the chain and then do this inside the space between the other incisions.
And once the amount of sweat has drained equally, squeeze the areas under the collected sweat.
And then pause at each incision with an old cloth, and place those powders of wine on them. Apply that mixture of wine and oil to these areas without forming any abscesses.
And on the third day, rinse off with boiled water or sweat water, and then treat this with anointing balm and oil mixed inside where the sores have been healed.
The second part.
Regarding the treatment of tears by catarrh and the lungs descending from the divisions inside the head.
When touching an inflamed vein and continuing this way, and often the lungs of the patient are weakened by coughing, and their examination becomes distorted; their eyelids are ulcerated, and their skin is discolored. In the front part of the head there is acute pain with sharpness followed by exhaustion, thus you should know these situations where the materials and catarrh do not come from veins of divisions occurring inside.
And the best treatment in such cases is this: you command the patient to rub their forehead, and then make an incision near the center of the forehead, a little bit across (and start from the incision of the left temple towards the right; and let the incision go into the bone; and extend your hand past the muscles where the temples are under, up to jaw movement), so that there's exposure of the bone.
Squeeze all the sweat with sponge or on dry cloth and then fill in between the two lips of the incision with old cloth or linen. And apply that mixture of powdered wine and oil on top in order to avoid forming abscesses.
And when you've drained this and as the abscess has diminished, then prepare to rub inside the bone starting from their nose flesh, and then treat that with regenerative drying which makes flesh regenerate, just like if you took two parts of wheat flour and four parts of honeycomb and mix them together, and make a paste from it and apply it in these sores as for the flesh's origin.
The sixth section.
Regarding the treatment of that which inflames in the earlobes.
All causes of inflammation in the earlobes are four kinds; one is from mineral rock or causes similar to rock like iron and lead, another is from plant such as garlic or fava beans, it's also from something that can cause leakage like water and oily mixtures, they resemble each other, or some kind of animal.
And when phlegm is found in the ear or another similar cause of those causes that don't adjust well within the ear, place the ear to the sun's heat, and if you see the phlegm, then distill it with some cause of oil violation or sulfur, and administer the extraction from it, and make them sneeze according to their condition, and hold their noses until the sneezing event occurs. And place some pieces of cloth or wool near the circuit of the ear, and spread the ear to its parts, which when heated becomes accustomed to these causes.
And if it is not heated, then administer extraction of it with the instrument called epicyclic gentle gesture extraction, which has this form:
And if it is accustomed to the gesture, that's good; otherwise, then administer the extraction of it with a delicate spoon made from wood with two additions.
And if it is not accustomed to this, then make a tube of reed and insert the end of the tube into the ear canal and seal around the area of the tube with wax and with soft oiled substance, so that it does not open except for the tube. And then extract through strong suction at your nostril, which increases the pressure like what we have described previously.
And if it is not accustomed to this method, then take some chalk or charcoal powder and apply it with a brush so that you can catch the wax in small quantities, place that on the tip of your nose, and then properly wrap around that cotton. And then insert that into the ear canal for easy access, and then remove the wax from the moisture.
And if it is not accustomed to all the causes we have recounted, then you should prepare to cut that out in front of where an abscess or spasm will develop.
And the method of cutting that out is as follows: at the beginning, you touch the base of the cephalic vein and extract according to its virtue, then prepare by making a cut between your hands and turn the ear towards its parts. Create a small crack in the canal of the ear and press the wax against the place where it has been pinched off. And if the crack forms into a lunar figure and reaches the phlegm, once you have obtained it with appropriate tools; and then while in that position, treat quickly within where it becomes healed.
And if the cause that enters the ear is one of those fats that grow and swell up inside it, then administer treatment and extraction for it; but if you do not adhere to your commitment, then take a thin spatula according to this form: And use that spatula to remove the fat lump which is inside the ear.
And do not remove it as soon as you think that this area is moistened by the ear vapor, place it on small pieces and then carefully extract from those areas through the nostrils or with a subtle gesture method, or use the tool we described which makes extraction easier.
And in the water that enters into the ear cavity, make the patient sneeze according to their condition from the beginning, fill the patient's ear with a bit of old cotton, and pour over that part of the ear where the water is. If it becomes accustomed to this method, then it's good; otherwise, take small teary and leon-like substances according to the length of what we described, heat those briefly in fire, let the patient insert one of those into their nasal passage and rest on a piece of that part while hitting another pebble against the phlegm inside the ear. So continue this process until all the water is accustomed to being inside.
So continue this process until all the water is accustomed to being inside. And once the water becomes accustomed in that way, take paper or a needle and thread, etc., and place one end of it in the ear canal, extending the other end into fire until its tip burns.
And place another needle and do this process several times until all the water becomes accustomed, then extract that with a tube as described previously for removing phlegm.
And in the extraction of beast entering that ear canal, if it's small and similar to it, treat it as we have said in the division; but if it's a large cause that appears deep within movement, then administer its extraction through gestures and with care, and this cause is easier than all other causes that occur inside the ear.
And in the extraction of worms that are produced inside the ear, when you treat it with what we said in the division and in the tract about distillations, but your treatment is not effective, then consider looking at the ear under sunlight.
And if here appears any worm-related cause, then remove it through gestures or with delicate spoons; but if there's no reason to appear, then take a tube stretched out and wide which has this form: And insert the delicate end into the ear according to the amount that can withstand the pain; and suck vigorously through suction, while doing this process several times, until all worms are accustomed.
And if you do not adhere to your commitment, then seal and cover around the tube circuit with wax as we have said; then administer distillations which have already been prepared for worm treatment, and find this process in the tract about distillations.
And let your application be such that you pour the medicinal oils into the auricular artery through this tool with which this is its shape: Make it of silver or amber, leave it straight, in which there's a small notch, and have a flat surface above.
And so let it be that what is in the cavity of the canal here where it's necessary will be performed. And if you want, take the rod and wrap it around the end of their descent, and then pour oil into the cavity of the concha, or juice from any herb, or whatever you want from these medicines in the canal - that one is in the ear - , and then place the rod on top of the herb and squeeze it with your hand at a moderate pressure so that the oil is expelled into the cavity of the concha and the patient feels the oil inside.
And whatever is inserted in the ear should already be heated by fire for a little time. And remember that when you distil in the ear it should not be too hot, because the remedies of the ear do not tolerate this.
Chapter VII.
On the treatment of perforations in the ear.
Some children have small punctures in their mothers' unperforated abdomens, and this happens sometimes in adults too, perforation in the meat of the ear due to a splinter or a piece of flesh from that area; and some of these perforations are made in the front part of the ear canal which does not sense the touch, and others are outside the parts.
And that one that happens in its front part, which does not sense touch, is in the more difficult situations for treatment.
And in that one where you can sense touch, consider to hold the ear of the patient towards the sun and look at it. And if there is an obvious perforation, open that with a fine spoon which has this shape:
If the end of it where there is a small width, where one part is sharp and the other is not; and the spoon should have two sides that are long for not harming the ear.
And if the perforation is through flesh inside the ear or in its meat, then you have that with thin needles and puncture it vigorously so that all the flesh is pierced.
And if the perforation is in the front of the ear, then take a fine long rod and heat that with fire for a little, and place it inside the meat of the ear.
And if you have sensed that the patient feels relief, by listening to sound, relieve the pressure on it with ease; and remember not to harm the nerves of the ear.
And then place earband on the ear according to the size of the thickness of that which you have wrapped in Egyptian ointment; and do this for several days until you are sure of the healing of the wound; or take any kind and press it into water and grind it over the dried substance, using it; and if the ear has already healed, then consider to destroy that one and replace it with another kind which you wrap in a bandage made from roasted oil, within which the pustule should subside; and treat that until it is cured.
If it happens that there is discharge of pus, then immerse a sponge or cloth in water and place it over the ear, and apply another remedy which restricts the pus discharge, which is mentioned in the treatise on distillation.
Chapter VIII.
On the treatment of adhesions that occur between the eyelids.
Eyelid adhesions that occur between the eyelashes in some cases are moistened, and in other cases they are dry.
Consider that you have to separate those with tweezers or with needles, and split the adhesions from their roots using thin needles, and then place them over the affected areas after they are dried.
If there is pain with pus discharge, then you apply a cautery to those with fine tubercle cautery.
And the best cautery is near the incisions and many pus discharges return when there remains any cause of those roots; and when they are applied with fire, those roots are burned and do not recur.
Chapter IX.
Treatment for the swelling that occurs in the eyelashes of children.
Swelling cases that occur in the eyelashes of children is caused by something which gathers as swelling in its strength and hardness, and because of this swelling it is called.
And it's an accumulation of large moisture on the eyelid below and above.
So the operation in them is that you should consider if the swelling is proceeding from within it, i.e., coming out of the eyelid and being swollen to all parts; and the cause of it is slight.
Then make incisions across it according to the width, and then drain it from all parts with ease until it drains, and then suspend that with needles and remove that.
And if the appearance is large, then you adjust it with suture; and treat that until it is healed.
And if it's only slight, you won't encounter much difficulty since the discomfort of the patient restores that and brings relief.
And if the swelling is large, it decreases in the parts inside the eyelid, then flatten that eyelid and suspend the swelling on a string, another you choose from beginning, press that with all sides; if the eyelid begins to stretch, this will be noticed under no cause.
And at the beginning, wash the wound with salty water; and treat the area with water that brings relief until it heals.
End of chapter or section.
Regarding the treatment for inflammation in the area above the eye.
Axcirnath is yellow mucus that's produced in the membranes above the eye, especially affecting children, it intensifies their eye infections and damages their sight; they can't look at the sunlight because their tears congeal on them.
And you should have them speak about these things constantly on their foreheads all the time, and sleep with them on their foreheads; and allow their eyelashes to become wet from sweat, which already covers inflammation, and the imminent formation of pus is evident in the eyes; and when you press the area with your fingertips, you feel a hardening within those.
And there is a surgical method in this where the patient rests their head on your shoulder, then place a cloth over them and apply heat. Create a circle according to how much pus from all parts contains, then press that onto the patient's back so that pus accumulates inside the circle. Then create an opening at the center of that moisture parallel to its width, ensuring it isn't larger than the incision made in a phlegmon.
You should make the incision all the way through until you reach the pus, which after the largest positions, you process pus through a cut according to the form of white fat.
So, extract those with the cloths that you enveloped between your fingertips from the outward parts, and stir them with your right and left hands until they are dispersed.
And remember not to place it in the cut so that on the surface, it doesn't reach the eye and avoid letting it down there.
If you don't find pus in the beginning of the cut, then place something small in the cut so that it can process pus; and also extract as we said. And apply cloths soaked with water, vinegar, and press them on the area, strengthening those with powder.
And similarly, they spread salt and let it sit in the cavity of the cut, as that which is wiped off from that moisture.
And afterwards, treat it until it heals.
And if an abscess appears in the area, then treat it with plaster bandages until it heals.
End of chapter or section xi.
Regarding methods for touching the eye.
When in the eyelids of the eyes, these are natural hairs and so ancient, then they touch the eye causing ways of eye diseases like excessive tears, swelling of the eyelids and the inner tissue where this causes damage to the eye leading to a condition called ophthalmia or inflammation of the eye. Treatment is done in four ways: either with a hot cautery; or with acute medicine as mentioned in the section on cauteries; or it's treated by cutting and suturing; or through canals as I will say.
And therefore when you place the head of the patient on your shoulder; then convert the eyelid of the eye to your left hand, and if it's converted, then it's good; elsewise, insert a needle in that where pus remains inside the eyelid, and make the needle pierce through it above, and so - near the edge of the eyelid where the hairs are born - near the hair, pull the thread from the upward parts to the eyelid, then convert it into redness.
And further make an incision inside the eyelid so that these hairs align with the tears falling from the main lacrimal duct to the lacrimal sac; then extract the needle and apply a small amount of cypress or cloth powder on the eyelid, then place it on the eyelid as if in a thyme leaf shape.
But indeed when making the shape according to the quantity of eyelid deflation which varies in humans, those who need for a large quantity of it depending on how much the eyelid becomes swollen.
And further apply the paste over the two lines which you've marked out, starting from the main lacrimal duct to the smaller lacrimal duct. And if your cut is near the natural hairs like it's wide as a king's.
And further insert the string in one of the two corners of the cut, then scrape it all over, and adjust to the stitching both lips with thread or thin wool, clean off the wax, and adhere what's superfluous from the threads onto two eyelashes due to certain causes that irritate them, if you want to do this, otherwise don't treat it.
And further let the thread stitch of the threads rest for three or four days, then treat that.
And if you want, leave the wound to heal naturally, and treat it with what dries and tightens, for when the eyelid is lifted, you should seal the wound and add something to it; better suturing is more important. So do this according to the ancient techniques of medicine.
However, in such situations concerning the patient's leg, it is a good operation, and not out of fear.
And there is another way to consider it, which involves placing a figure on the eyelid like a leaf of myrtle, and then lifting the eyelid by three threads separated and grouped according to this form:
If it is not possible to do this, hold the threads, and if this does not match, then take a needle with thread attached and insert that in the middle of the figure, and insert the other thread near the major lacrimal point, and the other thread near the minor lacrimal point. Adjust between your fingers the threads equally, and lift your hand up to the same height as the elevation you are performing; raise the entire chain on which it is laid just like we have instructed.
And then adjust the two wound edges for suturing, and heal that inside which needs to be healed.
If it happens that you have an abscess, stop your incision or your cut, but treat that abscess with dressings and make them look alike, and apply ointment.
And sometimes on the eyelid that their hairs are transformed, then take care to use in that what we have said about incision; better suturing is more artificial.
Medicine for canes (or dogs) follows this form: And it involves converting the eyelid and dividing the figure inside as I have recounted; then, using art, create two canes or two fine wires of which their length is according to the length of the eyelid and their width is about the width of the nose. And you have already incised at the extremities of each part, where you have the threads.
And place anything of subtlety under what you have superfluous on the eyelid of the dog, and tighten the wires at the ends of each part firmly, then leave it for a few days, when the chain by the tension will die down and be rejected, and settle so that by itself it will fall.
If it is delayed, then cut at the loops, and then heal the wound that needs to be healed.
Then, when it has hardened, the eyelid will rise and the hairs will not pinch.
And this is the form of two canes that you should follow in this manner: And have the quantity of length and width neither too much nor too little.
Chapter XII.
On elevating irritating hairs in the dog when the hair is hard.
When the hairs are unnatural, hard and sharp, causing irritation in the dog, then the operation is that you take a subtle needle and insert it into this fine thread like a needle and a lion's claw, and adjust the ends of it in such a delicate manner that each one stands alone. And let the length of the threads be about the size of a palm.
And then you create another subtle thread from what is left of yours quickly, and if you want, use the ends of that one.
And then place the dog's head in your own hand, and place it close to the sun so that your work may be seen, for this is a subtle and small operation.
And then insert the needle into the adjusted hair where it needs to be made, and let that penetrate into the eyelid smoothly while you remove that above the natural hair.
And then pull the hair inside and insert it into the others, and let there be one or two or three hairs at most.
And then pull your hand inside where the hair has been removed by rubbing on the eyelid with the natural hair.
If it is rubbed off and not cut the hair, you will rub off to the parts left with the thread that you have made in this manner, where there is rubbed off hair from the trace above.
And then take that away from the dog's vision, when you will rub off and the thread, cut the dog's hair, and let it rest for two or three days, so that the hair sticks to its place and grows back good flesh.
And if the hair is shorter than normal, then adjust a long hair of the natural ones, and elevate it towards that, or leave it so that it grows slightly in some space, and then elevate it.
Chapter XIII.
On treating excoriation which occurs above the eyelid.
When excoriation appears in the dog, which is the contraction of the eyelid when it tightens in its parts, or on the right or left side, due to poor healing of wounds, bleeding, or cauterization, and it is called leporine. This excoriation can be natural or accidental, occurring from the tightening up due to the healing of wounds, bleeding, or cauterization, or resembling its maladies.
The manner of the operation in such cases is that you cut through that contraction and separate its edges from it. Place a piece of linen bandage where there's space between those parts, then sew them together when they are healed.
And do not overlook the use of treatment for the causes that dry out, restrain; because if you do this, it will return to a worse state than before any time had passed.
Use in that of the causes that soothe such as fenugreek, and steep them in water above which they float for a while or in butter oil, which when liquefied with any of the oils, immerse your body in that, and cure with that.
And the treasure of your treatment is that you puncture through all parts that are not consolidated according to their original form at the beginning.
And this operation, which we are referring to, is merely a correction of the disease that does not return the form of the site according to what it was before.
Chapter XIIIV
On the treatment of gout which is done in the eyelid, you must.
This gout which occurs in the eyelid, you must treat; it is called spontaneous gout and has both a natural origin and an accidental one.
Accidental gout comes from wounds, cuts, cautery or other similar things.
The procedure for the operation is: take a needle with two-fold thread, insert it into the flesh and guide it from the left tear duct into the right one, until the thread reaches both ends of the flesh.
Then extend the flesh towards its divisions on the needle and hold that to the needle, and incise with a broad space. And if the eyelid returns to its original shape as desired, it is good; otherwise, take the thread and hold it in the cut area, then reshape the eyelid with that, and make both cuts on the side of the eyelid as you wish.
And let the ends of the two cuts be at the corners of the incision you made in between them, and form an angle from there when they come together, making their figure.
And this shape is Greek letter: the lambda.
And remove that flesh for the amount that corresponds to half of your patient's sharpness, so as not to damage the eyelid.
And adjust the separated parts, sewing them with wool thread; and cure those with the medicines that we have mentioned for soothing treatments and in baths so as to heal.
And if gout is caused by a cut or suture or cautery, you must make a flat incision on the skin of the eyelid as it was done beforehand. And remove with the bath between two lips as we have said.
In the total discussion of gout treatment when it's about the left or right side, it should flow in your operation according to the shape of gout, and that shape is like a variety of spots.
And the skilled artisans always prepare parts in every manner possible that could fit inside to make the figure return to its natural form or close to it, and this patient according to what suits them from the operation and tools within their best arrangements.
Chapter XV
On the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
When this hardening occurs in many men, it means that the eyelid is solidly stuck above on the white of the eye, and prevents ease of movement and its natural actions. Therefore, you must insert the end of your finger under the eyelid and lift it up or extend it to the elbow.
And you should incise the adhesion with a subtle cut, which is not at the sharpness of the incisions, having slightly blunt so that the patient does not worry about the operation, and leave the cut without damaging the eye's sharpness.
And let your incision carefully remove that adhesion with ease until the eyelid returns to its natural shape and heals all the adhesion.
And then you should immerse your eye in salty water, or distill it from juniper dissolved in water.
And then separate between the eyelid and the eye with a bath for him, place on the eye ointment soaked in the egg white, and daily use causes that promote healing until it heals.
Chapter XVI
On incision of the eyelashes and the elevation of flesh around the tear ducts.
Know that an eyelash can occur in two ways, either nervously which resembles a hard fine ciphac; or non-nervous, resembling thickened white moisture. When you touch it, if the patient wants to pluck it at the root, it is removed and the root does not stay in them.
And both types do not start from the major tear duct but gradually spread into covering the view and prohibiting light and eye movements.
The way to act in an incision is that the patient holds their head where they are, and then opens their eyes, lifts the eyelid with your hand, and carefully grasp the eyelash at its root and extend it towards the divisions above. And then take a needle and insert a horse hair or a cow's hide or a sheep's skin, or similar, or gradually double the end of the needle until it is placed in the middle of the eyelash, penetrate that with the needle, tie it at the end of the eyelash; extend that towards the divisions above, scrape off the tip of the eyelash which cuts the pupil. And thus follow that towards the skin inside the abdomen of the patient.
And then you incise the remainder in the root of the tear duct with a thin spatula or with small scissors, and cuts out the skin of the natural lacrimal membrane so that due to it, continuous flows of tears do not occur.
And some claws in the sun or on the finger, as we have said, then it is to be excised with a small spatula which has this form:
And remember not to touch the corneal layer with the spatula and that there is no rupture in it, and that the pupil is not pierced.
After the incision makes in the wound a little bit of salt or vinegar made from wine seeps out, and leaves that inside another day; and care for that where it covers should be healed.
And if the claw is not nerve-like and you can't insert the needle, or it's not attached to that big finger, then this kind of claw will be cured with medicines, and treated like I've recommended in the section.
And if you want to cut that, then open the space of the thigh and take out a small, sharp spatula according to this form: In subtlety. And if you notice that it is thinned and mixed in that duct, then distill from your mouth with vinegar wine or with vinegar or finely ground salt into the opening of the tear duct, and pour the opening inside the next day.
And iterate over that the operation until it removes all that belongs to you, otherwise let pus form in the opening which then you leave, and start treating the abscess when it heals.
And continue your operation on it with reason until it is healed.
The removal of the lacrimal flesh, if noticed in the wound due to great damage, should be suspended on the finger; and cut out a part from it, and do not finish the incision so as not to cut off flows of tears.
And after that, distill in the lacrimal vinegar and make it with vinegar until it is healed.
Chapter XVII.
On the incision of alveoli and what is born from tightened flesh in the wound.
Some ulcers in the alveoli of some people produce hardened flesh, and is over-covered until it covers the pupil, or gets closer or tightens near the eyelids and fortifies the eyelids against the parts forward and it is assembled to touch the edge of the palate.
The operation on it is that the thigh rests its head in your place; and then open the ulcers of that and collect all that flesh with convenient scissors to water, and hold the water with a pair of forceps or tongs; and cut out the flesh starting from there until everything is finished at the incisors, and watch over the wound so that you don't let go of that, which should be your operation.
And let your incision be like the one where you cut those or with that spatula which we recommended in the operation of the claw, or with small scissors according to what will come up to this chapter's form.
So when your operation is completed and that flesh has been removed entirely, then fill the wound with salt, or distill into it vinegar powder resembling those of corrosive medicines, and place over the wound outwardly a slice of raw egg until pus formation is assured.
And if there is any disease of the alveoli and it is covered by pus, and you fear pus formation, then leave the wound and treat that pus with water where pus decreases, and after that continue your operation until it heals, and similarly do for the flesh which happens in this kind's wound.
However, you should ensure that all healing of the wound through natural or accidental means operates through iron, and do not put your hand into any of these operations until you see that that member suffers this operation.
Chapter XVIII.
On collecting wax in the wound.
Wax is those stubborn veins which are on the wound and forbid its operation, and cleanse the wound longitudinally over days.
So it is necessary at the beginning that you consider whether the wound in which wax exists is strong and there is no other ailment than wax, then you collect that wax.
And it is that you command the thigh to rest its head in your place, and lift those veins onto a finger or two according to your judgement; and let that one finger have a subtle duplication as follows:
or gradually over two fingers like this form:
And let those veins be collected with fine forceps, with subtlety, and remove the pus little by little as you see those veins being removed from the wound and turned inside out.
And remember not to lead the wound towards the tips of the spatula; and if your operation is in the middle of the day facing the sun, be firm with your operation so as not to cut any other veins.
And when you have completed, then distill in the wound vinegar or vinegar by which its acuteness corrodes that which has been removed from the wax.
If it is not possible for you to gather all in that hour, then you apply a plaster over the area that relieves your pain, and let him rest for several days until his pain subsides and the abscess heals.
And gently continue to treat him according to the mother's method until he is healed.
And this is how it looks like a scythe:
Capitol. Nineteenth.
Reduction of inguinal hernia to the nose.
When you treat hernias with a cautery or with hot penetrating medicine, according to the description of their symptoms and they are not getting better, then it is not in him but rather cut above the abscess you wait for its maturation, and you extract all the moisture which is in him until his bone is exposed.
And when the bone is discovered and there is corruption or blackness in his body, then you treat him with a mustard that looks like this:
And it is called hard hat, made of iron and shaped like a nail, with the head rounded thus like a thorn which is made perforated by the tip of a chisel or finely bored (as shown in the following figure).
Place that over the corrupted area of the bone, and then roll it between your fingers, gently pressing your hand little by little until you know that this corruption is flat.
And with it make some incisions, and then restore the area from causes of drying and constricting.
So if the area is consolidated and it has good flesh in his navel, and it removes the body of the disease for forty days, and it does not renew and there is no abscess formation and nothing happens to him by accident, then you will know that he is healed.
But if not, then it is not in his belly but reducing the crack to the form of the nose, and according to this manner: and you reveal from the bone on either side with iron or with acute medicine, and when the bone is revealed, then you take out a tool according to this form:
The end of the iron is triangular, and the shaft of the tool extends into the tip thus as seen here.
And place that on the bone, and that should be close to the nasal bone; extend your hand just a little bit beyond his nose, and then rotate your hand with the tool until it penetrates all the bone, and he feels the patient when you take hold of his hand.
So then restore the area with medicines that dry and constrict in this way, as you have seen fit.
So when the flesh and the area are hardened, then that matter which flowed to the far parts returns to the nose, so this is just pus on the patient's chest.
Capitol. Twenty.
Reduction of the prominence of the nose.
When the nose protrudes to its entirety and does not occur in the reddening of damage or diminishment, then bend that back, and follow it up, and place gauze on his neck for scraping with good scraping; and then place over the nose a liniment made of garlic and aloe vera and honey and lard, and place a plaster bandage over the nose with powdered dough.
And the method for powders is that you take linen cloths, each cloth to be divided into four pieces; and make them from those powders.
And then place those one on top of the other according to the amount that his nose needs. And then strengthen them with a thick bandage; and place the suction cups for scraping on his body; and leave the suction cups in place and straighten his nose during the day and night.
And if while the ligament is being softened, then bend it that way well.
And then hold the ligament during the day and night as we have said.
And if the nose has already been reduced, then that's good, but if not, then continue with the plaster and powders and bandage and suction cups until it is healed.
Capitol. Twenty-one.
Reduction of the prominence of the inner coat of the eye.
When there is disruption in the inner coat of the eye, and then it protrudes outward like a grain of sand, and its form resembles that of a human being for this reason, and you want to remove it, then the operation on him is as we have recommended, that you insert the needle into the slit of the choroid at the part left in the part above, and then put the needle inside another containing a double thread of the lacrimal side, and make it penetrate and guide the first needle according to its position; and then cut the place of the double thread and remove that part of the choroid from the hole made by the needle, and strengthen that with bandage.
And then extract the needle, cover his head with wool soaked in hen's egg white and wait until the thread falls into the eye.
And then treat his nose with water that makes him comfortable until the wound is healed.
And make several incisions around the entire circumference of linen bandage on his nose at its prominence large, and then puncture it with a fine spatula that reaches to the tip of the nose, and drain the watery mucus, and let his nose descend and enter soon.
And indeed strengthen until it is healed.
Chapter XXII.
On the treatment of ulcers.
This illness called ulcer is nothing but disease which fits like water flowing down, and it is not that one.
The method of treating it is to make the patient lie on the fitted and straight bed, with their head elevated from both sides. Position their head in such a way that you can see where the disease is coming from in each part, and treat only that area. Ensure the treatment doesn't spread elsewhere, keeps moving forward, and stop when the patient sees these situations occurring.
And if it does not descend below, know that it is water.
And if the disease's descent is not prepared, as we have said, then make the patient lie between your hands and take a fine needle to apply it under their eyelid. Cut through only until you reach the conjunctiva near the cornea in the crown (into the desired area), making sure that the disease is already drained out from there.
Once it's drained, then you should apply hot water soaked in which you have mixed honey or water in which you have cooked fennel and honey.
And continue treating any other causes while it is being healed.
Chapter XXII.
On the treatment of water flowing down from the body.
We have already discussed the characteristics of water in the division and which ones are suitable for puncturing as we have explained before, now that one according to their health.
Then guide the patient to lie down between your hands on a mat and place their head there, move them vigorously.
And place your right hand close to the eyelid of their head, if the head is where the water is, it's their right head; or with your right hand, if the head is on the left.
And with your right hand take a mirror if the head is on the left; or with your left hand, if the head is to the right.
And place the end of the mirror near the crown by the thickness of the eye in the eyelid's white part opposite the tear duct, and move the mirror with force while turning your hand there.
And then penetrate into the eyelid's white part and feel that the mirror has reached because of vision.
And guide that the size of the path of the mirror to the front is the size of the space between from the pupil to the end of the shadow, it's the crown of the eye; you will see the pupil at that time with vision through the clarity of the cornea.
And guide the mirror inside the place where there is water, then pull it down once approximately again, and if the water descends immediately, then guide the patient so that they can see there momentarily, and the mirror in their eye.
And rest for a little while; if the water has descended, then you should pause that again before the mirror is submerged.
And therefore, when it's closed and doesn't descend, then you remove the mirror with ease, turning your hand little by little around that. Then dissolve a small piece of clear gemstone salt in water and with that lather inside the eye; then pause outside the eye using wool or cotton dipped in almond oil and albumen from egg whites to wash it away from there.
And may those of our time pause on that as they do with the almond albumin.
And if your mirror doesn't enter the eye canal due to its hardness - which is characteristic of some people whose eyes are hard to move - then guide that you take the needle which is named the almond, this being its shape:
And thus puncture that conjunctive part with it, and don't end your hand on the cheekbone, but rather aim for a path down to the mirror location.
And guide the mirror as we have said.
And complete your work, ensure the patient is prepared for a comfortable descent of sleep where they lie on their back in a dark room, and forbid all movements.
And rest in the nature of water so that its nature is clarified, and don't let their head move to the right or left part at all.
And guide them according to their position into the third day.
And guide them out of that dark room and let their vision breathe freely, show them some causes, then guide returning them into the seventh day.
And don't guide that you perform this during treatment hours or shortly after the infusion. And have it guided that you avoid this so that water can gently pass through due to its large and vigorous examination.
And if an abscess occurs after the exam, then have it guided that you open the eye in front of the seventh day, and correct that with water that would allow the abscess to drain.
And then guide them to take their vision away and pause on the face of their mouth through which they control their breathing for a few days, existing in the dark room.
And guide them to gradually get out of that room and talk about their causes.
And know that even for a short period of blindness, the student does not excuse vision several times, then you should be fervent about the operation.
And already we have reached the knowledge of some of those who are at Artach, and some say that in Ayrac there is a fire that makes an incision through which water is poured.
However, I have not seen such a complete remedy in our land, nor is there a legitimate water in any of the ancient books; it is possible that this water might be new.
And these are the forms of the types of herbs for when they should be applied on those ones, that which is unknown to them:
And if they are made of hemp or iron properly, and their extremities be at this subtle triangular shape, the sharp end thus is like that one which is its form.
Chapter XXIV
Regarding the treatment of flesh wounds in the face.
When in the face are flesh wounds of various kinds, some causing a condition that is gathered together like the stings of an insect's bite or as a polyp on the skin; this illness is called 'polyp' which resembles that particular skin condition. And when his flesh is cancerous, reddened, of dark color; and from him it is that the flesh is white not of dark color.
So in that which is in these white flesh not deceitful nor cancerous, know how to make the patient sweat by rubbing your hands under their arms and exposing them to sunlight, and allow their nose to breathe, and apply your elbow in those flesh areas. And then remove that from the outer parts, and proceed to cut out what you have identified in those among sharp and subtle knives between one part until you know that all the flesh has been affected; if there is a cause within the patient for which an incision might be possible, then you must use this among the finer tools to help remove that cause from the patient. If the master wishes to heal an infected or pustular wound, then you must allow that which cures them; or it is among malignant ulcers, then you cover and cauterize within where the infection can be removed and all cavities are affected.
And if there's need to make incisions in the face near the cut, add water or wine. If the face has opened and you notice moisture inside the palate from it, then know that it is already healed.
If the moisture does not penetrate according to the cure, then know that inside him there is flesh with pus within your nose's bones where an incision has not been made.
So the master should introduce the patient's breath to him where there might be swelling, and use oil on his insects, taking breaks between each nutriment in proportion to what was said or monthly, and make the patient sweat and introduce one end of the breath into the nose at a ray or another cause which is possible for him.
And after this has happened, let his smell enter until it reaches the canals of the nose, and sit above his belly button; many children perform actions resembling this on their schoolyards because it is a minor cause for those who want to do so.
And then pause the two ends of the breath, one end that goes above the nose and the other that remains in the nose; proceed to perform flesh suturing on the nuts that are in the breath, do this until you know that the flesh is already around the nuts of the breath.
And then remove the breath, pause in the nose near the extraction of pus with a spoon, and do this for three days or more until the medicine has dissolved all that is rotten in the flesh.
And at the end of the cause, pause with a lead pipe in the nose for several days until it is healed.
If you are undergoing treatment that dries out, use that one.
And this is the form of the tool for nose purger which boils oils and medicines in the nose:
And do this from silver or hemp which resembles a small opened lamp, as if it were a small cauldron, and make the mouth similarly.
And if you wish, make a closed pipe like a stick, and the pipe of this tool for nose purger is flat, exposed; attach a handle at the rear end of it, where you hold that when you immerse oil or what you want from the liquids and susceptible causes in it.
Chapter XXV
Regarding inflammations in the extremities of the nose.
Some symptoms are shown as inflammation in the extremities of the nose, and it is magnified and ointed for a few days until the illness shows its care.
And as such, know how to insert that in the beginning of the appearance of him, and remove all that. And then pause over the spot or with a cautery or burning medicine which is in place of him.
If the patient's insertion has taken longer than necessary and is swollen, hard, of dark color and with little sensation, then do not touch that with iron which is an infected ulcer; these symptoms resemble what you would apply to this ulcer because of its great severity on him.
And if the abscess is due to lion and not of dark color, and if there's a chance for incision everywhere, then evacuate the patient and make that mark, and treat the area with what causes it to drain out until it heals.
Chapter XXVI.
Chapter 26:
Understand that when there occurs a breakdown in continuity in one of these cartilages, most doctors do not perform the operation otherwise than for certain individuals.
Then cut, when dealing with any cause of those [conditions], consider if it's fresh disease in its root, then adjust both the edges of the wound for suture, and treat that area until it heals.
And if the edges of continuity breakdown have already separated and some are made healthy, then cut that you scrape off every part of its external body until there is a disease. And then adjust both edges for suture and strengthen those, and apply dragon's disease powder on them along with a fine paste. Place a small amount of gauze over the powder for two or three days, then remove it and replace that dressing until the scabs fall off naturally, treating with oil until it heals.
The method for suture is that you add the continuity breakdown or with needles as we have recommended in stomach suture, or add the continuity breakdown with wax and do this yourself and let them know.
Chapter XXVII.
Chapter 27:
Marks observed in men within the parts inside their lips include hard abscesses resembling fat of animals, some are smaller and some are larger.
Then cut that you convert the lips and cavities of every hard part within them from all sides. Afterwards fill up the place with a mixture of wax until the disease is strengthened, then wash it with warm water and treat the area with what causes sticticatization, until it heals.
Chapter XXVIII.
Chapter 28:
Numerous observations have been made about the adjusted meat in the gum which the ancients called "albumen", therefore cut that you suspend it by an incision or whatever you have done to that in its root, and when you make this incision you should allow the healthy fluid to flow or let the disease run.
And then place over that treated with wax or other hardening or drying powders.
And if that meat returns, then you should make another incision and cauterize it again, in which case the cauterization will not recur.
Chapter XXIX.
Chapter 29:
When on the surface of the teeth in their internal parts and at the entrance, and between the gums, there are hard, pointed marks, some observations show blackening and are caused by citron or vitreous substances that corrupt the gum, causing the teeth to be worn.
Then cut that you make a slit between your servants and place the head of each one in its true position, and remove the teeth where these hard marks and similar causes appear, and do this until no further cause damages them, treating the blackness, citron-like aspects and others until they are modified.
If the tooth is still in place as it should be at the mouth of digestion, then it's alright; otherwise, you repeat this procedure on those elsewhere for another day and second and third times until it reaches its final state where you want it to.
Know that teeth require various forms of roto-resection and different shapes of marks according to how your operation is prepared. And to know that the tooth resection from within their parts requires one type of resection tool while the one for resection between teeth is another, and these types of resection tools need to be prepared by you as you will see shortly:
Chapter XXX.
Chapter 30:
Cut that you cure the tooth of its pain at the root and delay in total tooth eradication, not for any cause that replaces the mark when it is removed, being a substance that evaporates during the removal of the tooth.
If the patient insists on having this tooth removed, you must firmly certify which tooth is causing pain, as marks of pain separate the gum and fall from a healthy tooth. You remove that tooth, but the pain does not cease until the diseased tooth and its gums are removed; we have already seen this in operations for barb removal.
Then you must be certified as to which tooth is causing the pain, and this you can understand well. Therefore cut that you incise around the tooth with a channel where there might be a root, so that it dissolves from the tooth-gum in all parts, then pull out that tooth gradually either by your fingers or with fine blades at its base until they are removed completely.
And then cut large handles with strong strength or dissection force, and place the head of the sick tooth between your thumbs where you must ensure it doesn't slip, and pull out the tooth according to the correct way without twisting it, nor causing major pain to the tooth or to its extraction.
And if it is not removed by cutting, then take one of those instruments, and place that cushion under him from all parts with ease, trying to remove him as quickly as possible.
If the tooth is decayed or eaten away, then cover that root with a cloth and tightly hold it at the tip of the delicate area so that it does not get squeezed during your pressure on that place while holding them.
And make an exquisite incision in the scarification around the entire part of the gum and maintain your strength so that you do not puncture that or break off a part of it, and return to the thigh for the cunningness that exceeds his first pain.
And be careful not to do what those ignorant barber surgeons do in their rashness and audacity during eradication, as they do not follow the advice we have given; their pricking wounds cause great illnesses among men, which are harder to treat than tooth extraction, and the roots of their teeth become overgrown, or some parts of them, or you might remove that from certain bones in the jaw, as we have witnessed.
And after the extraction, wash his mouth with vinegar or add salt to it.
And if there is blood coming out due to wounds, just like from pricking wounds, then mix a little vinegar and sprinkle it on the wound. If that vinegar does not relieve, then use a cautery.
The shape of the forceps and fine tongs by which teeth are worked on at the beginning is long tip, short handle and thick, so that they do not bend when you use these ones.
And be like those of thick handles that, when you extend them with those, they are not bent, and their tips are short.
And let them be made of iron from India, descending straight tips, and the tips of those should have teeth where one fits into another and are extended by bending down in strength, some pricked points having their tips like the bill of a stork which is called ciconia, this is its handle, and they are strong in construction.
Chapter XXI.
On the extraction of teeth and removal of bones in fractured jaws.
When you need to extract a tooth that is broken off due to some cause, then cover the area with your hand over it for about one day or two until the place becomes soft; and proceed by using a pair of forceps resembling the bill of a stork called ciconia or guanta, which are the tips of the forceps:
The tips of them should be made like chisels or nut crackers.
And if you do not follow my advice with these forceps or tongs, then cover the root and remove all the flesh and insert the tool called an awl, which is this kind of lever:
And it should have a short tip that's thick at one end and not bent so as not to break.
So if the root is cut away by this method, well done; and otherwise, help yourself with these other tools whose forms are as follows: the form of the first tool is triangular at the tip where there's some thickness:
The form of the second tool is that it should be triangular and have a more delicate tip.
And already you will help with this tool having two ramps as follows in form: and with other tools which are used in tooth scraping; for youth this tool is made that resembles a large stag's antler and it looks like this:
from the triangular bent or short tip that has some thickness and is not bent to prevent breaking.
And know that tools for teeth with decay resemble other tools similarly.
The craftsmen are wise and subtle in their art, finding for themselves according to what it means to them the operation and various illnesses; there are illnesses for which the ancients would not describe or use proper instruments due to the diverse forms.
If the bone of the jaw or other bones in the mouth is broken, then place your weight on that spot at its convenient location for you among the tools and forceps as we have mentioned in removing tooth roots, help yourself with this gesture:
And have some thickness gradually, and hold it or keep it in your mouth so that it does not escape or flee until the bone of all is cut away; then proceed to restore the place with suitable medicines for that.
If there's a small pus pocket in the bone, then remove it along with its darkness, and cure that place until it heals.
Chapter XXXII.
On the treatment of prominent teeth compared to others.
When teeth are prominent not due to their natural shape, particularly when they protrude more in women, especially the more venerable ones; then consider: if the tooth is very close to another tooth, and it's impossible for extraction or treatment of that one, then leave it alone; but if it's not attached to any other tooth, then use this tool with this shape to cut into it; it resembles a pig's snout and is made of Indian iron with a very sharp tip.
And if your operation is such that you cut into it for many days due to the hardness of the teeth, and there should be no other damage to the teeth.
And if the tooth is extensively exposed by grinding, then grind it with an Indian file whose form is like this:
And it is all of Indian iron and has a groove; and use points as with an actual file where needles are made, grinding the tooth bit by bit over several days to facilitate this, in order that no other tooth be damaged or broken. And then draw it out at the tip, and cut it with some razor blades.
And if it is a tooth where a part is broken and you are left with the root, then correct that inside where the roughness of that portion has been smoothed out and made equal, and ensure it is filled so that the tongue does not cut into it nor the word be corrupted.
Chapter XXXIII.
On restoring damaged teeth with gold or silver.
When it happens to the teeth due to concussion or removal by striking or impact, and the patient cannot lift what they are chewing on, and you have treated that with stiptic medicines, but your treatment has not been effective. Then, so that they do not get further damaged, use gold rather than silver for those that are weakened by a toothpick, as silver turns green and can be left in place for several days; but no time should change to gold.
And let the toothpick have such subtlety and coarseness according to the amount that can enter between the teeth; as for the shape of the insertion, you should take the toothpick and place twice its length between two healthy teeth. And then make it grow between two tortuousities of the toothpick between two damaged ones, or if there is one or more, so that the thread reaches the healthy tooth on the other side. And then repeat the insertion into the part from which you began, and strengthen your hand with ease so that it does not become damaged.
And if your grip is such that you hold the toothpick, you should avoid piercing the teeth so they do not get damaged.
And then remove the excess ends of the toothpick with forceps or scissors, and add those wherever you move them, and convert those as well as hidden ones between the healthy and damaged teeth to prevent any damage to the tongue. And then pull it out in this way like a Roman.
If it is dislodged or broken, strengthen that one or those with another tooth in such a manner throughout its entire process.
And this is the form of teeth and the figure for the extraction of two healthy teeth and two damaged ones, as you would perform these actions:
And when it is done to return one tooth or two near the place of each, and they have grown back as we have recounted, and that they grow again.
And do not let this be otherwise than with good artisans and wise people.
And sometimes, some diseases affect the bones of cows, and they are made in this way like a tooth, and placed in the place where the tooth fails, and strengthened as we have said, and remains and serves for a long time.
Chapter XXXIV.
On the operation for a lump in the tongue that impedes speech.
This ligament in the tongue that you find sometimes or is naturally present since birth, or accidentally occurs due to a wound which has already consolidated.
And the operation on it is that you open the mouth of the patient, its head being there; and lift its tongue, and then cut that nerve ligament according to the width where the tongue has recovered from its recent position.
If there is any hardness or concretion in that area, and it has been left due to the consolidation of a wound, then you cut an incision and divide that from the width where you have cut the ligament and dissolve the lump.
And remember not to make a crack in the front of the flesh, and that you cut here so that there is bleeding from the vein.
And then wash the marks of the incision with vinegar or with oil, or with rubbing water; and pause for several days to lift the tongue gently; thus make it a habit that the patient lifts his tongue every night in order that there may not be consolidation of another lump.
If there is bleeding from the vein, pause over the hot iron tool; but if the blood escapes, then cauterize the area with a tubercular coal which you place above it. And afterwards this cure is performed on all other causes until it becomes healthy.
Chapter XXXV.
On the extraction of a ranula from the tongue.
Some diseases occur on the tongue resembling a small abscess that impedes the tongue from its natural operation and swells up so much that it fills the mouth.
And the operation on this is to open the mouth of the patient facing the sun every morning and observe the abscess.
And if you notice it changes to a dark color or black, hard, which does not cause pain in the patient, then do not touch that which is swollen.
And if it turns to white, in which there is moisture, then you insert the needle into it, cut with a subtle spatula under it, and cut from all parts; and if bleeding occurs during your operation, then you pause over hot iron tools, which are made of glass, so that the bleeding stops.
And then return to your work within which you have prepared for him, within which he has been washed with fresh water and salt; and care for that according to the other cure until he is healed.
Chapter 36.
On the extraction of pus from both ears and that which is nothing in the earlobe, as well as other abscesses.
When it comes to the earlobe, they are glands that are assembled cotton-like, which happen outside and are called earrings. They are named so because when you treat them as we have said in the section and do not heal, then you consider if the abscess is hard, of a dark color, with little sensation, then do not touch that with iron.
And if it's reddish in color and the root is thick, then do not touch that with iron for fear of causing bleeding from the wound; wait to smooth out that spot until it has matured, and then either you drain that area, or it will burst on its own.
And if it's white in color, hard, and the root of him is fine, then that one will need to be incised.
And for the operation in him is that you consider, before your operation, if the abscess has already rested under the knife as full recovery or if there is any diminution; then make sure the patient faces the sun, and his head is on your side, open his mouth, and have the server hold between their hands his tongue letting it rest against a noble instrument of which this is the form:
And make it from silver or gold, and let it be thin as a needle.
So when you press that tongue and it shows you the abscess, and place your hand over that area, then take an incision tool and make an incision there in the skin, and pull that outwards from as many parts as possible. Or another thing you remove some cause of the layers, and then cut that with an instrument as this is its form:
Or another thing you remove some cause of the layers, and then cut that with an instrument as this is its form: And it resembles forceps, but the ends of them are curved, so the opening of each one of those is against the other, very sharp, which is iron that has been twisted.
May if this tool is not present, then cut that with the tip of something as this is its form: And it should be sharp from one side, but not sharp on the other.
And once you have cut one, cut the other according to this method of incision, and after that the patient should be rubbed with water.
May if there is pus discharge, wash with decoction of sorrel or wormwood leaves and do it in the same way as for the causes that restrict blood flow so that the pus discharge is reduced, and then care for it until it heals.
And there are some times when other abscesses appear in the earlobe besides those earrings, and cut them as I have said and instructed for cutting the two wounds equally.
And I have already treated a woman for an abscess that was natural in her earlobe, this abscess had a dark color and little sensation, which had constricted her earlobe, and the woman could hardly breathe normally, she had also been forbidden to eat or drink water, and she was on the verge of death if not treated within one or two more days.
And the abscess had swollen so much that there were two rows of teeth between where it went through with two cuts.
Then I cut it roughly and took out one of their incisions, then pulled that out, and the large portion came out with it. Then I opened another incision where I could see through to the other tooth, then made sure the patient's mouth was open, and held his tongue, then placed the incision in that abscess.
And then I removed a large part of it, and there was only little blood coming from him. Then the earlobe of that woman was completely restored, she began drinking water immediately, and soon resumed eating food. So I didn't stop cutting out pus from that abscess for a long time, and in its place another abscess would appear where it continued to grow.
Then I washed and cauterized her earlobe, then there was a sense of relief; and later I walked around without knowing what God had done for me.
Chapter 37.
On cutting the gum when it is inflamed.
When inflammation occurs in the gum, and it is inflamed and long, then it is named as a horizontal one. And if it's in the part that leaves out thick and round, then it is called a blister.
When it has been cured as we have said in the section and your treatment does not agree with it, and many times when pus has already escaped from him and is fine, then you need to determine that if you should cut out what was added round; and if it's along that length, and it bleeds, reddish or black in color, without a sensation towards the patient, then it seems like you should test cutting his treatment, where there is fear on the part of the patient.
And when you cut it as I have instructed according to its whiteness and length, make sure the patient faces him and presses his tongue with an instrument whose process is described in the cutting of two wounds, then place the incision in this new area, pull that out downwards, and cut it with one of the two tools that were said for cutting two wounds.
And correctly do not insert it anywhere but on that which is adjusted to the natural addition, for if you insert from his more, you will injure his speech.
And for the insertion, use that which we have rehearsed in the insertion of two parts, and treat it within so that it may be healed.
If the patient was frightened by the insertion, then: use skill in the cautery of him and his fear, and the way of the cautery on him is simply with hot water, and you place the head of the patient under your hand, and press lightly the tongue of him against the tool we have mentioned, take some of that water as we have said at the beginning of the cautery procedure, and pour it over this living cause, and make sure it's neither too thick nor too thin, and fill the cavity of the instrument with which this is done:
Let the part that has been retracted into its cavity be ready for the medicine, just like when you take out a hernia, and place the tool with the medicine on him, and have the patient lie down on their back so that they can spit or clean saliva from their mouth due to the internal medicine, so as not to cause any harm in his stomach region and let him relieve himself.
And place your hand on the medicine, and squeeze it over the uvula through the space for half an hour until you see that it has been numbed and reduced by the chewing of the medicine.
And if you wish, take hold of and cover that part at the end of the tongue, immerse the handle in the medicine, insert the tongue with the handle into a tube such that the handle adheres to that tube, do this as many times as needed for obtaining what you want from the cautery of the uvula, and let it dry until it falls off about three or four days later.
And if you need to repeat the medicine, do that, and after applying the cautery on the uvula with a handled tool, cleanse it in the uvula's canal by sucking water through it, adjust that which is in the channel of his medicine, wash it with rinsing water, treat externally with ointment, clean inside with toothpaste, and wait until it heals.
And this kind of treatment is beneficial for insertion and far from fear.
Some ulcers are cured of the uvula with that which is delicate for cautery and insertion, which is treated by sub-aqueous vaporization in this manner: collect calendula, yarrow, rue, mugwort, Arabic gum, chamomile, soapbark, and similar substances from among the herbs, adjust all those causes or some of them into one vessel, let them soak in hot water, and simmer; then strain out the liquid and allow it to cool halfway in the vessel. Place a copper plate on this level with an instrument made of bismuth according to this manner; make it of silver or bismuth.
And immerse the end in the mouth of the patient so that the steam rises to the uvula on the palate, while the uvula becomes somewhat opaque.
And repeat over that scabby spots while it dries, and remember not to perform this treatment when the appearance of abscesses starts, which would exacerbate in the abscess. Do not do what I have described here, but rather declare the abscess treatment for him after its occurrence.
If you do not present this instrument, then take a stick and make it into the end of him a bunch of garlic, so that the mouth of the patient is fumigated, for the garlic cloves prevent the steam from burning his mouth.
And this treatment is good for health.
Chapter XXXVIII.
Regarding the removal of thorns and what adheres in the stomach, as well as other causes.
Scabby spots adhere in the stomach or thorns from plants or any other cause.
So when you remove what is evident, on which you look, because you press the tongue against the tool facing towards yourself, in this way you declare what is in the stomach.
And what is not evident and is hidden in the stomach, when you make the patient vomit before the food has digested in the stomach, because a strong cause attached to the stomach can be eliminated through vomiting; or if the patient swallows a handful of oatmeal or lettuce leaves or a spoonful of dry bread; or take a piece of desiccated marine sponge, tie it firmly with string, and have the patient swallow that thing. In this way, as soon as it reaches the place where thorns are located, it is eliminated; then it causes vomiting. And when you take a worm and drink it tied with string, let it settle in your mouth and gently pull it out; or take a spoon and place it gently inside the patient, then withdraw it gently.
And if those causes are not eliminated as we have described, then use an iron tool according to this form:
And make it slightly larger than a small one, and at the end of him have a cavity which you will insert into his throat with ease.
And make his head raised in the air, and keep watch that the doctor touches only his throat bone, for fear it damages his body or leads to complications with the bones of the neck, or causes damage from touching the ear or spine, which the doctor avoids by using their hand.
However, let the patient not interfere with honey, by using their scientific knowledge of the location of the attached cause and penetrate deeply, then he throws his hand towards the instrument, all according to the quantity that has been prepared inside so that it is fully penetrated.
Chapter XXXIX.
On the extraction of gallstone attached to the gallbladder.
When the gallstone is treated with what we have said in the division of recovery with medicines and it does not respond, consider this: within the patient's solar plexus, because you must understand the tongue of the patient under the instrument which we have recommended to you.
So if you turn the gallstone, extract it from where it's small or by subtle steps.
And if it's not possible for you to extract it from there, then take a concave cannula and insert it into the solar plexus of the patient, and place in the concavity of the cannula a heated iron, and do this as many times (until the gallstone is dead and leaves the solar plexus) and abstain the patient from drinking water for the whole day.
And take one vessel full of water, and open the mouth for him in that, and wash his mouth with that; and do not eat anything else from it, let him drink water once every hour by himself, until the gallstone feels the water when he drinks it.
If it is not fully penetrated by what we have recommended, then fumigate the patient with garlic or with asafetida through the instrument that we have recommended for the fumigation of the uvula.
Do this, and see how it proceeds.
Another method of operation in fumigation is as follows: take a bowl with lit coals and cover the bowl halfway with a cloth that has a string. Place the end of the instrument in this string. Then hold the fumigation above; have the patient place their mouth at the tip of the cannula and close their mouth so that you can determine if the fumigation reaches the gallstone, for when the gallstone melts.
And if it doesn't melt, then repeat the fumigation several times, and have the patient abstain from drinking, eat salty foods and grains, and don't drink water, and it is necessary that this regimen be fully effective.
And this is how the tool looks when dealing with gallstones from the solar plexus when seen; it's similar to forceps like this, but if it were in the patient's body at any curvature: It is laid out on the solar plexus, and the tip of it resembles the beak of a stork, that is held, in which it has been filed with a rasp, so that when you grasp any food, it doesn't slip.
Chapter XLI.
And this is the summary of the discussion in relation to boils and in sections concerning them.
Boils are specific spots, of bodily manifestations, according to their recollection, from any in this book.
And they are diverse in puncturing and sectioning them by two ways, of which the first is through the special feature of boils themselves; and from there we understand their moisture.
And the second method is regarding the locations where they occur in the body, for when a boil occurs in the head it's different from a boil occurring in the anus; and a boil occurring at a meaty location is different from a boil occurring at a joint; and each one of them has its purpose for operation.
And some boils are such that they should only be punctured when close to the healing of pus in those or completion of their course.
And other boils are such that they should be incised when crossed and not mature according to their completion; as with boils close to joints, for when a boil approaches the joint, its essence is extended until you can understand what's in its circuit, and hardens the ligaments or nerves of that joint, causing contraction of that limb; or it's near the main member, and if you delay the puncturing of it until after it has matured, damage will occur to the main member; or it's close to the anus, then incise the immature boil; and don't puncture when you encounter crossing without completion of digestion, but that which is near the anus, so you don't lose its essence and extend beyond the partitions inside the anus, causing a fistula, or one made in its tip that has not healed. And you should know when to puncture the boil, and this is when it has matured.
And you should know that it has matured when there is the cessation of pain and the end of fever, as well as the reduction of rigor and pulse rate, and the sharpness of the boil's head, and other signs.
And when you know that it has matured, puncture in the area of pus left by the boil and pus coming from the healing of the base.
And puncture should be made through the length of the flesh or the body, if the blisters are in the parts of the limbs or the feet, and at points on the spots, at the cords of the nerves, at the arteries; and, moreover, in all equal places where they do not reflect, which in those that are reflected, use puncturing according to that member.
When the blister is in a meaty area, then it seems that you should make the puncture inside until digestion occurs according to proportion, as we have said; if you pierce there ahead of time, it extends the body's pain and dulls the body's sense, and makes the skin tougher and increases its depth.
When such blisters must be punctured according to the size of the flesh or the body's need, or according to that which each member requires.
And when you administer a small puncture, and for large blisters, a larger and wider or granular incision according to the diversity of the sizes of the blisters.
And for other blisters where it must be that the channel is returned and heated, when done in this manner like bread and made to last until completion, as happens with many boils and lumps.
And for those that are incised to a section having three corners; and for those when it is incised as in the shape of a thistle's needle, as with the blisters of gout.
And for them when circular and waning section is administered, resembling those.
When it comes to the one that does not have this as in superficial lion blisters, you should puncture that with a superficial puncture or simply flat.
And when the blister is large and has formed a healthy lump, puncture it but do not worry about removing all the pus at once; take out a part of it, then place the blister again the next day, and take out a larger part, and afterwards make granular wounds according to degree until there is an open channel.
Especially if the patient is weak from disease, or a woman in pregnancy, or a small child, or an old person in decline; for when the animal spirit's humors are resolved with the discharge of health, and strengthens the patient, then open them.
Take this chapter with great caution, and for the puncture in which you are puncturing these blisters, be sure to cleanse the sores and consider whether the sore from the blister is small, or a flat area; then administer remedies of any kind or local. And if the blister is large, and the openings of the puncture are granular, then you should place the patient in every position until they recover over time.
And if in the blister a part of the channel has been removed or concaved in the circuit, then be sure to restore it with local old or thread sewn from the material; like when you flatten dough or breads, consider moisture; strengthen it by the third day; and proceed with it and treat what comes from the ointments until it heals.
When bleeding occurs from illness during your operation, then you should administer water and wine in which you wet a piece of material, and place it over the area where there are spots of blood discharge.
When the bleeding continues from illness, then be sure to provide treatment and care, as well as powders which I have recommended in places like this our book and division.
When it is in the winter season, and the location of the blister is at a spot of nerve spots, then be sure to put powders in wine and oil mixture, and place those over the areas.
And if it's in the summer, and the areas are flesh-like, then be sure to place ground powders with water and oil or with wine and oil, all of which should be rubbed until the third day, as we have said, and when that's done be sure to remove the blister and cleanse it, then administer treatment for its recovery in whatever is suitable for it until it heals.
And this is what is necessary for knowledge of the treatment of blisters in general, but according to the way of distinction that I have said about all blisters on how their treatment proceeds through chapters individually.
Chapter XL.
Concerning sections of blisters that occur in the channel of the head.
In the channel of the head small blisters, which are specifically made of nodes containing tunics that make up their structure; and the specific types of their granules.
And they have points, and those that contain moisture similar to lime. And of those which contain moisture like dust, and resembling them; and of those that are lumpy, hard.
And in the section of all, and when extracting those there is no fear, as with the extraction of those you do not make an artery upset.
And the operation for this section is that you probe those with an instrument of which the shape resembles this somewhat, which is called an entrancer, so that you know it contains.
If what it contains is moisture, then split that into sections along its length according to the superficial section like this form:
Start from the section of line .B. up to the line of .G. Then as the moisture is evacuated, then scrape that skin containing that moisture, and don't leave any cause from all, so if it returns granularly, if there's any cause from that.
And then immerse the hand in Egyptian ointment if available, otherwise in water and salt; fill that with the wound and leave it submerged for another day, while you digest everything that is beneath that skin layer.
And then apply the Egyptian ointment on that hand again and thoroughly if you feel like it, assuming there is no damage underneath causing this issue; otherwise treat the wound with ointment until it heals.
And if there's an abscess containing fat nodes, then you should make an incision on this manner: In that section take the shape of a cross, cut between the two edges of the section and then proceed with the cut from all sides. Strive to extract the tissue containing that.
If you feel resistance while piercing, then do what I told you to do initially.
Similarly, do this for the infected abscess and in terms of treatment according to what we have told you; if the abscess is slightly infected, that means there's little inflammation and a small amount of moisture.
And some of these abscesses are located on the head in some men where there's no moisture; this is because I made an incision over an abscess at the head of an old woman and found that the abscess was like a hard, white lump, not drinkable. If someone else had done it, they would have drained it just like that.
And for other abscesses that occur on the head or elsewhere like those in children's heads and behind their ears, it's not this part of the head. Rather, these are all superficial sections.
And pause the puncture of those from the lower part up to where it's alleviated for the body in terms of recovery in the lower parts.
And then treat those with what you determine suitable for the process of healing.
Capitol 42.
Regarding the section on scrofulas which occur in the throat.
These abscesses are found in the neck and under the chin, and around the glands; some of these also occur in other parts of the body.
Those that occur in the neck are lumps that develop internally and are within their own tissue. All scrofula of these is within that tissue itself, just like with the nodes and abscesses on the head, as we have recounted.
The types of these scrofula are lumps; some contain moisture and others contain pus. The malignant ones do not yield to healing.
And for that one which you use in the Touchment with good disposition, whose color is revealed by its manifestation and resembles the color of the skin, spreading everywhere but not attached to the nerves of the neck or veins, nor to the artery. It's not wavy; when you make an incision through dry superficial tissue from this part up to the remaining body part of the line .G., between the lines of .B., burn it completely and extend the edges of the skin with oil, or with oil points if needed, as we've said for abscesses on the head. Extract that slowly piece by piece.
And more caution is to avoid piercing the vein or nerve.
And if the needle isn't sharp enough to not fit your hand during piercing or causes discomfort for the patient, then don't make an unnecessary incision. If you pierce a vein or artery and prevent your operation from proceeding, then rest in the wound with soothing powders that stop inflammation, strengthen the wound, and leave it so the pain of the abscess subsides and the wound begins to heal. When the pus is removed.
Then resume your operation while you've completed it.
And then ask yourself if there are any causes behind the other small scrofula nodules; hence, make incisions and clean those as well.
And if it's at the root of the large vein, then in that case do not make an incision on that scrofula along its roots. Before doing so, hold it with a firm grip and leave it there to fall naturally on its own.
And then fill the wound with old leather which you have already submerged in Egyptian ointment, and treat that area.
And if you've made an incision through the entire scrofula, then hold that you adjust both edges of the wound and place a bit of pus that's not excessively granular immediately after.
And if you find that there's excess granulation due to the size of the scrofula, then understand to make an incision at the root of that, remove it and administer suture as is said.
And for those scrofulas that contain moisture, pierce that with an external incision at the place where it appears to you in the location of its maturation, and pause piercing through the base of the pus below the body, as we've said.
And then when administering incisions, you should apply ointment like those, allowing that which is granular from the pus to dissolve. And when you find that the wound has already been cleaned, then treat that with restorative flesh ointment until it heals.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
From the section of the boil on the back that occurred inside the groin.
They cut off this section in the scrotum, and there isn't anyone we know of in our land who has done such a thing.
And this is the inscription of the dialogue of those.
May it be in men that there is a corner, and where the excision of the scrotum should be avoided, because thus it would not happen to him young by himself; for all the veins and the major parts of the groin are here.
May it be in those who have boils on the mouth or groin or both ears, when the groin disease is not at the root, one must avoid cutting into the scrotal section to prevent the loss caused by perforation.
So when we want this, that we should incise the scrotum leaving three circles of the scrotal rings, or four at small sections for its width in the one between two circles by quantity, that the section is in chinch, not on cartilage. This place is suitable for a section being free of flesh and the veins of the blood of him are hisen.
And if the doctor is fearful, then he should extend the incision from the groin to the ankle, and then make an incision in it so that it reaches the canal, but avoid the veins of blood if there is any reason with those.
And then cut the testicles according to what we have instructed; and it means on the section of the canal by the swelling which is from that exudate towards him who has burst it, and for the resection of the pus.
And leave the wound open for some time.
Therefore, when the hour is ripe for the feared perforation, add two layers of the skin from the wound's canal, and if that alone is the cartilage.
And then administer medicines that cause the flesh to regenerate until it heals.
And Al-Bucasis has stated that the sum of this dialogue is only that you see some of these boils have reached up to the groin of the testicles, and the testicles have gone into death, and his life has been cut off. Some people used to incise the epiglottis so that the testicles breathe over the area of the wound for a breath or two, and they were saved from death.
And for this reason we should leave the wound open until the malice of the groin is consumed; and the malice of him lasts three days; and then we should do as follows to the wound and treat it until it heals.
And what I have seen through my own experience is that a servant placed her hand in her groin and incised part of the lung canal there, and I was called to treat him, and it sounded like the groan of the dying person, and discovered the wound and sucked out the pus which was exuding from the wound little by little.
So I was to admit that she had not incised a vein or artery, and the wind came from the wound, and cured it until it healed.
And nothing happened to the servant unless perhaps in the pus, and some days later returned to their normal disposition.
And I say that for the section of the scrotum there is no fear.
Capitol. 44.
From the section about the boil that occurs outside the groin and is called the hernia of the groin.
This boil named hernia of the groin is a large boil according to the color of the blood, and it moves in women.
And it occurs in two ways, whether it is natural or accidental.
And in the natural way, there is no need to cure it.
And the accidental follows two ways of which one is similar to fatty swellings, and the other is like a boil that happens due to the blockage of an artery, and in that case there is fear. And one should not make any assumption about it as if it were iron, except in the case where it is small. And you should investigate that and examine it as described, and if you find it resembling fatty nodes, and is not suspended on any of the veins, then you should incise it like fatty lumps, and remove it at its attachment to the skin and fat; and otherwise, then thoroughly examine all its nature, and treat the area with whatever promotes healing until it heals.
Capitol. 45.
From the section on the varieties of lumps.
Of the lumps there are various kinds, and I have already mentioned all their different types in the division.
And you should understand that I am listing here the difference between a lump and an ulcer to avoid confusion.
And I say that in ulcers there is heat and fever and violent pains during which the boiling of excess is calmed; and this putsrefaction process ends when later the fever, pain, and heat cease.
May it be in lumps there is no heat or fever nor pain, and contains that chinch which is to the spleen as its own.
And it depends on the color of blood, and its beginning is like a boil and happens in the same way as emptying, whether major or minor, and they are according to two kinds; either they are fatty and contain moisture, and the colors of moisture are spots, as I have stated in the division.
When you reach the stage of healing for nodal issues, remove that and inquire about it at the outset regarding the instrument which is referred to as an intrument, according to its shape in the head which is approximately this.
It is the method of inquiring about pus and all kinds of nodes. You must take this instrument and introduce it into that wet spot which you find within the lump, and you will slowly push your fingers into it until you know that the instrument has penetrated the chain.
And guide your hand according to the size of the lump, and then extract the instrument. Consider what is left in the footprint of it.
And if the wetness is not too deep and of any color, then you should incise on the superficial section as I have said in other lumps.
And if there is no wetness left from the insertion, then you know that it is greasy.
And dry over it as it has not taken shape in this way: Like this was taught to you, suspend it with pins, and scrape the chain from all sides for ease, and preserve the skin or bag if possible over it, then extract that healing from within the node.
If it breaks during the operation, it is not possible to extract that healing, and remove what has been exposed instead, then you will extract it by weight so that it does not damage anything unnecessarily.
If it damages any cause from it, a little or too much, the node returns as was usual.
And if you notice that it damages some small part from it, then complete the wound with some corrosive and sharp powders, strengthen the wound, place a heat source over that which is a lump, cure that alongside other treatments until healed.
And if it's a large node, then you cut both the lips of it and cure that with what is inside.
And if it's pulsating, then you touch and treat the area of what is swollen that is the vein and straighten it for two days or three until the wound heals and rests from the boiling blood; then return to cut off what is damaged from the node.
Chapter XLVI.
Regarding the forms of instruments necessary for sectioning and puncturing.
Among those are the forms of instruments used, and they come in three kinds, from which one is large, another is medium-sized, and the third is small.
The form of a large instrument is this:
The form of a small instrument is as follows:
Make them out of iron, lead, and tip-down extremities properly, so that the instrument penetrates into the lumps.
And these are the forms of experienced ones, they have no name, and one among them is called red.
They come in three types; one of which is large, another is medium-sized, and the last is small.
The form of a large experienced one, its form:
The form of a medium-sized experienced one, its form:
The form of a small experienced one, its form:
Let's ensure that they are for those lumps and sinus tracts and abscesses, so that within them there are from the bones and other causes.
They are round sticks, large ones, lions, as big as large needles to which the strings are attached, and they are made of ivory, or bone or iron, or silver. The best are those that are made of ivory.
And the forms of experienced black feathers are such that for these to be opened in the cavity of which there is reflection, they are reflected towards their lightness towards those reflections.
They come in three types; some of which are long, and others are medium-sized, and the other ones are short, according to the quantity of width of the fistula and the constriction of it.
The form of the large experienced one in lead:
The form of the medium-sized experienced one in lead:
The form of the small experienced one in lead:
The forms of the pins are of specific kinds; among which there are some simple ones, having only one curvature, and they come in three types: large, small, and medium-sized.
And of these, they have hooks, and they come in three kinds.
And among those there are two curves, and they also come in three kinds.
And amongst them have three curves each, and they are of three kinds.
All of these are necessary in their respective places.
The form of a simple small pin, its form:
The form of a large pin with two curves, its form: The form of a medium-sized pin with two curves, its form: The form of a small pin with two curves, its form:
The form of a large pin with three curves, its form:
The form of a half-circle has three curves:
And these are the forms of knives used for cutting and scraping nodes and abscesses, which come in three types: one large, another half-circle shaped, and the last is a quarter-circle.
The form of a large knife:
The form of the medium-sized knife:
The form of the small knife:
The ends of those knives are made with sharp points for cutting, while the other ends are not. They aren't held in such a way but rather to prevent injury during the scraping of nodes, fearing the damage might reach a vein or nerve. For these reasons, patients find relief and tranquility with a slight pressure that enables the effective removal of abscesses.
And these are the forms of mallets, they come in three types: large, medium-sized and small, like hammers.
They are made from wood and resemble sticks, on which alcohol is applied.
And in the tip there's a needle-punctured area on an inner hidden surface, and this allows you to move towards both inside and outside parts when you want, as you see.
The forms of spatulas, which hide between your fingers are used for puncturing abscesses and not allowing the patients to feel discomfort, they come in three types: large, medium-sized, and small. And these are the forms of those:
The forms of suction cups which help in reducing the flow of the disease, they come in three types: large, medium-sized, and small; these are their forms:
They are made from citric wood, round with some length, and they are delicate.
And choose these types of suction cups: large, medium-sized, and small ones, because with them you can remove the disease's flow quickly in need, and then when your first aid is not medicine.
However, do not use those to remove the disease everywhere in the body, but only on fatty areas; like on the swellings and thighs, on arm and chest lumps, and on nipples, abdomen, and thighs; similar to the fatty lumps.
Some applications are made with those tools or small things resembling pieces of broken glass according to this form; when done through venipuncture or in case of cutting a vein or artery, the disease is removed.
Some applications are made round according to this form:
Chapter 47.
Regarding the treatment of men's nipples which are formed by females.
Some applications cause the enlargement of men's nipples as they start to become fatty, and then the nipples are enlarged further. They resemble female nipples, and we can distinguish them from false ones by their texture.
And when you apply this, make sure to scrape the lunar section according to this form, from line B into line G., and then thoroughly clean the greasy area. Then fill the wound with medicated ointment entirely and adjust both edges of the wound for suturing purposes. This will cure it if it is healed properly.
If the nipple sinks towards these parts and becomes soft due to its size as in females, then it should be split into two halves filled with pus. Two sections resembling a lunar figure are made, each containing the other, where the larger line contains the smaller one according to this form from the line B. and the line G. Then clean the chain that is between the edges of the wound, remove the swelling, and administer the sewing process as well as powders necessary for healing inside when it's healed.
And if you do not complete the scraping of this that needs to be done out of concern for the patient and due to the disease's flow, then you should fill the wound with corrosive ointment and leave it there until this corrodes the fatty parts, and then cure it properly when it is healed.
Chapter 48.
Regarding the puncturing of abscesses that have come to the surface, allowing me to operate on them.
These abscesses that I find coming up to the surface are of the species of scrophula, thorns, which contain a layer that is pus.
And among those that contain moisture; among these, you should scrape according to this lunar form: from the line of B. to the line of G., and when all the pus within the abscess is evacuated by healing, then fill it with oil and leave it for another day.
And soon after that, let the area be covered and treated with a suitable ointment until it is healed.
And if the abscess is of the species of nodes or scrophula, then you should cut over that in the same way we explained in the section about scrophulas.
And if the wound spreads throughout such that it causes pressure, then apply cautery as we explained previously.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
From the section on abscesses that occur through vessel damage or through a vein.
When a vessel is ruptured and the cavity becomes consolidated which is above that area, then pus formations occur causing an abscess. The signs by which one can know if inflammation and an abscess are due to an artery or a vein: when an abscess is due to an artery it has a long extension in the body's front; and when you press on the mentioned places, you feel a wheezing sound.
And that which is due to a vein manifests roundly throughout the body.
And if the treatment of this abscess is wrong, especially when left with these symptoms, or in joints, and in the neck, and in localized body pains; it's large, so avoiding iron in its cure should be avoided, and that which is at the extremities, or on top (head), avoid treating them.
For the one that arises due to inflammation of the vessel's opening, it splits the tissue section longitudinally; and then cuts open the section with scissors and nears the vessel, delivering from within the tunics that are exposed.
And then place the needle near it and have it penetrate into the other side, strengthen the vessel with stitches twice in two places, - which causes pain to your experience during extraction of two vessels that are within the temples.
And then cut at the spot which is between two ligaments in the space where it burns all that's inside until the abscess dissolves.
And then administer treatment in which ointments are applied between the ligaments; and treat that with suitable ointments until it is healed.
And if the abscess is due to a vein section, then you should hold it like you have access to the pus within the tissue until the abscess reaches your hand, and then insert the needle from the spot where you've held your hand. Then make that penetrate; and in that thread double inside as I told you when sewing on the thread at both ends of the thread between the two parts at both extremities.
If you fear that you will extract the thread, then insert iron into that needle from all the pus, you should start your stitch with the first needle, and strengthen your threads in four places.
And then drain the abscess in its central part within that when it settles as is inside, so you cut off the excess tissue and leave what's bound from it.
And then place on the powder which you have submerged in water and oil, and then administer treatment that is done with cloths and ointments until it's healed.
The chapter concerning abscesses that occur due to twisting of nerves.
Similar to how abscesses occur in vessels and veins, they also occur due to impact on nerves or overwork, similarly.
And it's done like this in the areas around the knees or ankles, or in any place where pain occurs at the joints.
And it's a hard abscess, and its appearance is like the other skin, and it affects the major parts of his disposition senses and when it's stretched due to intensity, one feels in it the patient's similar confusion.
And it is not an abscess that extends in the body's front, and by itself allows tissue to return, and one feels pain everywhere and doesn't move towards front or back parts.
So for those that are at the joints, you should not be bound with iron, which will strengthen its contraction.
And apply this treatment in the head or forehead by opening it with a needle. And if the abscess is small, then treat it at its root and remove that from its base.
And if it's large, then suspend it with a hook, scrape that off, and place something underneath; and adjust the wound with stitches, treat it until it heals.
Capítulo 51.
The section about abscess that occurs due to childbirth, which happens in the abdomen.
Examine the swollen and red areas in the abdomens of those affected and in other parts of the body of those subjects which are called fungiform due to their similarity with fungi; from which the base is thin and the head is large; already the lips of those have increased, it is from those that are small, and it is from those that greatly increase.
And I have already seen one where in the patient's abdomen were two parts which resembled fungi, and there was no difference between those white areas, of thin tissue.
And already the lips of those would be inverted and would split, and moisture would flow from that continuously.
So I inserted them and explored each one in a period of about eighteen uncia (a unit of measurement). And the other was six uncia.
And in the operation at insertion, you should consider if the patient is wet, and the color of the area is white, wet, from thin tissue; so then you would insert it laterally through a cut, and have your presence with the cautery in fire, such that swollen areas can be expelled from that section causing pain; and if there's no sensation, cauterize it.
And if you see the patient is fearful and anxious, be cautious around iron; instead take lead that has been recently made, and strengthen in that part, the way we have said it to be; leave it for two days.
And adjust near the constriction of the lead thread; thus, do not cease to strengthen large amounts of lead in that part, until it is removed and falls by itself from the work.
And if that part is due to a large reason, then in the place of anxiety and fear exists some cause, and more so in the case it is in the abdomen.
It's possible that you might remove the disease from him, and then cautery that area so it doesn't return.
And then treat that place until the wound is healed.
And be cautious not to presume that you are removing a part of dark color, with little feeling, under careful examination; for such is cancerous.
And I will come back with recall from childhood nearby.
Capitol. LII.
Of the cure of the prominence of the navel.
Navel prominence is caused by various reasons; or through cracks in the stomach which is above the belly, and injuries to the skin or intestine according to what happens in other ruptures; or due to infection that flows from a vein or artery as mentioned previously, or due to constricted wind circulation within it.
If it's due to stomach crack and injury to the skin, then the color of the pus is similar to the body color; and its pain is intense, appearing in various locations. And if it's due to the protrusion of the intestine, then that position is in your area as we have recounted, with more intense variation. As you press that on your fingers, it gets concealed, and then returns; and when you gently touch it on the surface, it becomes magnified movements.
And if due to dampness, then the pain is intense and it's not concealed when you press with your hand, nor is it compressed, nor does it increase.
And if due to infection, then these signs appear in the pus turning black and declining.
And if it's due to flesh nothingness, then there is a heavy, large, and hard pus, which forms according to the amount.
And if it's due to wind, then touching it is intense.
And the operation here is that you should consider if the navel prominence is due to infection in an artery or vein, or due to wind; thus, one must refrain from treating it where there is fear and anxiety as we taught you in the previous chapter regarding the pus related to arteries and veins.
And if the prominence of the navel is due to the intestine or skin, then you should order the patient to lie on their back and stay in that position. Then test through the entire navel area, and order them to lay against your hands between their buttocks, and wrap a cloth tightly around this area as you tested it. Extend the size of the pus over the top parts with one large hand; then tie firmly or loosely with thread or string, following the pattern of tying normally.
And then open the middle of the pus extending over the muscles, and introduce your fingers into that spot and remove the intestine; and if you have found or missed it through the muscle, then you will suddenly extract it and push the intestine back into its original place inside the abdomen.
And if you have found the skin, then take that with one hand; and remove excess of it.
And if it is against your artery or vein, then encircle that movement, and proceed with your operation again; take two needles and insert them in those two strong threads, and introduce the needles around the pus area in a crisscross manner, making them penetrate. Then strengthen the pus in four parts over the needles.
And if you wish, or leave the needles and let the flesh extend over where it should fall by itself; or open that when it becomes thin and is ready, and place something there, then treat that with the ointments until it heals.
And if the prominence of the navel is due to flesh nothingness or dampness in it, then you should extract the pus as we have said and remove the infection or dampness which you find there, and treat that with what heals and consolidates the area.
Capitol. LIII.
Of the cure of childhood diseases.
We have already discussed, in the division, about the special types of childhood diseases and how they are treated with medicines, and that healing through iron alone should not occur unless it is not ulcerated; we also talked about diseases that arise due to the lack and negligence in treating them.
And they say that some childhood diseases can be eradicated from certain locations where it's possible, such as in the head which is found in nipples or on the cheek and resembles parts of the body that are meant to be removed completely, especially when they begin small.
And when it's old and large, there is nothing to do for him, as I have not been able to cure anything of this sort before nor have I seen others who could.
The operation on the patient is when you allocate everything as we have said, that is, you precede and leave the patient undisturbed, and cleanse him of black bile on several occasions, then you adjust it if it's an internal disorder with obvious symptoms.
And prepare the patient for operation in the position suitable for the procedure, and ensure that they breathe easily as it is done; and make them concave from all sides so that a good thorough examination can be conducted without causing any damage to their condition. And let the treatment flow naturally, do not puncture lightly, squeeze the affected areas, and remove any excess fluid with your hand or an appropriate tool among the available instruments.
If there is an accumulation of thick pus that seems to be coming from a vein or artery, then apply a cautery inside where the pus flow stops, and afterwards proceed with another treatment until it heals.
Crown. (The term 'capitola' or 'capiol' is used in some regional dialects to refer to something related to the head or crown.)
On the treatment of dropsy.
We have already discussed in the division of the various types of dropsy caused by water and the symptoms of each type. For treating any of them, we use medicines.
That which is cured with iron is merely the type of anemia alone, and it should not be treated as close to the types of tympanic or yposaccarian dropsy, for those are fatal.
And when you have treated this type of tympanic dropsy with medicines and if your treatment does not improve, then consider this: if the patient has already gained strength, or it's another illness in addition to dropsy, such as cough or stomach ache similar to those, then be cautious about using iron on them because caution is needed regarding this.
If you notice that the patient is getting better from excessive strength, and if it's not another illness but only dropsy, then there isn't any concern about age either. The way to perform the operation for them would be to lift the patient between your hands, and then assist them to relieve their stomach with your hand, expel water towards the exit point of the urinary tract. Take a thorned needle according to this manner:
Use two long needles with sharp points, like a thorn; however, for this operation in the patient, make them short and little by little. So that during the procedure on such, you don't penetrate into the intestine and ensure it's done properly.
And consider that if the production of dropsy is due to the intestines, then it involves cutting off from the navel by the length of three fingers towards the exit points, on the right side of the patient over the urinary tract.
If the production of dropsy is due to illness of the kidneys, then your cutting point should be on the left side of the navel by three fingers.
And if the production is due to milk, then your cutting point should be on the right side.
And remember that when your cutting point is towards the side where you want the patient to breathe, so as not to allow excess fluids to flow into that area.
And when you are done piercing the whole line with the instrument and entering that section, lift your hand towards the thorn between the line and the siphon. Then scratch that area. And if it's as much as a fingernail or roughly that amount.
And when you pierce the siphon so that the thorn reaches the desired location, this is where water is found. And after extracting it, insert an instrument with this shape: It's similar to a delicate silver catheter; it's made of silver or ivory or bone. At the lowest part of the catheter there is a small point, and on its sides are three needles: two from one side and one from another; this is how the tip should be cut like a feather, as follows:
And on the end of this part there is a ring, which when the instrument reaches water, immediately starts moving over the instrument. Then drain out half of the water at moderate intervals, if you evacuate more than that in an hour, it will weaken your patient's strength due to animal spirit resolution, or might cause him to fall into coma and approach death.
Remove that according to the strength of your patient and according to what you interpret from the patient's condition during the operation, considering their pulse strength and goodness.
And after removing the instrument, collect the water that causes it, which is retained by the line that catches the needle you've made sure to pierce in accordance with that manner.
And repeat the process with the instrument on another day if you notice that the patient tolerates this treatment, and extract a small amount of water. Do this for several days with caution, and be careful not to completely remove the water but just a little bit.
If you are worried about the patient and remove a large amount of water, then treat them with burial in sand and sweat baths under the sun for a long time. Treat them with dehydrating medicines until they recover.
And apply a cautery on the stomach and kidneys near the water extraction site, as I have previously described in what has preceded this.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
From the treatment of children whose kidneys have not yet been punctured for urine.
Some of the children's urine flows out through their mother's body, and the mixture's head is not punctured (or it is straight or not in its proper location).
Therefore, upon birth, perform the operation on them as soon as they are born with a delicate incision according to this method:
And then place in the straight path of the urine a small lead pin and bind it, leaving it for three days or for four.
And when they want to urinate, let them go and urinate; and then return that (the urine flow) back to normal.
And if you do not stop the lead, it is possible that the urine which was over the site does not heal this closure.
Make sure that the path of the urine is straight by using a lead pin as we have said, for too many days before it becomes larger.
For those in whom the urine is not in its proper location, it becomes blocked, which causes this issue with them. The one that is natural and makes the passage of the urine go up to the end of the penis so that they cannot urinate inside; while lifting the penis by their hand to above; this does not affect their generation, because their semen cannot reach their mother according to rectitude, and it is a problem with the kidneys.
The method of the operation on them is that you place their thighs above themselves and extend the tip of their penis with your left hand with strong extraction, then cut the tip of the tip of the site of the prepuce with a sharp blade as if it were an inkblot, or you do not remove any part so that half of their skin resembles the tip of the penis and that urine falls in the middle place according to how we do.
And remember that in your operation for the flow of pus, what diseases might occur to this; and take care with them about the one you are cutting off pus from, and leave them as if you have cut it, and treat the wound until it heals.
And here ends section 56.
Regarding the white matter that occurs in the prepuce at the tip of the penis, as well as pus, darkness, and adhesion of the prepuce at the tip of the penis.
Some occurrences of this white matter occur in the skin and is an indication of kidney problems.
And one of these is malignant and the other is not.
Non-malignant ones, hang them on a thin cord and cut that between which you will remove it all; then cover that spot underwater with Egyptian oil; and over that place, treat the oil of diafinicon until it heals.
And if the white matter is malignant, note its color, then treat it with cautery close to where you made the incision and the amount of treatment.
So if white matter is found on the prepuce at the tip of the penis in a non-circumcised individual, and one part of the white matter is inside the prepuce and the other part is outside, then remove the white matter that is inside from when it starts to harden; and then treat the external part, so that when you treat this period, it is not guaranteed that it will not be squeezed.
And it is common for the genitals and prepuce to have blackness and corrosion. Therefore, treat everything that has already deteriorated and that wants to decay or that has already decayed; then draw a line over that around that with honey, which is treated with flour from saffron, rosemary, and juniper berries.
And treat that with the other treatment until it heals.
So if there is pus discharge, then apply lunar cautery according to this method:
And lunar cautery consists of two simultaneous treatments, one for pus discharge and the other for the wound when it is decayed.
And if the tip of the penis is corroded and completely destroyed at that time, then treat by inserting a lead catheter into the middle of the prepuce so that the patient urinates through it.
Regarding the adhesion of the prepuce to the tip of the penis (this adhesion only occurs in that which has a tight prepuce, and above it no circumcision is performed; and when adhesion occurs due to wound or abscess) treat by cutting with blunt scissors until the ligament dissolves and the tip of the penis is freed from all parts.
And if it is difficult to carefully cut those out, then treat by cutting with scissors some part of the tip of the penis and prepuce, and this is that when the prepuce, which is delicate, is lightly punctured because of its delicacy.
And carefully separate between the prepuce and the tip of the penis by a thread of its delicacy, which has already been mixed in water to prevent further occurrence.
And treat with styptic powder until it heals completely.
And here ends section 57.
Regarding the circumcision of children and the treatment for what happens to those who are circumcised.
Circumcision is not a solution like other wounds: however, due to our operation and our will, it is more appropriate in this case for children, so we must assign better surgery and ways that preserve health while losing as little.
When ancient people didn't say to perform circumcision in some of the free moments, for they don't use it in their laws, and it's only because we acquired it through experimentation that I have found out that most craftsmen and barbers use circumcision and castration on novices and students; and they use honesty with the faithful and cutting with the fingernails.
And I have tried all these methods and found that castration with knives is better than circumcision, using honesty with the faithful rather than circumcision like fingernails. It avoids chaining the joints above, where the foreskin's chain is made up of two tunics, and leaves the tunica clitoridis below, making it stronger and allowing for another type of cutting and assured pain. And castration which is done by surgeons, who use their fingers, doesn't ensure the cutting of the end of the male member, for it forcefully enters into the passage of its flesh.
In the operation with fingernails, forcefully using iron spoils your operation. And the chain of a child is short by nature, and cuts made in this manner do not require castration, which I have seen.
The benefits of castration done with knives and metal in the flesh, is discovered by experience to me, as knives offer a proportionate cutting, so that the sharpness above is thus like the sharpness you leave; therefore when you press your hand it provides two kinds of sharpness, and cuts according to comparison at once; and this makes compression of the flesh into a figure containing the chain of the penis from all sides, on which no mistake is made.
And the first way of operation is that you make the child stand very well if he belongs to those I understand as a little one, so that you do not simply let the flesh touch its penis only, and leave it for another day.
And then make him rejoice in every way possible that he receives according to his understanding from this. And then have him lie between your own hands well prepared, and it should not be done hastily; hide the knives in your hand or leave them on your belly, so that the child does not see those or any other tools.
And then insert your hand into the penis and blow on the chain, and pull that in until the head of the penis is freed, and carefully castrate him as what is added to it in foreskin.
The shape of the knives for castration, this is how they are:
Let the first blades not have a handle and the others be handled, so that there is no mistake of the rod of the key, and let the length of the two sharp parts be thus like the length of two oars equal in size.
The mistake in castration is when forcefully you remove the whole intrinsic chain or a part of it, and thus you must cut.
So consider that you should extend that of your hand to your fingernail in front of the elbow on it, and cut that according to equality.
And if you cannot hold it at your fingernail, then cut that with a knife and cut it.
And if it has passed three days, and what remains of the swollen penis is retracted, then you leave that until the swelling has been reduced by the cauterization, and cleanse that with ease, and cut it according to what suits you.
And guard against the head of the penis, which is not for him.
And then treat it with that which heals the wound from powders as we have recommended in the chapter on powders.
And if it has been cut into the chain to measure, and you follow its parts above, this will not bother him.
And treat it with what we have said until it heals.
Chapter 58.
Chapter 58: On the treatment of retained urine in the bladder.
Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by obstructions made by stones or by clotting blood, or by blockage or with a plug, similar to what we have said about the methods of treatment in the section.
And if it is not dissolved in what we have said and the cause remains on the patient, then you must intervene upon them; here lies the treatment for you to perform with a tool which they call syringe, of which this is the form: It's made of silver and very fine, somewhat like a needle from a syringe but slightly longer than half a palm in length, with a thin tip at its head.
And the way to conduct urine discharge through that is: take the bent horn and bind it on the tip of the leather or cloth for good adherence; insert the ends of the horn into the opening you have made in the syringe, and if there's any excess from the cloth, cut it off but rather enter it into the syringe with vigor. Then later move the syringe near a heater and apply butterfat to it.
And cut the patient's thigh above, and clean out the bladder and penis with oil mixture, and olive oil and water.
And place the syringe in such a way that it reaches the root of the penis; and later fold the penis upwards from the opening of the anus; and then push the syringe inside; and then push this inside until the bladder is reached, and this ensures that the thigh is immersed in the empty space, and not to do so according to this order but rather where there's a tendency.
And gradually extend the horn through the cloth little by little, for urine will soak the cloth.
And remove that and proceed with urine therapy, use the syringe, do not stop this process and use the syringe until the bladder and thigh find relief.
Chapter LI.
Regarding the quality of bladder irrigation with vinegar and using utensils that agree with this method.
When there is an ulceration or abscess in the bladder, or inflammation within it, or if you want to distill waters and medicines inside, then this must be done with a tool called vinegar clamp. Here's its form:
If it is at the end of its application and it feels dull, then you close it. And in that place there are three parts: two on one side, like this size.
At the beginning is a hollow area, in which that substance is introduced, and according to the amount that pushes it out, you add more, within which when any cause is pushed out by that from the moisture, it's pushed out, and when it's expelled, this is pushed out, and when it's expelled for a long time, as per how it functions like vinegar in which naphtha was treated in sea battles.
So if you want to expel moisture in the bladder, insert the tip of the vinegar clamp into the moisture, and pull out that which has been pushed out upwards, for when the moisture is expelled it moves towards the interior of the vinegar clamp.
And later insert the tip of vinegar clamp into the penis according to what we advised in the syringe; and then push out the moisture as you push it out, for when this moisture reaches the bladder immediately, and the thigh holds this moisture.
The form of a subtle catheter to which the bladder is catheterized, and that is its form:
And it should be made of silver or copper, where the tip is either like a small feather or resembles that shape internally, and its shaft should smoothly extend inside.
And proceed to grasp the bladder muscle, pause there in the moisture you wish to catheterize in the bladder, and then bind that between two pieces of a double horn with strong ties. And heat that moisture over fire.
And later insert the tip of the catheter into the penis.
And later, press your hand on the bladder with the moisture straightened out deeply, as the thigh holds that moisture which has already reached the bladder.
If you don't have a bladder present, then take a sheep's stomach and make a circle from that; puncture the whole of its roundness; later insert a strong horn into those parts, as they are turned; later add the circle in the same way it is added, so if you pause with what you want of the moisture, oil and waters.
And later you bind that in the tool and do this as you did with the bladder, expressing your hand so that the moisture reaches the bladder.
Chapter LX.
Regarding the extraction of gallstone.
We have already discussed the types of gallstone and their treatment with medicines, as well as the differences between gallstones formed in the bile ducts and those formed in the bladder, and the signs of that.
And we have spoken about the stone in which the operation takes place, and section.
And the stone generated in the bladder is exactly that which is formed within the bladder.
And I am narrating this with clear exposition and abbreviation.
So it is said that the stone generated in the larger bladder mostly goes to children; and among its signs is that the urine that leaves the bladder resembles water in its subtlety, and appears like sand; and the patient rubs their penis, with heated spots over the anus, and nearby is being raised; and when ejaculation occurs from the anus, it contains pieces of those.
And healing is immediate for children who have reached the age of fourteen; and it is difficult to heal in the elderly. It may be that among those, there is a middle ground due to this water between them.
And of the one where the stone is greater and healing is easier; if it's small, it's contrary to that.
And how do we approach the treatment of that, begin with the modification of the patient using a cauterizing tool which opens up the entire opening within their intestines; that opening, sometimes by heated spots prevents the formation of the stone from its investigation.
And place the patient on their feet and make them sit upright with a cauterizing tool for themselves that allows the stone to descend into the bladder's base, or escape to any location or by heated spots.
And prepare that cauterizing tool between your hands and the patient's, let the rest of their things be left as they are for you, so that the whole bladder may be made to tilt towards the parts left.
And prepare to remove that entire protruding area.
So if you feel the stone in the space, then immediately cover it with a section on top of it.
And if you don't feel it all through your touch, then cover it with an oil of your hand's index on the left side; if the patient is elderly or a child, use the 'middle' word for the young adult and insert that into their anus. And prepare to find the stone inside while your finger remains there. And convert that small stone gradually into the bladder's neck.
And apply pressure on it with your finger, and expel that from the exit points outside; towards the spot where you placed the section.
And instruct the minister to press the bladder with their hand; and instruct another minister to stretch their right hand above the exit points with their other hand, and use the cord left by the genitals towards the spot where the section is made.
And prepare to insert some fat from this substance, which is its form: And divide that which is between the anus and genitals, not in the middle place, before the left side of the thigh; let the section be on top of that stone and your finger be in the anus, let the section be transverse, so that the exit section outward is wide and inward narrowed according to the amount I extracted from the stone to its possible extent, but not larger, for when we use our finger which is in the anus, the stone should be prevented from coming out due to this section and it becomes too tight.
And know that there are stones some of which have angles and edges, due to which their ejaculation is made difficult by this.
And that one which resembles a lion and has a round shape, it causes easier ejaculation due to this.
And if it's that one which has angles and edges, adjust in the crack.
And if it is not too tight, then cover it with your hand or strengthen over it decently, the end of which is like a file on which you strengthen on the stone, and do not pull away from it; or insert this subtle tool of curved end.
And if you cannot over it, then extend your tool a little more, and if you feel blood flow, cut gently on that with nitric acid.
And if the stone is more than one, then at the beginning you push your hand into the opening of the bladder, and gently penetrate towards it; and you gently push something close to that; and similarly do so if there are more spots.
And if it's large stone, then the lack of knowledge is that you penetrate that with large section, which befalls the patient due to one or both causes: either it stays there or changes into a continuous urine distillation process, so that the area is not completely consolidated.
And administer expulsion of it so that it becomes loose, or engrave in the crack with scissors where you extract that in pieces.
And when you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with ointment of aloe and dragon's blood extract, and strengthen that. And place over it a cloth soaked in oil and wine or in ground oil and water for vinegar to be released.
And prepare the patient to rest on their back over their chest, and do not change their clothes until the third day.
And once he has changed his clothes, wash the area with water and oil, then treat it with a thin ointment and with an ointment of diabazilicon until it is healed.
If in the wound an abscess occurs with corrosive pus, adjust and treat it aggressively. If that is how it looks like, as if the infection is within the bladder frozen, and causing forbidden urine (which is known by its elimination through urine), then you should intervene in the wound and remove that pus. Because a Roman causes the bladder to decompose inside the bladder and for it to putrefy.
And place the wound under a gentle rinse with warm water and salt, opposing all kinds; use what is suitable for your healing process within which it will be healed.
And during all the hours of your entire healing process, that you apply to both thighs, adjust the medicines which are placed on the area.
And if the wound is small and located at the root of the penis, if it is infected within him, and urine elimination is forbidden, then treat that as I advised you before reaching this stage; for this healing process is criticized by this technique; and already I have made this, and what you should do is take a soldering iron, which is the shape of this:
Of triangular shape, sharp, infected within a stick.
And then take the instrument, and position it at that part of the penis, leaving the wound there so that it does not return to the bladder.
And then place the iron at the penis, making a hole with ease within which the tool will reach that wound. And then rotate the tool with your hand in that small wound little by little, making a hole inside which you will allow it to penetrate from the other side; so that urine is liberated immediately.
And then place your hand on that which is being treated from the part forward of the penis; when that is healed and filled with urine, it becomes well again, and the patient is cured.
And if this healing is not properly done for any cause that prevents it from continuing in this way, then leave the tool on the wound, and another instrument on top of the wound. And then cut over the wound between two folds on that penis. And then remove that (implying the contents or structure being referred to in the previous line). And then untwist the thread and changes the frozen infection, which happens in the wound.
And it is not necessary to leave the soldering iron on the wound, only so that it doesn't return to the bladder, and the other thread on top of this is for that reason; when the thread is untwisted near the exit of the wound, the cause returns to its place and takes back the infection.
And that's why it is necessary when you have the soldering iron above this, to lift the cause from these parts, or if it returns you should remove your contribution and takes back the infection as we've said.
Chapter LXI.
On the extraction of a wound from women.
In women, a wound (or perhaps a similar condition) is less common to occur.
If you find a wound among those conditions, then the healing is difficult for them, and it is prohibited through various methods.
One of their characteristics is that when a woman allows her uterus to be too full.
And the second is that you don't find a woman who knows how to describe if she has been with a man during her fertile period or not from a maiden to a married state.
The third is that you won't find a woman who knows this technique, especially the operation with her hand.
And the fourth is that the location for the operation on a wound in women is far from the location of the wound, so you need an extensive operation area, and there is fear in that.
If need arises for you to do so, then seek out a skilled male physician, as it is more reliable.
If you are lacking that skill, then seek out an almost subtle male physician, or present a knowledgeable woman midwife skilled in female matters, or a woman who is partially proficient in this art.
So make that presentation and command her to do everything you instruct her, from the inquiry about the wound to its beginning; which is why she must inspect if the woman has a uterus, then place your own thing in her buttock and try to remove the wound.
So if she finds that, make her forcibly take away your own thing, and then command her to cut into that wound.
And if she is not a uterus-bearing woman, then command the midwife to place her thing in the woman's abdomen and inquire about the wound. But hold your left hand on the bladder, press that well.
When that is found, then dig in gradually until you widen the opening from the bladder's orifice to each of its parts through which it spreads into their share of her virtue so that it reaches the level of the knee.
And then carve over that location near the mouth of the womb; you must reach the level of the knee from wherever it stops on them. Keep the stone in that part and let the rest not be dislodged by the stone when you remove it.
And make the section small at the beginning; then insert the rod over that section. And if you feel the stone, then adjust it to the section according to the quantity of stone that you know will be dislodged from there.
And know that the sizes of stones are grains: some of them being small and large, hard and sharp, long and round, and have edges.
And know how many types you are of for this so that you can signify about what you want.
And if you want to see the release of urine, adjust in that very place and let it pass for one hour before removing the obstruction, then proceed with your operation until the stone is removed.
And prepare for yourself the tools you were told about in the extraction of stones in men, so that you can be helped by them during your operation.
And if you want the release of urine and know that the expulsion of urine is from the artery that is incised, then pause powder over the area and strengthen it with powdered and constrictive substances; do not exceed this. And let the stone remain, do not remove it; for a strong one will cause the patient's condition to worsen. And then treat the wound.
And when the sharpness of the urine has reduced somewhat after several days, and the place is healed, then proceed with your operation until the stone is removed.
Section 62.
About hernia in the section.
Hernia is simply an accumulation of moisture in the white bile, which contains the gall and is located at the site of the genetic chain; it is called bile.
And some are in the proper abdomen which nature prepared for them at the location of bile, once it is cut off where there is already more bile; this is the genetic chain between white bile as we have said, and it is not this but another bile.
And the generation of this hernia is due to overproduction that affects the genetics, so it pours out this substance into them; and some may occur due to blows struck on the genetics.
And this moisture has various colors; its color ranges from yellow to bloody or reddish, or it's dark and fatty, or it's watery white, and this is what is more common.
And the signs by which one can determine where this accumulation of water is located are: if it's in the white bile as we've said, then the swelling appears elongated along its length like a figure of bile, and the genetics become visible; for moisture surrounds it from all sides.
And if the moisture is in the proper abdomen, then the swelling occurs at the location of bile and that's why we judge that there is more bile.
And if the moisture is between the chain of genetics and white bile, then you can feel it with your hands.
And if you want knowledge of the color of the moisture, then you express the color of the moisture on the swelling through a cut in it; and according to what stands out in the trace of penetration, judge about what is inside them.
And when we come to treating them, then dig so that you command the patient if this is possible for you, to urinate freely, and fill their body.
And then have them lie on their back for some reason or another, and place your hands under their sweat towels.
And then sit on the left part of them, and command that the servant follow on their right side, which extends their hand to one of the two sides towards the chain of genetics and the location of the miracle in the abdomen.
And then take a diagonal cut, and divide the chain of genetics at the middle point along its length towards the pubis.
And make the section according to rectitude at an equal distance from the line that should be at the skin of genetics, until it reaches white bile including.
And scratch that area, observe and keep watch so you don't scratch too much; your scratching should reveal something hanging down towards bile more and examine it carefully according to the quantity you can manage.
And then pierce the white bile filled with water through an extensive hole, and remove all of the water.
And then separate the two folds of the section with scissors, and extend white bile towards the parts above; don't touch the chain within the genetics including it, and cut white bile in that manner which is possible for you. And cut that all or in pieces, especially its finer part. If you don't examine the incision thoroughly, it won't be certain that water doesn't return.
And if the bile is processing outside of its chain during your operation, then when you have completed the section of white bile, return inside it and adjust both folds of the genetics's chain with stitches, then treat that similarly to other wounds until it heals.
And if you find that the belly is corrupted by another illness, then operate to discover which vessels are above the suspension apparatus, and extract the belly, and then properly treat what we have said.
And if the water is divided into two parts, then you know that there are two hernias; therefore cut that section as you did on the other equally; and if it seems to you that it's an operation, then do so.
And then clean the wound, and between these sections immerse wool in oil or in rubbed oil; and place another wool layer that you have submerged in vinegar and oil, and spread this over two thighs and the belly area; and cover with folded sheets and powders, and let them dry according to this shape:
And then have two layers and let them be filled with damp wool according to this appearance; and make the ends such that they are pressed by a hand or wet wool, and add them into the structure in the waistband of your trousers, one of the ends takes inside the other, and the second end goes to the crotch part of the pants, and two ends on each thigh, and two others on each hip bone, and all tightness should be adjusted into the waistband of your trousers.
And for some cases of this hernia it is medicated artificially with a cautery in place of the section on iron; and you would take a subtle surgical instrument and cut there where the genitals' cord is, and ignite according to what we have recommended that when revealed is the white spleen containing water, then you do so by cautery as follows: And it resembles Greek letter.
And then pierce that spleen and ignite so that all the moisture is evaporated inside.
And then extend the spleen with threads, scrape with threads, and scrape with a slightly ignited cautery; cut there as long as it is within your ability to eliminate all of it; and beware not let the fire touch the belly.
And know that this operation is better saved far from bleeding and much more so than an operation on the section.
And if it bothers you in the middle of an operation or during a cautery, or bleeding, then understand what kind of complication is happening to you through this, and apply the treatment as prescribed for that.
And if the patient is weak and does not expect the second operation due to its horror, then perform a piercing according to what I recommend; and this is when it has been certified that you should do, by what we have said about meanings, that this hernia is water-filled.
And then understand that you should make the patient lie on a raised surface, pierce the abscess at the lowest part of the affected area with a horizontal incision, and continue the piercing according to the length of the body.
And if the cut is wide where all the water flows out completely.
And then press on that spot and smooth it, so that all the remaining water drains away. And then treat it while the wound is healing.
And if a complication occurs during the drainage of water at that time you pierce there: and this is not done unless the white splint in the wound's opening causes complications and prevents water from entering, then understand that you should place in the wound a small object or tool with which water from dropsy is extracted; its shape is shown beforehand; or fit on top of the wound a small cover.
And know that the water returns and is purified approximately two months or around those; and when it has accumulated, then this should be drained according to that systematic method, so that the patient will pass their days.
Chapter/Capital LXIII (seems like a chapter number).
Regarding section on fatty hernias and their treatment.
And know that in this section regarding this hernia, the fear of cancer is prevalent in major decisions; for which I have seen your salvation and being saved by that better way.
And I remember the operation for that one and the specifics of the abscesses.
So I say that the abscesses are found in the bodies where the tendons are composed, and this is done due to various reasons: or by an acute overflow of fluid which spreads through the tendons, or by impact.
And the color of the abscess is according to the color of the body, it's not detected in the pain, and it's a heavy abscess.
And a soft small abscess is formed, whose color is dark, and it doesn't hurt the patient.
And sometimes it is caused by the obstruction of the veins, and because of this inflation already one can remember the patient, or by the inflammation of the veins.
And this is known as the spread of abscesses when you press that against your fingers; and understand that don't touch it.
And this is done due to the inflammation of the vein, does not spread from any cause you should press against your fingers.
And it is possible that for this type an operation can be done and for others of flesh; and you cut the tendon's cord, extend the belly towards the upper parts, extract the one from the white spleen, free the suspension apparatus of the vessels, tie them, cut the suspension apparatus that you have freed from all parts of the belly.
If the patient already has those hardened masses, then do so by taking out the patient's body and placing it under them.
And if there is adhesion between any parts of the lungs or between what is inside the heart cavities, then do so by removing all that adhesion and insert a round opening.
If it's a natural formation of flesh at the site of adhesion which is behind, then do so by removing all that comes from you, and remove the body as well in accordance with what we have said.
And once your operation is completed, then fill the wound with oiled and pure wool and let it heal; and thereafter treat that as in other healing processes until it is healed.
Chapter 64.
Regarding the treatment of hernias that occur in the stomach.
If there is an abscess wrapped by some kind of covering resembling a bud and causing the weakening of testicle functions, and it makes physical exercise and walking on one's feet difficult.
And in treating this illness, due to fear of what precedes it, there is reflection that must be taken into account.
However, when they say surgery according to what I first did.
And tell that when you make the patient lie on an elevated bed; and place the testicle suspensor to your side parts; and put the pelvic ligament under your hands where they are located at the waist; and have those other servants ready, and stretch those with intense extension.
And then make an incision on the lower part with a sharp tool through the section crossing into the right side of the vessels where the vessels are exposed.
And then remove all parts as we have said in the extraction of stones which are inside the temples.
And then place in those a needle with a double thread, and sew that at the first of the areas where you encounter veins, and sew it again from another direction at the end of them. And then make incisions in the middle part according to the length of the body in a straight line, and extract that which is aggregated from the liquid, putrid and corrupted humors.
And then treat the wound with treatments for other wounds when you wish it to be cured by itself as if they were bleeding vessels that you are one of two genitians, which is not bad for that.
If veins occur throughout the cavities, then do so that the testicles are removed or that the testicles for this bleed through that area, so that it is deprived of all nutrition by blocking the veins, and they are reformed, or that stop bleeding naturally without affecting those.
Chapter 65.
Regarding the treatment of intestinal hernias.
The occurrence of this hernia happens when it extends into the stomach spread over the belly from the edges of the belly button area, so that the contents of that rupture move to one of those contents.
And this rupture is either from the stomach or from excision of it, and it occurs in these two species due to various causes: by impact, or through jumping, or through shouting, or due to lifting a heavy cause, or through labor.
The sign of this when caused by the expansion of the stomach is that it happens gradually over a long period and not suddenly, and it's an abscess evenly within the ventral wall because the stomach compresses the contents.
The sign of it is when caused by the section of the stomach; at the beginning it causes sudden intense pain; and it's an abscess quite different from what you see close to your side parts; and this is due to the movement of the contents, and his body in front of your waist.
Sometimes tears occur on the surface of the intestine's wall, and this type of hernia is called intestinal strangulated.
Sometimes they occur due to flatulence, and sometimes the hernia goes through a tear in the intestine, it gets stuck there, and this is a great danger for the patient, and sometimes they cause terrible and greater pain when pressed.
And in treating the species of this illness, there is fear involved, so you should avoid surgery in that area.
And the method of performing that operation is to command the patient to return the hernia with their hand into its cavity if it responds to returning back, and then envelop them on their chest between your hands, and lift their ribs.
And then stretch the ligament which tightens the testicle ligaments above, make an incision across the entire length; and then place two folds of skin at that area according to how you need to open that section with them.
And if the area according to the amount that it is possible for you, so that the patient's body can be opened.
And then scrape that fatty tissue which is left of the testicle ligament, in order to expose the white firm stomach from each part.
And then you enter your finger into that which tightens the testicle, in that which is between white stomach, which is left of the patient's body, and in second stomach, and clean away from that adhesion which is behind the patient.
And indeed remove my hand from the area of the testicles to the front part, and do this with a white pincers on his side with my left hand, and lift the stomach up to the point of section; and command the minister to lift him up and you dissolve the adhesion that is behind with complete solution.
And seek among your fingers that there be no cause of the intestine enclosed in the white pincers hard. May it be if you find any cause from him, then you pull that out to his belly leave it.
And indeed cut at the spot under where the testicles end through the section where there is pain and healing as we have recounted in what we have said.
And indeed apply wool submerged in oil, and pause at the wound; and apply that tight spot (and several spots of white pincers are cauterized, as we have mentioned nearby the insertion point for bleeding, where several spots can occur) and let that spot relax so it falls by itself.
If the healing of his condition is delayed, then let salt water be applied, and pause on that spot where it falls according to what we have said.
And indeed heal the wound with the other cure for wounds until it is healed.
Chapter LXVI.
About ventral hernia.
In this hernia, none has been seen that would be burnt during its treatment as we have done.
And the first ones would say that it is done in this way as we have recounted for the hernia that is on the side; which is to tie up the vessels near the section around that with ease for him; and then dry in the middle area around where the abscess opens, through which the vessels can fall.
And heal the wound as we have said until it is healed.
Chapter LXVII.
About the disorder that occurs in the ankles.
Some spots can rupture in the ankles as we have said, and let the place emerge.
And do not allow any cause of the intestines in the belly; and if they do, it is little; and return to them at all times.
If the time with that continues, there is an opening in the pincers through which the intestine descends into the pincers; and this happens due to the extension of the pincers which are in the ankles as we have said, this cause is that the pincers are stretched, and nearby it becomes softened and the place becomes inflamed and emerges.
And the treatment of him is with cautery as we have previously described in his case.
And some spots are healed with iron according to this manner: which is that the patient sits on his two servants under your hands, and then dry the area of the abscess rupture around the insertion point up to the width according to the size of three fingers.
And indeed strengthen the white pincers which are below the navel so that they are exposed.
And indeed take the rod and pause it on the most prominent part of the pincers, and press it onto the bellybutton.
And indeed pinch both prominent spots on the tip of the pincers with the end of the rod, and adjust to the suture one of those onto the other.
And indeed remove the end of the rod, and do not cut through the pincers completely, nor extend the stomach, nor any other cause as I know it regarding the treatment of intestinal hernias.
And indeed heal that with the treatment of wounds, and when you cut those spots, clean that and restore the wound until it is consolidated; which is where the pincers are tightened and the rupture's prominence is not adjusted.
And cautery is better in this location, which is closer to recovery.
Chapter LXVIII.
About softening of the navel region.
Some spots in the navel region of men tend to soften for this reason because the muscles that are within it become softer, and his care is neglected.
Therefore, it is necessary for him who treats the condition of this person to make him lie according to his two servants, and expose the entire navel which has softened over the natural navel; and then that he adjust two lips on the suture.
And if you wish, in the beginning of the treatment for excess in the liquid that has been softened, there are three or four boiled areas and a firm suture.
And then proceed to open between the stitches; and then treat through the healing of the other wounds until it is healed, so that the pus drains.
Chapter sixty-nine.
On castration.
Know that castration in our law is condemned, yet for the sake of this document's content I choose to recall it; and there is no need for me to remember it merely because one might be asked about it during medical consultation, needing knowledge of its cure for whoever undergoes it. The other way is that we, out of necessity due to our offspring's juvenile needs for castration in various creatures, like with mares, dogs, pigs, and similar beasts, also require this procedure.
And so I say that castration is done in two ways: either through castration by resection or through incision and excision.
In the case where it is done through castration by resection, the method of operation involves cutting the beast in seawater until its testicles soften and become inflamed and hang down. And then take those near with your hand until they dissolve without exposing them to the touch.
In castration done through incision and excision, you will have the beast and press on the sperm sac of its testicles with your right hand.
And then attach the suspensory ligament, and incise over each testicle in one place until two testicles are processed.
And then drain the pus that you have excised from any wounds. And do not allow anything on those of the penis except for a fine paste which is over the veins.
And this way of castration is better which is done through resection, for a mild resection leaves no cause for the testicles that makes the beast desire copulation.
And then treat the wound until it is healed.
Chapter seventy.
On the treatment of androgyny.
Androgyny in men occurs in two ways: the first is when there's a division within the space of the testicles, where it appears as if one half has feminine characteristics with hair on it.
And some cases have urine that comes out through the space of the testicles, within the testicle's area.
And in women is a special case: it's that the male part on the belly is like two testicles of a man, almost completely identical in size and shape, as are the prepuce of men and two testicles.
And the treatment is for three types: two from men and one type from women. And you should understand that when you incise those tightened tissues so that the secretion of that is expelled, and then treat them with treatment for other wounds.
And in the second type of men from which urine comes out that is within the space of the testicles, there is neither cure nor operation for them.
Chapter twenty-one.
On bleeding and prominent flesh due to feminine causes.
Bleeding that is mild occurs due to natural causes, it is well adjusted and should be observed; some instances are magnified in certain women to such an extent that they spread like in men and enter into intercourse.
Then understand when you have the excess of bleeding with your hand or with a tool, to incise.
And do not conclude in incision, especially at the top of the cut area, so that no pus discharge occurs.
And then treat that with treatment for wounds until it is healed.
And for nascund flesh, which does not develop within the uterus and instead grows forward according to resemblance of a penis (for this reason some called it "caudal malaise"); so understand that we incise in the same way as bleeding, and treat that until it is healed.
Chapter seventy-two.
On the treatment of impotence.
Impotence occurs when the female genital is not perforated, or if it's slightly smaller. And it can be either due to nature or by accident.
Accidental occurs due to a caudal disorder that preceded it, and this is done through poorly adjusted flesh or through a thin or thick penis.
And it can occur in the uterus' opening, on its sides, on excessive pus, or at the base of her, and forbid intercourse and pregnancy prevention, and prohibit menstruation as well.
And knowledge about that is made through observation of the physician, if the opening is noticeable, then it's obvious. But if it's not noticeable, then you search for that with your fingers or by touch.
And if the opening is due to a thin penis, and it's close to both lips, then you guide and expand that.
And you press on the two lips of dust, and then place your fingers' tips under both of their lower parts.
And the woman should be on her back, with her hips extended, and then you extend both lips as far as necessary so that that thin penis is broken and the opening can be opened.
And take wool, soak it in oil, place it over the incised area, and leave it there for a day to ensure that the cut does not heal.
If the gallbladder is large and thick, then you should incise there under the liver or under a sheet of mint.
If the operation is for meat, then suspend that with a hook, and incise there.
And use the medicines that stop the flow of bile and reduce pain, such as pepper, bile from a bear, and dragon's blood, mix them with hog's gall.
And administer an expansive lead cannula so that the wound does not heal too quickly.
Keep it there for several days and apply lard oil.
And after this, use the other healing method of consolidation until it is healed.
And some things happen in the main birth of other meats, and then you should incise according to this manner. If it is for a pus-filled boil, then the boil that is in the main should not be treated against iron in any manner.
Title 73.
Title seventy-three: On the treatment of hemorrhoids, and of tail and of a red boil that occurs in women.
Hemorrhoids are the result of veins in the anus that continuously transport bile; when old hemorrhoids occur, they happen like this.
And I have already explained in the division the species of those and their signs, and also indicate which ones receive treatment and which do not.
So it is said that hemorrhoids and piles when they are in the late stage of pregnancy and do not appear painful, then there should be no treatment with iron for those.
And those that are in the mother's opening where you can feel pain are the ones that need treatment.
And you should make the woman lie down in bed and extend her thighs outwardly, or under rough cloth, and then incise those at the cheeks.
And after that, apply the flows of bile from one of the internal powders to reduce pain, such as pepper and similar things applied to those.
And after that, bathe her feet for an hour, then let it sit in hot water.
And if the bile flows continue, then make her drink a decoction of sumac and dried plums and raisins, and similar things.
And after that take ground walnut flour, mix it with honey and wine and make a poultice of this over her back.
And if the bile is eliminated, then it's good; otherwise, attach her to two stools, and give breast-feeding with incisions on the nipples.
And take wool and immerse it in colander juice or in the juice of arnical or in bear's gall in wine, then apply it to the area; and after that treat the area with ointment until it is healed.
And treat it until it is healed.
Title 74.
Title seventy-four: On the perforation of a miscarriage during pregnancy.
The various species of boils that occur during pregnancy, such as painful boils, stone-induced boil, ulcers, abscesses, erysipelas, erythema, piles, and other boils. And I have already described these illnesses and their species and their signs, as well as the treatments for them in this section.
And you should know that I will speak about the treatment of boils in this treatise when they occur during pregnancy for those that have a tendency to heal naturally, and if you want to know how the operation is performed with iron.
So when you consider that the pain of the boil in its beginning is sharp to percussion and pus and fever, and sometimes it becomes red and if there's pain over it, then you should recognize the need for perforation of it, and treat it with whatever helps during its maturation until the sharpness of the accidents ceases.
And when you do that, make the woman lie down on a board with two boards; recline her back against her hips and extend her thighs, let her knees be spread apart, place her arms under her buttocks and tie them loosely to whatever is convenient.
And when the midwife follows with the knife and administers the tool which opens the mother's opening, its shape will come about in those causes that are to be done later.
And when you want to administer this tool, fix it at the beginning of the mother's opening in the woman, and let what enters the mother from the instrument not be more than the beginning of her opening and spare the patient. And if the tool is larger than the beginning of her opening, then you should apply powders to the texture of her mother's opening so that it prevents the entire tool from entering her mother's opening.
And you should make the fluid inside the tool move down, with a whirl above it, so that the minister has the tool and turns the fluid until it opens her mother's opening.
And when the fever appears, and it is touched by your hand and is hot and wet, then uncover what you must release, you should remove the head of them with a sharp cut.
And when the fever is evacuated, then cover the wound with a cloth submerged in camphorated oil or in turpentine oil containing some medicinal properties; and place your foot on the section at the heel of the larger part.
And place your hand on her (patient) and over the knee, woolen cloth submerged in water in which some pomegranates are boiling.
And it is cured approximately two days with oil which, when mixed with this, should result in healing.
And some baths are given to her (patient) and the wound is soaked in water that is mixed with honey, which should be used until she heals. Then, it returns to using oil again.
And if the wound is inside her swollen belly, then do not allow any treatment with iron for her until you apply that which we have said in this section.
Section 75.
To teach midwives in which manner they should medicate the embryos when it happens according to an unnatural figure.
The necessary cause is that the midwife knows in the beginning the figure of normal birth by signs from her, and when you see a woman force to expel at the parts leave her and desire to smell the air, and on this she is stimulated by this which happens with her during labor, accelerating the movement of the embryo. Then you know that this part is according to a natural figure, and it is the movement of her on her own head, and the second one towards that or suspended or hanging from the umbilical cord.
So when you see those signs, then you know that her abdomen should be compressed by itself so that the embryo is gently expelled as it goes over its head. Then give the second one to her and eliminate those excesses with good digestion.
It may happen that this part is not natural and unmanageable when the embryo is expelled on its own feet and her body is ahead of her head, and her feet are behind her, or one hand is by her belly,. or when her head is expelled and her hand is by it, or on her belly, and firmly she is turned over her neck, seeming like impossible figures.
The necessary cause for the midwife is to be knowledgeable and discerning in all those causes, and avoid mistakes and deception.
And I am showing you every figure of these, and which instrument is used in each one according to what it signifies and its position.
When the fetus is expelled on its head by normal effort, and it is strong on her (patient) causing difficulty for her part, and weakens her virtue. Then she should take this measure, or whatever women have under their beds, and evaporate her sweat with fennel seeds and with wet olive oil.
And it is necessary for the midwife to intervene between her (patient's) small intestine and appendix orifice. Or if she cannot do this, then dry that area with her hand where there is moisture. And press the belly of the woman so that it expels the fetus.
It may happen if it does not expel, then you must make the woman sweat with fever caused by mustard and fennel in bed.
And it is necessary to command her (patient), and prepare her well. Then make her sneeze with mustard oil; and let her open her mouth and her nose for an hour, so that the fetus can come out quickly.
And if both ends of the fetus are expelled at the beginning, then you should reduce those efforts gradually to facilitate it little by little. It may happen if she does not follow the instructions. Then let the woman rest on one elbow and raise her legs from her body, then press the elbow to the ground; and make sure the woman does not fall due to this concussion.
And if the efforts are not turned inside and the fetus is not expelled, then you should intervene by pushing the uterus of the fetus or lie it down on your hand with a cloth and pull it out evenly, so that it can come out easily.
When the fetus is expelled onto its own feet, then you should push those upwards and gradually turn the fetus, then make it equal and take one of its legs and spread those in little steps.
When it is expelled inside the thighs, then you should command her (patient) to push and make her sneeze with mustard oil, which will come out quickly if God willing.
And if it does not come out as we have recommended with mustard oil, then you should gradually return the fetus back inside according to its natural position, so that this will happen quickly with a little effort.
And if it is forbidden to do all that we have recommended, then take mustard of saffron and of dissolved gum, and crush it thoroughly in the mortar for good crushing. Then pour this over her (patient's) sweat and the lower part of her belly's pus. And it is necessary to have her squat in hot water so that she can reach her hips.
And when the parts leave your body and are softened, then have her (patient) be exposed to fumarole of myrtle and keep that area exposed to her. And when you perform the under-fumigation for an hour, then you have to make them sit on a chair, and subsequently make them sneeze and widen their mouth, and remove them from that position. Then apply light pressure to the lower part of their abdominal area, which makes them feel as if they had passed gas.
Positioning the person in a lateral position on one of their sides. It's important to have the hand reduced for this, but if you can't reduce it there, then lift the woman and let her try.
And if she can't pass it that way, then have her lie on her back, and shake her thighs vigorously, and apply medicine from my remedies involving mucus.
And if the childbirth has come about, then have her sit on a chair, and study the reduction of the hand, and guide her as naturally, make her sneeze and command her to compress herself as soon as she feels like passing gas.
Positioning the person on their chest, spread out their hands and the abdominal muscle of them is as wide as half their mother's. Make sure the midwife holds onto the fetus' hand and gently turn that small part little by little, making it easy for them.
And when they're equalized and this is done, then rest on the fetus' head that we've recommended using oil and mucus.
And then command her to cough gradually, and once you've done this, have her sit on a chair and command her that she should be leaning forward, and also tell her to squeeze herself; and make her sneeze under pressure. The fetus has been prepared for delivery on the side.
When the mother experiences horrors as this method dictates, consider it, and then you should insert your second finger into her until she has expelled the moisture.
And if the fetus is hanging over her face and chest, then you should insert that of the navel, so that it isn't retained and causes distress.
And then gently push the fetus towards the organs inside until you pause it as soon as you can feel it, and command the woman to squeeze herself a few times, and he will pass gas almost immediately if God wishes.
The delivery of twins or multiple fetuses has occurred. You should know that normal twins have felt movements, and sometimes they feel three or four, but this is strange and hard to detect; mostly these are due to natural causes and not illness.
Count those, whether they are multiplets, one second, and are separated by ciphers, distinguishing them within the umbilical cord of each of those. And sometimes movements feel like passing gas as if it's a fetus passing naturally almost immediately, and there are some feelings due to unnatural pressure as we have recommended.
And if some of them are difficult for you to deliver, then proceed with the birth as we have said about non-natural figures, and treat those in this manner as we have recounted.
And if the midwife is skilled and makes her actions easy and skillfully, and in a delayed manner, and has been instructed according to every figure when she prepares herself leading to health.
Remembering what is formed in the womb from embryos and those that abort.
Some boils are formed in the majority one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and more than ten, you should verify that with me whether a woman aborting conceives once again, and another all of them, which is caused by measurement of the glorious senses.
And all this is to be as what's in the science of the midwife that she relies on that pale resemblance to it, and then stops herself according to what feels right.
Chapter 76.
On extracting the fetus when it is dead.
When you treat the dead fetus as we said in the division of medicine and it is not expelled naturally, then you may use operation with your hand if necessary. Consider whether the woman is of sound health and is not affected by any accidents that could lead to her loss.
And when the woman is lying on her back on a bed with her head tilted towards her chest and her thighs raised.
And the minister should hold that [the patient] from both sides or tie him/her up in a bed, so that the body of the patient does not extend beyond the removal of the fetus.
And then you wet the mouth of the mother with oil and salt water, as well as other medicinal herbs and seeds.
And then anoint the midwife's hands with those oils and medicaments, and place her hand under the mother's abdomen, and settle her hand in the location where she will place her fingers into the fetus.
Position yourself conveniently in this manner: then consider if the fetus is ready to be delivered by turning it down its head, and once you've done that, place your fingers on the fetus's buttocks or neck, or mouth, or palate, or chin, or belly button, or other suitable locations near the back, or leave your hands at the armpits.
If the descent is below its legs, then place it on the knees, or in the middle of the back.
And have your finger on the right hand, and hold the curve of it in that spot which is between the last two fingers of the left hand, and place your hand under the assistance and have your finger rest in one of those spots we've mentioned, until it reaches the final position.
And then place and keep it in the position of where the other finger is, or the thumb if needed, so that there is equal pressure, and not an extension according to its straightness only.
And soothe the entire area, so that the pain of the patient is relieved as when toothache occurs during the extraction of a tooth.
And apply in such a way that the extension is made smoother; and if any part of it is being held back, then ensure that the midwife applies oil to some of her fingers and uses them skillfully, rotating in those areas where it is being held back.
So if the part of the fetus is outside, then the fingers should be moved into the location that is more suitable; and do this until the entire fetus is out.
If the hand is in front of the other and it's not possible to reduce that by restraining the mother, then ensure that a cloth covers that; and extract that until all is out, and cut it or at the junction of the hand or on the side.
And do this with the other hand as well and in both feet.
If the head of the fetus is large, or causes restraint during delivery, or it's in the position of water in front of the head, then ensure that you insert between the fingers a sharp instrument and cut open the head, or remove the water, or use an instrument known as "alundat", whose shape will resemble the shapes of other instruments near this one.
Similarly do this if the fetus has a large head by nature: and ensure that you cut that with ligatures, or take that with an awl as we have said; and remove the bones with forceps.
And if the head is compressed and restricted at the sternum, then ensure it is cut through where the moisture in the feet is dispersed.
So if there's no complication and you don't experience pain during delivery, then ensure that you cut the head immediately as soon as it is feasible to do so.
And if the intestines of the abdomen are protruding or in the case of water-bag delivery, then ensure that you pierces it where the moisture is present.
So if the fetus is above its legs, then the pain during delivery will be slight and the direction of it towards the mother's mouth will also be slight.
So if it's constricted in the abdomen and feet, then ensure that you remove that with cloth which you will wrap around your hand, and cut the abdomen and feet where the liquid is flowing from those.
So if the other limbs remain and turn the head, then the midwife will insert her left hand; but if the mother's mouth is opened, then place your hand in the pre-anal region, and around that place the head, and pull it with your fingers into the mother's mouth, and place one or two fingers there and pull it towards those.
And if the mother's mouth is constricted due to an abscess causing pain in one, then ensure that it isn't excessively high from it; before this, apply fatty humid cause application. And apply bandages; and care for the patient with waters that soothe and moisturize.
And if the fetus is on its side, then as much as possible make it straight: and provide what we have said for living fetuses.
And if this isn't possible, then ensure that it is cut into pieces, and be extracted.
And ensure that you don't leave any cause for a second delivery.
And as you have completed all your operation, then provide the treatment we have discussed for the abscesses that occurred in the mother.
And if there is bleeding, then use收敛ing waters and apply the other treatment.
And I have indeed seen a woman in her womb who had a dead fetus, and then about that fetus there was another pregnancy started, and the fetus was also dead. It happened to him after a long period of time when an abscess occurred in his abdominal cavity; it inflated inside and then made an incision, started bleeding, and began to discharge pus.
I was summoned to treat him, and treated him for a long time, but the wound did not heal properly.
So I applied some powerful healing ointment to him and operated on him several times, passing days each time, and operated on him again; and I was very amazed, for there was no bone in his stomach.
And then I realized that they were from the bones of a dead person.
Then I cleaned the wound, removed the flesh and bones from him, identified them according to their anatomical positions, and treated them in such a manner for a long time, cut off a small piece of his arm.
And I didn't consider it strange at all, but rather that in this is knowledge and help for whoever the medical artisan administers care with their hands.
From the forms of the tools that are necessary to remove the fetus.
Shape for turning in which the majority is opened:
This is the shape of a stretcher on which the free are equalized, to which two strengths lie at both ends of two futs. Yet make this strength smoother for the sake of ease in handling, and have it made either of wood or of metal rod.
And let the thickness of each rod be two inches and the edge of both is one inch; and the length of each is a hand plus half. And in the middle of the two rods there are two adjustments of these metal rods which are already fastened, where their length is about a hand plus a little less than that, and the thickness of each is about two inches, or a little less than that.
And these two adjustments should be inserted in the mouth of the mother so that they open when you turn the two prescribed strengths.
Another shape similar to that, but more subtle and lighter:
It should be made of wood or metal rod according to the resemblance of forceps. Yet at the end of it there are two adjustments just as often, and the length of those adjustments is about a hand, and the thickness of each is two inches.
And when you want to open the mother with those, then place a cushion under her while she is hanging from her feet, and make an incision in the space between her thighs. And then open your hand on the tool in such a way as you do with scissors evenly according to how much you want of the extraction from the mouth of the mother while you measure it, making it as you desire.
The shape of the turning that they were said by the ancients:
Shape of the forceps, on which the fetus is pushed:
Shape of the spoon-like tool where the large head is being held.
And it resembles forceps with teeth at the end like before, as often as possible. Some times are made long like forceps according to this shape, as often as possible, where there are teeth like those of a rasp on which it is sharpened and held. Shape of the spoon:
Shape of a cup having one spine:
Shape of a cup having two spines:
Shape of a spatula having two ends where the head is cut off.
Shape of two spatulas lying side by side:
All those tools are exercised, and when more of their species exist and they are prepared by the artisan, it is lighter for his operation and more suitable you should use the men according to their quantity.
And do not work with those tools already that you must be equipped with, for the need of those is inexcusable.
For extraction of the second child.
When the second child is retained you should give birth, then command to the mother that she retain her breath, and make her sneeze with the condition, and hold your hand on her mouth and her nostrils, and if it comes out by this means, it's good.
And if not, then take an olla and pierce through the cover with a thorn and pause in that herbs blow into the mother's mouth, like calamus and rudis and nettle and camomile and scalding arabic and cinnamon wood and santaular. All these herbs or some of them should be submerged in water in the olla, and pause that above the fire.
And then place a pipette from a gourd in the mother's mouth, and keep that inside until the vapor goes into the cavity of the mother.
And then make her sneeze in this manner as we have said, and the second child comes out quickly.
If this treatment does not take effect and is not effective, then you command the midwife to submerge her left hand in oil of saffron or in high altitude vegetable soap mixture, and introduce that into the womb and make the second child come out by that way. And when she has found it, take it little by little slowly. If it sticks to the mother's preon, then introduce her hand as we have recommended, and when she finds the second child, pull it out little by little according to its position so that the mother does not fall from the violent pressure. Before it is laid on the right and left sides for easy turning.
And if the mother's mouth is constricted, we have already recommended treatment with sneezing and medicine from the sea using herbs.
If not removed by all the causes we have recommended, then ensure you do not exhaust yourself in the iteration of abstraction, but instead allow what is emitted from you to the mother's mouth lies on the female thigh, and then treat that with grease and tetra-formula; which one will dissolve that around a few days and become free.
When you relieve yourself, it raises the bad smell to the head and stomach, and this scents the disease; and then ensure that sub-smokes and suitable things are administered for this.
Such as the ancients already use sub-smoke of nettle and dried figs.
Forming an instrument with which the female is sub-smoked, you must retain her menstruation and second periods:
It is made of wool or reed.
And the subtle end is placed in the corner and the wide end above the fire, and the sub-smoke is placed on the arms of the fire.
And keep that so that the sub-smoke is consumed and repeats itself.
Regarding the treatment of an unperforated infant's anus.
Mothers often neglect and do not perforate their infants' butts, which are sensitive and plump. Then advise the midwife to puncture with her thumb that cheek; if not, puncture that one with a sharp needle, and ensure it does not touch the wound.
And then place over that wool saturated in vinegar and oil; and then treat that with grease while it is cooled.
If you fear it's plump, then leave a tube in the mother for several days, and remove it when the child wants to defecate.
And if there is defecation in the butt due to consolidation of pustule or abscess; then ensure that this consolidation is incised and treated with what we have said about treatment and lead.
Regarding the treatment of the fistulas that trouble you.
The fistulas that occur in the left side, close to the anus, are small and rough, causing trouble near or in the space between the buttocks.
It is a fistula or marks.
And as that lump becomes old and erodes due to the whitish watery moisture or pus, some of these sores sometimes occur from such fistulas.
Those that penetrate are known because they emit from them through expulsion and due to windiness; some of these sores cause the mother's discomfort during expulsion, and severely emit from those worms.
Some of those fistulas have sores penetrating into the bladder, and into the thigh region; some of those penetrating into the space between the thighs and into the navel region.
And for the type of penetrating fistula that goes into the anus and does not penetrate, you should insert your finger in the anus, and introduce a subtle stick made of reed or iron into the fistula when there is no obstruction.
And if there is obstruction in that, then insert that subtle lead or horse hair stick into it where you feel the thread or the hair on your finger.
And if you do not feel that throughout or do not proceed with any cause of expulsion, worm, or windiness as we have said, then know that it is non-penetrating, and now attend to the treatment.
And when the fistula penetrates into the bladder or into the thigh region, then this signifies her urine discharge from that and prohibition to do so until the area where she has medicine is consolidated.
And if it penetrates into the space between the thighs or into the bone and is accompanied by pain in the veins, then this indicates that the thread passes here through if there is no obstruction inside the bone and pain in the veins; and that she has pus continually; and that it doesn't matter with that medicine treatment, nor does it consolidate with grease.
And in all those penetrating fistulas is not the cure of everything, and the treatment of these consists of labor and diligence from medical doctors over which they are imposed.
And for those that do not penetrate and are not old, you should expect healing with iron as I will already recommend, and what I have previously said.
And it is that the mother should have her hands under her knees and lift her ribs within them, her thighs inclined towards her belly, and introduce a lead or reed thread if there is obstruction in the fistula. You should know where through the thread passes.
And if that feels like the mother around the neck, then advise you to insert your finger tip in the neck.
And if you feel through your finger that the thread has already been discovered penetrating, or anything else between your finger and that lump or flesh, then you can definitely know that this is penetrating; thus do not work on it, as there is no treatment for it, as we have said.
But some might say that it is healthy in certain old men.
And for the treatment by which youth is expected in them, you should make subtle incisions according to the size of the fistula as described earlier, and insert that flame into the fistula until it touches the wound; and then repeat this process two or three times until you know that all those muscles attached to the fistulated area resemble a quill feather.
And then treat that with heat in bandages wrapped around it until all those muscles that are stuck recover. And also treat that area with medicines to regenerate and strengthen the flesh, if it is healed, it's good; otherwise, at another time no treatment will be healthy after this period.
And if it enters inside and does not penetrate the one you mentioned which is in the anus, and between that and a wound that is gradually filled with flesh or fat, and makes an incision at the site of the fistula in the area where it is on the surface of the skin, then dry the anus from the beginning of the fistula, then dry this thing as well, and ensure that the drying reaches the spot where the tip of the fistula exits. Then the fistula is liberated and there's nothing left.
And then properly treat those fistulated muscles that are similar to a goose feather and do not damage any of their parts.
But if there is pus flow between you and your operation when you touch those muscles, then let it be, and of the pus use a minor instrument to cauterize with fire or with acute medicine; fire-cauterization makes good cuts: this is adjustment for those muscles that are adjusted, and removal of pus through drying up of moisture.
And then treat that with bandages or in the case of cuts, within where the wound is cleaned up, and later on treat the wound with hard flesh medicines to regenerate and strengthen it.
And these are medicines in which there is coagulation and drying; once this happens, it is restored and healed, and you do not fear repetition.
But if the fistula has already reached into the inside of the anus and is extended from the surface of the body, then insert what you said in the anus and ask about it.
And if you touch the fistula and between you and it is gradually filled with fat or flesh, and it approaches penetration, then this is not an operation on him but according to faith and hope.
This reason is to administer one of three ways: either cauterize that as we have said; or dry up that until you achieve the fullness of its cavity so that it becomes possible for you to insert some tools and treatment can proceed; do not introduce fire in drying processes lest you enter into the wet area containing the wound, and act according to your desire and intention on the patient's inner body. And then treat that as we said which makes the injured area strong; or extend that gradually and remove that pus that is being dried up within near the anus as we have said, either by fire or with another sharp tool, and then properly treat those fistulated muscles that are in the drying area where you can perform scraping. And then exert yourself to restore the entire wound through drying processes, and if the pus areas above are not consolidated, and continues to open up the fistula at the passage of the anus, and produces a little pus on the patient's inner body. And some operations on the fistula are completed according to this method: when you insert the needle into the fistula, and around the anus near the surface of the body in relation to the rectum, and at the edge of the anus, then takes on a needle with perforated tip, which is like a sewing needle according to this form:
And then insert the needle into that bandage covering three needles or around them; and later on insert the needle into the fistula until you achieve its fullness.
But if it penetrates near the inside of the anus edge, then you pull out that thread as you inserted what you said in the anus; and remove the tip of the thread and adjust both ends at once, strengthen each one, let this be for a day or two, and when more deeply penetrates the flesh, strengthen it so that those muscles lie between the two ends of the needle and fit together.
And then treat the wound until it is consolidated and healed.
But if the opening of the fistula is not penetrating, then make it penetrate in any way that you are prepared for, but rather from inside where it's not accessible to you, so do not enter into the wound; and later on treat that until it is healed.
The shape of cutting a spine on the one that is cut by the fistula: the curvature of which is rather sharp and the other part is not, so as to not enter what is unnecessary, just like this.
Sewing hemorrhoids where pus flows in at the opening of those.
Hemorrhoids are in two ways, where they resemble charcoal inside the anus or they are like raisin fat outside. And of those they are small and large, the pus that flows from them at times is uniform, it's a mass, and it's within or outside the anus, and at its ends.
Those are the ones where in small periods of moisture, they may have yellowish water or a little blood mixed with blood continuously, and according to the color of the body.
The treatment for one that is inside the body is to command the patient to stay and squeeze it until the bile starts to come out and the emmoroids appear before you. So you stretch yourself and hold onto your nails or what you have there under your thumb, and then proceed to prick those that should be pricked by their roots.
If the nails are not held in such cases due to their moisture and softness, then take those under a rough cloth or wool or felt, and remove those by your fingers, and then proceed to prick those near and grind some powders over them near the pricking; or cauterize those according to what is previously mentioned in the chapter on cauterization. And then treat those with the other remedies until they are healed.
And if the anus does not allow evacuation, then treat the patient with a mild cautery using a cautery that has a slight bite, and wash them with that water which is in the bile that facilitates evacuation when the patient is squeezed.
If the emmoroids are outside the anus, then their cause is slight; you should take those with your thumb or those with nails, prick them, and treat those with what we have said until they are healed.
And to the one who has an incision, do as follows when you are to sew them: take a thread wrapped around it and insert that in a needle, then remove the emmoroids from their places above, and make the thread enter the needle in the root of the other part; wrap the two ends of the thread around the part laterally; strengthen the emmoroid with firm tension, then pull out the needle and leave the thread.
And do this to all of them, and let one of those remain unclothed, for that way the excess blood will flow from there.
And place over the anus a cloth soaked in rubbed oil or in wadding; then have that rest on the bile and command the patient to rest. And then let that remain until it heals; when it is finished, treat those with greases or with other remedies until they are healed.
And if they are old and do not respond to that medicine, then you should drain them through the tip of the needle or through your thumb until they become moist and have been bathed with pus above it, which prevents consolidation; and treat those until they consolidate.
Then you drain those through the abundant pus, in the first instance when they become inflamed and are irritated; and treat those until they heal.
Know that abscesses are the key, and not otherwise to be found resembling a tip of a violin, and they occur throughout the body and especially in the limbs and feet, so for those with pain, you should guide them.
And you should know that it should be pricked with what is inside the circuit of the key, and held with tweezers or nails, and its root should be removed; then treat that.
And if you wish, cauterize it according to what is previously mentioned in its chapter.
Verumca's prominence is a small sharp circular fistula that occurs on the surface of the body, and cysts often appear in children.
And for treatment, you should stretch that or prick it with a needle or thread until it heals. And if you wish, cauterize this as we have said, with fire or with an acute medicine.
Formica is a small prominence or large cystic formation on the body surface that often appears in pregnancy, and when you touch it, it feels like being bitten by an ant, and it occurs around the body.
And for its treatment, you should take a needle from the tip of a dog or a needle from a snail, and make it strong, place that over the ant until it contains the circle around the body parts; then rotate your hand with the needle until you prick what is in the circuit of the ant, and keep that at the center of the flesh, and remove the ant from its root.
And if you wish, do this with a needle or iron according to this method:
Take the part above the needle that is drawn in delicately, quietly (which means not perforated), wrapped around it so that from below it gives the appearance of having been shaved and the rotation of that.
And if you wish, cauterize the ant according to what was said in advance for cauterization of anthills in the chapter on cauterization.
Regarding the shape of the instruments that you administer to give cautery.
Some are made with cautery from silver or tin or melted iron or hammered metal; and some are made with those small and large instruments according to which ones you administer, so that the one used in treating small children should be small. And of those whose anus is sore or painful, the cauteries from those should be small.
The method of treating large and few:
The head of the catheter above which the bag is tied is wide according to this method; and as for placing the bag, it should be done in the same way as necessary.
And the end of the pus coming out, which invades the anus, should be sound (if not opened), with a gentle touch; and in one side of the buttock there are two punctures, and on the other side one puncture, and the width of the puncture according to the thickness of the nerves and somewhat thicker.
And let the bag in which the medicines for the bladder of beast or sheepskin are placed, and the size of your hand is a palm.
And let it be punctured with needle-like points as it rotates; and if the space between the points is the size of what was said.
And then insert a strong, raw faeces into those points that are the size of ten faeces, or about that size; and adjust it to each point. And when you place the bag in the patient, straighten it in the head of the catheter between two marks with strong constriction, and adjust the catheter to each point: The better quality of adjusting is that you fill the bag with medicine according to the tolerance quantity of the patient; and be careful not to make too long or too short.
And have the patient lie on their back, elevate their legs and place one of their buttocks under which is where people or a pillow would be; then smear the end of the cautery with oil, or with egg white or with fenugreek or semilla mixture; then insert that into the anus with ease, then let the minister take the bag and squeeze it while doing so forcefully until everything inside the catheter is expelled; then remove the catheter and have the patient lift their buttocks to the wall.
And if the medicine forces it into urination, keep as much as possible; and if you let that happen for the whole night, it is better later in adulthood.
And if you adjust that in the patient's stomach problems and the urination of them takes time, then you will repeat the cautery until they are cured.
And if there are hemorrhoids or boils in the anus, then let the catheter be delicate and gentle, like those catheters which children use.
Regarding the treatment of infections.
I have already mentioned in the division of treating infections what was suitable for free, and I say like this, the treatment of those with my own means and with medicines according to their capacity.
Therefore, it is said that infections are varied according to the place where they occur and according to the location on which the lesions attack.
And the causes for which spots appear in infections can be as follows: due to the rubbing of rough clothing, or cutting of space or bone, or hitting with a lance, or with a stick, or with an arrow, or similar from causes that lead to such spots.
And the infections that occur in body locations can be such as scalp infection or neck infection or foot infection or abdominal infection and similar to those of the limbs.
And I am recommending the treatment of some infections because I pause that reasoning and rule for other infections.
And I start with simple scalp infections, whose memory of compounded ones will come at the beginning of the next chapter.
And it is said that when a simple scalp infection occurs and it's not a fracture, then consider: if it's due to rubbing or from a similar cause, and the pus has already been drained only until now, it is large infection and you fear that the patient might develop an abscess later; in this case, you apply cold and bloodletting on the cephalic area immediately, do not delay this treatment; and remove blood according to the quantity of its virtue if no other contraindication prevents bloodletting, especially if the blood that is coming out from the infection is little.
And let bloodletting be opposite to where the infection occurred; and take care of the patient against overeating, thirst, and heavy foods.
And if you prohibit any cause from the start, then reduce food intake and do not come close to meat or drink.
And pause about the infection, if it happens that an abscess forms, apply heat with rubbed oil or in a drink where it is antiseptic.
And if you are sure of an abscess forming, then pause about the infection, if it is recent in its blood and air hasn't changed that powder which I recommend to use slightly.
And if the air has already changed, then pause about certain ointments until it is healed.
And if the infection is large or it's due to cutting of space and similar causes, and the patient's lips are not closed with pins, then adjust those with stitches according to what I recommend for stitching them.
And if the infection has already penetrated through bone and skin, but it's not retention of the patient just a small suspensorium, then incise that and treat the infection with medicines until the meat is restored at the place where pus was present, and instruct the patient to eat hard foods: cabbage and beans, similar to them, until it is healed.
And if you find decomposition in the intestine and it does not stick to the bone, then you cut out all of this pulp and remove it, and then treat it.
If in these diseases it is an artery or vein from which the flow of blood might occur, and it cannot be separated by medicines, then you inquire about the artery, and if you find that part not being cut off, then you cut through that artery, or tie it; and if necessity compels that what we have said does not correspond, then you cauterize until the blood is cut off.
And if these diseases are simple and small, then their cause is minor; scatter this powder over them, let it harden before the air changes those.
And the way to prepare this powder is as follows: take oil from one part of the wax tree, two parts of dragon's blood, and three parts of unextinguished ashes; mix them thoroughly and sieve them, then fill the wound with it, apply pressure for good compression while it rests on that area, let it coagulate due to the blood.
And bind that with dry dust and leave it, do not remove it while it's still like this until the medicine has fully taken effect inside of it so that it heals.
And sometimes when you don't have wax and dragon's blood in the present, do this alone with a cautery.
And perform this surgical operation in large wounds when you have to lay it over those and tighten them, especially fresh wounds on their blood, which the air has not altered.
And if the air has altered them, especially during summer, then it is not appropriate to place this powder in its usual position, but rather treat those as we said before, by laying several digested ointments over them, or by placing some flour polishes from the dough with water and honey until they form a paste; then treat those with another treatment until they heal.
And if it happens that you encounter a fracture in the bone, and it is small, then you extract this from the wound.
And I prescribe the treatment for skull fractures in what is poisonous.
And regarding the diseases of the throat.
And if the disease occurs in the throat, then there is no difference in treatment compared to a simple skull ailment.
And if already the nerves of the throat have been cut or an artery, then if it is a nerve, not in its natural place but to avoid treatment that causes violent constriction, as with zinc and saying it's corrosive and resembles their nose in the nerves and constricts them. And do not place anything on the wound that would cool entirely, for the substance of nerves is cooled and their continuation is at the neck, which is the center of all parts of the body.
And if it is treated with mild medicines, such as washing with boiled water or oil rubbed or un-rubbed, thyme when washed with boiled water, and other salves according to this method, and moist ointments.
And if the wound is large, then you perform stitches or tighten the lips of it, and then treat that with dust until it heals.
And if the wound has depth or occurs at the lower part of the paste, then pierce it in the deepest point.
And if an artery has already been cut in the wound and blood flow is obtained, then separate or dry that, or tie it, or cauterize it if necessity compels to do so.
And if you have cut the tendons of the leg or all, and the veins of the throat are saved, then adjust the lips of the wound around stitches on the bone of the leg without touching that; make it equal to that and return it to its natural shape, and bind it with good tension for several days; and treat it with salves in which there is constriction and excitement until it heals.
And if the disease has already affected the bone, then you prick it, and if there are pieces of bone in it, extract all those that you can from them; for what does not adhere to you, leave it until the wound heals, and make its removal easy.
And if the disease is recent, then scatter this recommended powder over it. And if in the disease there is formed an abscess, then treat it with what will bring back its memory in its capital.
If it's an ax blow or a club hit, and you assess the depth of the wound, then if there is wind passing through when the patient is breathing; you should know that the disease is fatal.
And if there is no depth in it and the disease is recent with its blood, then you place this first hour's powder on it, without binding it so that the blood does not get trapped at the depth of it and returns to the heart causing the patient discomfort, but place this attractive ointment on it, remove it two washes the next day.
And if the ointment is not at your disposal, then you press against the opening of the wound with your finger to allow it to drain out any moisture; and make the patient lie over the wound so that what is in his body can flow properly.
If it has been three days or more since the wound was treated and no convulsions, heart failure, nor constriction occur in the patient, and if you use other good treatments for him, then you can conclude that the wound is saved; and from there treat it with warm baths and within another treatment where it is healed.
If the patient's recovery is justified, and if it has already opened up continuously, then you can conclude that a fistula has been formed; therefore, treat it accordingly from its source.
And if the wound is due to a surgical incision or a cut, and it is simple on the surface of the foot or the leg, then treat it with what follows from suture, if it's large, or with powder, if it's small.
If it has already undergone extraction in the bone, and you have cut out pieces from him, then press on the wound and pull to extract those pieces if they are separated. If they are not separate, then wait until the wound heals, for extraction of them becomes easier.
And for other wounds occurring in the other limbs during treatment, it is similar to what we have been discussing.
Of the abdominal wounds.
The indisposition that occurs in the abdomen is either large, small, or mixed.
And a small disruption is made by another method, and it's clear that the reduction of them is more difficult, so you must take care not to let their introduction to their place wait too long, for when it does, it gets swollen which makes the internal substance hard.
And therefore, the best disruption is mixed, where it's not difficult to reduce the intestines, as it is in the two species mentioned previously.
And know that there are four methods for suture of the abdomen, yet two types of stitches are common and suitable for sutures of other wounds in the body.
And two others are specific stitches that communicate with other wounds, yet however they are more specific in the suture of the abdomen.
And I advise you to have every exposition and declaration for each case.
So say that when the wound is small and a part of the intestine has been displaced by it, making its reduction difficult, then this situation occurs in one of these two ways: either due to the size of the disruption as we have said, or when there's swelling on the intestine due to cold air.
And when it's like that, you should soften the area by soaking a piece of cloth with hot water or taking something into hot water and letting it soak in it, along with juniper, parsley, and herbs, then burying this around the intestine until the swelling is resolved.
And some cuts do this because they have restrictions, and it's better to use hot water alone in resolving swelling.
And when you've resolved the swelling, then you moisten the intestine with water in which herbs and mallow are boiled, for thus it becomes easier to handle the internal substance of him due to a few causes.
If it's convenient for the internal substance of him with this treatment, then divide the disruption by using a small tool that has needles inserted into it.
And the first treatment is better when it's appropriate that it's not dried out, and there should be no necessity for it to dry due to lack of need or deficiency.
From the tool, if its form suits:
One part of it is rounded and sharp, the other part is not acute, its tip is subtle, but not as subtle as a needle, being slightly blunt up to just a little.
And when the wound is enlarged and sticks out of the intestine, you should make its reduction according to its natural form, in its proper place, if it's possible over that, which is better.
If the disruption is large, and it's in the lower part of the abdomen, you should make the patient lie on their back, place their knees higher than their head; and if it's in the upper part of the abdomen, then you should place the head and chest higher than the rest.
And similarly, if the disruption is in one of the two parts of the abdomen, then hold your understanding and consideration for this situation so that the part where there's the wound is higher than the other.
And thus you should apply this to large wounds and to mixed wounds.
And in small wounds, use what you've prepared and have someone among your most experienced do it, so they can handle the disruption fully with their hand and adjust the layers of tissue, and then uncover from that to this one where there might be some cause for another type of suture.
And this is the common method of suturing: one that takes the needle, or a count based on the width of the wound; and then leaves from the end of the disruption of the ring finger, and strengthen the needle once, or another way you don't insert the needle into both ends of the thread, at both ends of the bandage which is left in the middle between the parts inside them, so that it penetrates this part; and you have added two ends of the thread and two ends of the bandage, forming four orders.
And tighten the needle twice in the loop of the thread, and make a few stitches at both ends simultaneously, and then add the two lips and the wound by addition; and smooth out the thickness of that one and place another needle in that same spot, and adjust that stitch like you did with the first needle; and don't stop doing this until all the contraction of the wound has been filled within the needles.
And let the needles be both smooth and fine, for fine needles make a gentle incision into the flesh; and the thick ones are difficult to thread in the chain, so that they should be of medium size combining subtlety with thickness.
And don't let the needle be inserted at both ends of the thread near each other, so that the flesh is not cut too gently and the wound does not rupture in front of its healing.
And do not extend the stitches for the wound to not be prevented from healing.
And make the ends of the needles pierce so they do not penetrate too far into the patient's skinfold; place powdered substances from all sides over the stitches, with their ends on the needles; leave them there until you know that the wound has already healed.
And these types of needle stitches are suitable for small wounds, up to one or two needles in the stitch around them.
And the second stitch is similar: and you should perform this stitch with all four ends, of the thread and both ends of the cord, in one go, using a needle whose thickness is equal to that of subtlety and thickness.
And when the needle has penetrated these four ends, reduce the needle from that half of the part you started with, so that the thread retracts into the other half of the pus-containing part, so that the stitch follows another stitch of fabric where the fabrics are tightened.
And pause between each stitch for the thickness of the thread's length.
And this stitch is what men know.
And with this stitch, I healed the wound that had happened to a man in his abdomen where he was wounded by a knife, and it was the rupture of a major wound of about one palm's size; it lay between the intestines around two palms from my belly location, and it was the break in the middle of the member; and then I reduced that after the intestine had been brought out through the wound for twenty-four hours.
And the wound was consolidated in about fifteen days or so, and I treated it until it healed; and then that became fluid with the passage of months, and he recovered according to his conditions.
And other doctors had judged that it was not healed; and by miracle of fire, which I did not treat with ointment, which was in a place where the ointment could not be found nor any medicine, but I applied to the wound like twice a day and applied frequent washing with honey water until it healed.
And I will tell you two kinds of stitches according to the report of Paulus.
And it is that you begin with the stitch of the thread, and insert the needle from the outer part to the inner part.
And then as the needle pierces into the thread and enters those knots according to straightness and length across the whole body, leave the end of the cord where you have inserted the needle; and make the needle penetrate at the other end the inner part from the outer part in the other end of the thread.
And when you have made that penetration, then make another passage in that middle end of the thread from the outer part to the inner part; and leave the end of the cord that is at this side, and make the needle penetrate at the other end of the inner part from the outer part.
And make that penetration of yours reach the cord where you made that penetrate into it at the end of the thread which is in the part inside him, so that all this penetrates.
And proceed from this side, then bite that at the end which is from the cord in the other side, and pull out the needle of the thread that penetrated it, then reduce that into that thread and bite the end of the cord which is on the other side at this side of the thread; and pull out that from the thread which belongs to him.
And do this once and another, and do this another time between one another until you sew all that is outer according to that example.
And the total of this way of stitching is that you sew on the stitch of tissues where you sew the skins, so that you sew the cord once from the part of the end of the thread, and leave that other passage until you have completed it.
And the second own stitch you call Gualia, and this is according to his report and what he recommended, it is that you sew that according to likeness as some surgeons do, so that they add all parts to their corresponding part for nature; and apply one extremity of yours and the end of the thread to the other end of yours, and this is done as I have advised you.
And when you place the needle at the end of the thread towards the outer part, make it penetrate into the inner part in that sole, and leave two ends of the cord; then rotate the needle and make it penetrate from the outside to the inside in two ends of the cord.
And then turn those nodes, and make each node from the inner part penetrate into the outer part in two ends of another body that is opposite to the latter.
And this method of suture is better than common superficial suture, it is a suture that recalls a previous memory.
This is the treatise of Guala.
And if they were to say so, abdominal suture is corrected with two needles. So you would enter this into each node with a thread, and start with the needle from where you should proceed, making that thread penetrate on the other side as per the suturing method of those that equalize the organs.
And know that when disruption is in the middle of the belly, then sutureting it becomes more difficult than in other parts of the belly.
The judgement of medical treatment for plague is judgment on the other plagues.
That is why, when you have caught the plague at its early stage before the air alters that part of it, and return the intestine and cook that part properly, then apply over that place carnal powder.
And if the air has already altered the plague, then apply over that place some ointments which are in your possession that harden and dry out the threads, and become compact; and treat it likewise as treatment for other plagues within where it becomes healed.
And if you do not have these medicines at your disposal, then apply over that place for a while, as it begins to get dry and congeal, and alternate those two treatments per day, just as you were taught, within which it becomes healed, so that you do not need other medicine in similar conditions when the plagues are simple.
And if you fear that the plague might spread to the main limbs, then immerse lion wool in oil of a good quality, or in strained oil, and apply this over the area between the armpits and leave it there.
And if you feel pain or decay in his intestines, where these treatments do not help, then apply this with a black stick made of a stictic substance, and even more so if the pus has reached inside the intestine and is causing an exit to penetrate into its cavity.
And know that what comes from the large intestine is a lighter pus for healing than what comes from the smaller intestines.
And healing is difficult for the intestine which is called "gegunu", as it does not receive healing from plague that affects it entirely; this is due to the large number of veins that are in it and the magnitude of those in those areas, and the subtlety of its body, and its proximity to the nature of nerves.
And if what is being treated of the plague is the skin, and you have caught it recently, reduce that according to your rectitude to where you return the intestines equally.
And if it has passed to the space of the patient and turned into red or black, then you should strengthen that with thread over the area that is degraded by him, so that blood flows from the wound, as there are veins and arteries in the skin.
And then insert what is another part of this ligament, and place two ends of the thread hanging from the part left of the wound on the patient's side, so that your concern about his condition is alleviated by the healing process and elimination of pus from the plague.
Recollection of plagues when they occur in the intestine.
When disruption occurs in the intestine and is slight, then it's possible that healing can occur in some individuals. As I saw this person who was stricken with an abdominal plague due to a lance thrust, and the plague was old, causing fistula formation, and loss of appetite and flatulence.
Then I pursued the treatment of this already realizing that it was not confined in the healing of him, but rather found out where it will heal and the area will become consolidated.
And I saw the place already consolidated, took pity on the misfortune that befell him in his stomach; and did not suffer any from this unfortunate event and disrupted his normal eating and drinking habits. Rather he engaged in bathing and exercised according to what was prescribed for him.
And it is already said by some experienced individuals that when a plague occurs in the intestine and is slight, then follow this method: you should take large caps; and adjust both sides of the wound's lips; place a cap that fits over the wound's lips; so when it takes on these and strengthens its mouth, cut off the head of him, which sticks and does not dissolve.
And then place another cap near the first one, and do not cease from doing this by placing caps one next to each other according to the quantity of the entire plague.
And then reduce that and clean the plague; remove those extra caps within which the intestine heals; and do not harm the patient from any damage.
And it is possible that the intestine be bound with a thread made from animal intestines attached to you, since it's more durable; and you take the end of these intestinal threads, and if they're clean, then place this end in your thread, wrap it up, and insert this thread into needles and dust it on that part of the intestine, then reduce it during the disruption.
This method of stitching with needles is merely another way of trust and hope.
If the wound is large and broad, especially if it's in one of the finer intestines, then at that point there is only refinement rather than healing, and not total recovery for it.
For the cure of abscesses and fistulas.
Know that all wounds and abscesses when they fester and become ancient, and result in a溃疡 (ulcus), which does not consolidate and bleeds for the entire time and is not excised, then wherever it might be, universally it's called a fistula and we call it that pus.
A true fistula is a narrowed, hard, white lesion at which there is no pain and to which the body's response is as if it were in response to pus; for this reason, that ulcer is referred to as a "pus root", meaning penum.
And in wet ulcers, which bleed; and slightly dampness is excised within several hours. And sometimes this moisture is a spot, it's small, it's thick, and it's subtle.
Having shown all those causes, and the signs of them and their treatment with medicine in the division.
And thus, I will teach you about the treatment of a fistula which is performed through surgery with your hand.
Know that fistulas occur in all parts of the body; those are fistulas that come from major veins and arteries, or nerves, or the throat, or intestine, or bladder, or along any of the ribs, or a part of the spine, or near any joint made up of bones. And these give proximity to the main limb and its resemblance.
And so among these fistulas that are performed this way, they are from illnesses with difficult healing and not receiving a cure, and the treatment of it is labor and ignorance.
And if there's some fistulas whose depth doesn't reach the places that were mentioned, and you hope for its healing and rely on it, and want to understand it, then take a risk with iron or steel, and if the fistula is in line, and you investigate this within you.
If the fistula is twisted, then investigate this with a subtle lead; since lead within its own body is lighter and you should straighten out the twist.
And if the fistula contains toxic pus, it's not within your ability to mark this upon it with steel.
And then cleanse the opening through your openings, since the moisture that you use to cleanse this goes to the other openings and their discharge.
And then inquire precisely, according to the way that you can possibly know if there's bone or nerves within it, and whether the length of the fistula is distant or near, or if this is a fistula with multiple openings which is all above your total strength, through your questioning, through which you question the patient, and where you apply pressure on the area with your hand, considering the significance and causes associated with abscess.
And once you have assessed all those causes at the station truthfully, then proceed with the treatment according to confidence: it is that you now consider if this fistula appears nearby or in a distant location, far from joint, nerve, artery, vein, or any of the places I've told you about.
And then you dry out the fistula according to what was said about its birth before, and remove whatever is in that filtration and corrupted flesh, and whatever has grown within the opening of the tissue or parts alike, and treat it internally until it's healed.
And if the fistula is of distant depth and is in line, then make sure to insert into it as far as possible, and thoroughly remove all its corrupted flesh; and then administer hot bandages soaked with sharp medicines, and introduce these within the fistula which you have understood through steel.
And do this in some places within where the sharp medicine will corrode everything that's rotten within the fistula's inner flesh.
And then restore it with ointments which produce healthy flesh where it has been healed.
And if it's not healed by this method, then you should cauterize it according to what we've recommended.
And if the cause of fistula is bone and you must confirm this, then inquire about it and dry out the fistula according to what we've recommended, unless there's no reason for vein or nerve issues or main limb problems as we've said.
If the lung is exposed and there is any corruption or darkness within it, then you must insert something into it so that the corruption can be expelled entirely; and soon after care for it until the flesh within it becomes healthy.
And if it is not healed and the blood is still dark like this, then you will know that you have not completely eradicated the corruption; and then you uncover it again thoroughly and make the necessary measurements and adjustments to its structure at the end of your work, and soon after restore it.
And if it is healed, good; and otherwise, then you will know that that corruption is deep within the body, which could not be reached, and so in that case there is nothing for you to do but leave it alone.
And if the lung is corrupted and small, or if it's within reach for you to pull it out, then you will pull it out using delicate forceps that are suitable for this task.
And if they are moist bones, then thoroughly make the extraction of all of them, and from those leave no cause undone by your strength.
If it causes you any contradiction due to moisture, and in their operation there is no fear or mistake, then cut those ligaments or muscles if they are here, and deliver the bones.
If there is no preparation for the bones to be there at your time, then pause on the wound so that the wound itself heals completely inside that part which is around those bones and muscles, and keep the wound from being consolidated, and ensure that the section you have cut during your operation remains restrained.
Waxing, if you fear, pause on the surface immersed in a warm oil bath, or on the surface immersed in an Egyptian unguent, or with one of those vertigo remedies; when those ligaments are ready, and the bones have been separated from them by cutting, and where there is no harm.
And if it is a large bone such as the rib or leg or resembling those, and what from him is corrupted is only the flesh of him, then remove that with resio just behind where that darkness and corruption is contained, and soon restore the wound.
And if what from him is corrupted is a large part, and the corruption has already reached to the marrow of the bone, then it's necessary to close that, and to insert everything into the place where the corruption was contained, and soon after heal it until consolidation occurs.
And I recommend that you do as an example and with assistance for when you operate on someone in their leg, so pause there to exemplify and assist your operation.
Treat a young man around the age of 30 years old, who has pain in their leg, and upon examining the divisions internally, it is found over the material inside the body where this material has reached to the leg, and this material is pus with large abscesses, and do not attribute the cause to external factors.
And then extend the time for that through the mistake of doctors until the abscess bursts, and remove all the liquid contents, and his treatment is soon paused until the change becomes fistulated, and make cuts in the liquid orifices which were all dripping with pus and moisture from the body.
And then I treated multiple times over two years, and did not know in those regarding the art, when I was called.
And I saw the change in him and the contents that flowed from those wounds over a large area; and already his body of that man was completely stiff, and the color of him was yellow.
And then I inserted a needle into one of those wounds and conducted it to the bone.
And then I soon examined all the wounds and found that they reached from all parts of the body.
And then I healed myself and inserted onto one of those wounds into which I discovered a part of the bone, and found that corruption, and it was earthy and corrupted and degraded; and already it had corroded a part of the body through which it penetrated to the marrow.
And I saw that which was discovered by me and prepared from the exposed bone.
And I knew that it was not in the bone but that corruption which had spread and congealed, and I had already removed it.
And then I paused the healing of the wound with consolidative medicine for a long time, and it did not consolidate.
And then I iterated and discovered again on the bone secondly about the initial discovery, and found continuous corruption to the bone.
And I healed what appears from that corruption to me, and then I made preparations for treating and restoring him, and it was not restored.
And then I discovered on the other occasion and did not cease to gradually cut away little by little from the bone particularly and made the restoration of him, but it was not restored until I cut around one palm of him, and he extracted up to his marrow, and soon afterwards restored him with medicines, and it consolidated only slightly and healed.
And it is not necessary to repeat the operation on this section of him but for the position of his lungs and for the lack of endurance and fear that comes from him in all hours due to excessive evacuation, which caused a bad syncope.
And therefore healing is through total recovery, and nothing replaces hard flesh; it's good to arrange him in his own body and return his health; and he is guided by his own decisions, and does not oppose him in walking or harm him in any case.
If the disease is located in the heart area and has been cut, then follow this method: you must pull that one until the second according to this manner. You should take hold of that substance firmly at the tip of that prominent part and command someone else to extend it fully; put a thicker woolen cloth than the first layer on that substance, then press that woolen cloth against the place left by the cut, extending its tip so that you pull the flesh towards those parts. Lay bare the flesh over the area where you want to make a cut so that the saw does not cut into the flesh.
And place a stake or table in such a way that when you do this, the saw is not allowed to cut into the corrupted flesh.
And find out that the cutting edge is placed gradually over the small corrupted area. If it's in the recess of the corrupted bone and doesn't appear with its manifestation to touch, force another cut on him.
And if the bone is corrupted and not prominent, before one part continues to the other, and corruption is in the middle or at a part of him, then you reveal flesh from all parts completely; then place a stake here, then press the saw on the first part where corruption is inside which should be continuous with the cutting line of the second part.
And make the cut according to the location of the corruption, even if it's small, as we have said.
And if the corruption is in the joint, penetrate that corrupted joint, and saw the bone where it continues from the other side.
And if corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then not on his reason but in between them.
And if corruption is in the armpit of the hand or chest, it's very difficult; however, find out where the corruption appears to you in what manner, and open that area, show that area according to every disposition which is possible to you, and make each incision rectify your own way when it does not oppose you veins or nerves.
And know which are the best tools and saws to cut these bones according to the position of the bones, their preparation, their thickness, their subtlety and size, and their hardness and their rarity; therefore find out that you prepare for every type of operation a suitable instrument suitable for that operation.
And know that operation means to you about the type of tool you need; when among you is great study and long and knowledge of the methods in this art, and testimony from methods of diseases, as then you already had for yourself to use what is convenient according to him of tools for every disease.
And I will show you at the end of this chapter the number of tools which you will use according to those which proceed from among them, as your prohibition which you will experience on the others. Shape of saw:
Shape of another saw:
Shape of a large other saw:
Shape of a rasp: The tip of this rasp should have the shape of the tip of a star key, and its points should resemble those of a star-shaped point.
And it is only necessary that in that place the tips of the joints be rubbed when they are corrupted, or have a large open mouth.
Shape of smaller razors:
Shape of diagonal razors:
Shape of another differently made saw: it should have an arch above the pus and the sharpness of its iron blade, and the member that makes it descend diagonally is made. Shape of it:
Shape of a razor with a concavity:
Shape of another subtle razor:
Shape of another curved-end razor:
Shape of small razors resembling spiders' webs:
Shape of another smaller incisor:
Shape of another incising tool; this resembles a rasp, and its tip is like a saw blade. It exhibits in various locations along the bones:
Shape of a rasp which conforms to the ratio of that one through which holes are made in the bones:
And its tip is triangular and has an acute end.
It is made of Indian iron, and similarly find all the causes that we have said about razors, incising tools, and saws.
Of the tip incision and the sawing of bones.
The ends may be due to an intrinsic cause or an extrinsic cause, or because you have treated that corruption with the medicines and recovery does not occur, or sometimes the corruption spreads from its own body without any external cause. In such cases, find out that you must incise that part within this where the disease has reached, so that the patient may die from this illness or from a malice which is worse than the misfortune of his body.
The sign of the one to whom it happens is that the limb becomes black inside where there's a burn, or you place the darkness inside where the heat enters that part of the limb causing it and takes over their entire body; and therefore proceed with this treatment on them.
Similarly, if it's caused by the impact of some poisonous causes such as from a sea scorpion or a pufferfish or a snail and its like.
And if the corruption or impact is in the extremity of the finger, then you cut into the finger and do not allow space for the corruption to enter your hand.
Similarly, if it reaches your hand, then you cut that from the wrist's bend, and do not allow space for the corruption to enter so that it takes over in the elbow of the arm.
And if you have to deal with that, then cut into the arm at the bend at the joint.
And if the corruption passes elsewhere around the bend, then in that case, it is the death of the patient; and administering another cause for this in treatment amounts to a large amount of virtue.
Similarly, do the same for the chest when corruption reaches the part of the chest, then you cut into that near one of the ribs.
And if it extends to the middle of the chest, then you must cut out the entire chest. If the corruption invades the liver, then you should cut into the abdomen at the junction of the liver.
And if corruption has already invaded the liver, in that case there's no cure but to let go, and leave the patient to death.
The method of cutting into the limb or squeezing it is that you strengthen one band in the area where you want to cut, and leave which behind. And place another band over the spot; extend your assistant with one band on the left sides left out, and extend your assistant with another band on its side; then separate the flesh that's between two bands in such a way that there is a small space laterally so that all the flesh is exposed; and proceed to cut or squeeze it.
And cover that with a cloth of all sides so that it doesn't touch the spot there, and bring about for the patient an adjustment wound and a scalded blister.
And if during your work you encounter blood from sweat when you operate, then you apply the cautery gently, or place some sweat-enhancing powders on it; and proceed to return to your treatment until it is completed.
And bind the affected limb with a bandage to a suitable location, and treat that so that it heals.
I urge you to understand this that I found in someone's chest, this incident which I share with you, the one that happens to them turning black in their chest as though assembled to combustion of fire.
And that corruption first occurs in their finger spreading throughout the chest.
And then that person starts preparing for self-medication with pus that the healing goes to the member as strong as it causes pain and intensifies their condition, and they cut into that chest at the junction, and he heals.
For a long time, this corruption incident occurs in the hand's finger region.
And then it reaches me, and so I must carefully consider the repercussions of this excess on those who are subjected to these medicines, affecting the body's transformation; and the excess does not recur but begins to spread into another finger starting where it began in the hand.
And he urges me to cut into his hand, but I do not want to do that fearing the repercussions of this excess, rather than fear the cutting of his hand which is about to die, for the virtue of the patient was in dying.
And since he became angry with me, he returned to his land and informed me that the person cut his entire hand and healed.
And I have not told this story for any other reason than to provide assistance about this disease of the patient, and its meaning which must be understood and according to which it has been done.
Regarding the cure of sinus issues and the quality of enemas with medicines.
When an abscess occurs in certain fleshy members and the space of the abscess is extended causing collection of pus, then it bursts and perforates, and pus escapes from there, leaving the site empty as if it were a vessel, and the membrane that was covering it also like fine cloth, and does not reach deeper corruption, nor seeps into the bone or nerves or tissues, it is called a sinus, and it is not named a fistula.
However, if the space is extended to the point where corruption begins in any member, then it is called a fistula and not sinus.
And the treatment for it is to cut out that membrane completely as if it has been turned inside out, and especially when it is delicate like fine cloth, and you arrange so that it does not stick to the site due to its corruption.
And if you expect that the membrane will stick and that corruption has not reached deeper consequences, and if pus has escaped from the membrane, then you treat it with enemas.
And if you consider it as a sinus, then if it's large, the smell that emanates from your arm is Egyptian medicine made of oil and vinegar and ginger with equal parts each, which are placed in a container, and are heated on fire until the medicine boils and spreads like honey.
And you take what is necessary from him, dissolve it in water and honey; and suppurate with that on his stomach, strengthen his opening, and leave the medicine in him for the amount of two hours.
And then extract that from its place; and do this for several days until the stomach is cleansed and the odor has subsided.
And some washes are made with ash water, when this medicine is not available to you; and you take the ashes of birch, put them in water; then boil that and suppurate with it until you find that your stomach has been cleansed, at which point there will be no odor.
And if the patient doesn't tolerate this Egyptian medicine or ash water, then suppurate with water and honey, mixed with finely ground clay. Suppurate also with a mixture of wine and honey; it's the property of honey that cleanses and washes, and wine makes the stomach adhere, especially when there is excess of astringency and dryness in the wine.
And when you do these washes and find that your stomach has cleared up, then suppurate with what makes the flesh give birth in it.
And you take rhubarb unguent, dissolve that with roasted oil and astringent wine; or suppurate with some medicines and other ointments which have their properties written in the treatise of unguents.
And if the opening of the stomach is narrow so that the catheter cannot be inserted for suppurating, then you gradually enlarge it with a small iron rod, and rest your hand covered in Egyptian unguent or basilisk unguent until it's expanded.
And similarly, if the opening is wide, then you stitch up the lips of the patient and let in an amount for which an additional catheter can be added.
And if the opening in the body from which the arm flows is raised above the parts above, then dry that at the lowest point of the pus where it's located so that the arm can flow into you, when the arm is constricted in the depth of the stomach, the flesh will be generated in you.
And if it's not possible to dry the stomach inside at the location of the lowest pus as you want, then pierce that and prepare the member for what allows it to flow from you just slightly according to your capacity and so that no cause of the arm is kept back.
Let that which is over the opening of your stomach be adjusted at all times so that it doesn't allow anything to escape from your arm. And in order to know whether what flows from you through your arm is much or little, whether it's digested or not.
And in this regard, you should consider the place of that stomach, if the patient feels pain or not, and whether it's in the abscess.
And when your treatment is extended in this manner and you see the substance that's discharged over the opening of your stomach adheres, or gains adherence, then leave it to dry or let it heal naturally. When the wound heals, change the bandage for another one and renew the ointment.
Let it be known that if there's a large space near the stomach that allows for subtle viruses to spread, don't despair of the healing process in your body; sometimes this depends on individual factors such as how long flesh takes to regenerate in their wounds, and these are among those who experience the opposite.
And if your arm is indigest for several days near the stomach, then you know that the stomach does not adhere. And if the adherence of the stomach takes longer and causes a prolonged issue, then adjust it in drying off of medicines; and if the medicines are wet in their substance and lose their effectiveness, they should be dried like rhubarb ointment, when there is excess addition of zegi.
And the main thing that follows is that you take rhubarb ointment and dissolve it in roasted oil, and have it travel back and forth through your veins like its original substance, then apply it to you, and use it.
And it behaves similarly in that action, when there is no arm, rhubarb ointment and honey when applied within it becomes thickened, use it; or take myrrh and aloes and mix them together, then heat the mixture with honey until thick, spread this on a bandage and strengthen it over your stomach; then spread that with thickened honey and heat it again, spread it on a bandage.
And some washes are given to you using the long traditional aristocratic knowledge and research of celestial lilies (which are indeed celestial lilies), flour from beeswax, and centauria. Use those simple remedies or adjust them, grind those into a powder and mix it with the honey I recommended; then use them.
And if the lung is elongated and cannot be healed by this treatment, then you must know that corruption has affected him, and it already reaches into the bones or into other hard parts of his body or joints; in that case, treat it with a tubercular cure, as explained above.
In the treatment of ingrowing toenails and clipped nails, including the addition of cutting into the finger and sectioning.
Ingrowing toenail is an abscess which causes the nail to push against the tip of the finger or toe, and strongly pushes other nails into the digits. If it's prolonged and its treatment becomes expensive, or if it discharges pus from an abscess, or gets corrupted, then you put your arm in that the corrosion eats through the nail bed, and forcefully corrupts all of that area, and forces the corruption up to the bone where it smells bad, and makes the tip of that side cut off, and its color becomes black.
And so when you have that like what we've said in the division and if your treatment doesn't show results, then it's clear that you should cut off all excess matter that has accumulated under the nail and proceed to cauterize the wound there. A hot iron is helpful in this process.
May it be if the bone is sound and the nail is healthy, and the extensions of the nail have already penetrated the tissues inwardly, starting to pierce and guide that area, then you should know how to pause at the subtle point by the angle of the nail where you are piercing the flesh, pushing that inwards and cutting into that flesh with ease, placing your hand on it as the remaining flesh of the medicated corrosive substances burn inwardly until everything is thoroughly cooked; and then treat that with ointment once it's healed.
May it be if corruption has already infiltrated the bone, then you should know that you must cut into the bone at that point and remove it, because nothing heals when the bone is corrupted.
And if you notice the corrosion and corruption spreading in that finger, then you should cut into it at one of its nodes according to how much is recalled by its memory, and treat that area once it's healed.
And if there's hammering or scraping under the nail, and if there is severe pain in that area, then you should know that at the beginning of surgery on the patient, you must cut off the affected leg, and proceed to remove the nail with a sharp knife transversely above it, making sure not to let the cut reach the flesh beneath where the nail was left, which will cause the patient severe pain, and leads to the production of unnecessary tissue in that area; and then treat that area with something that relieves pain.
And this is called 'adjustment', which naturally occurs in the bones of many people. It strongly affects flesh all over, or it weakens bones, or it affects the nail itself.
And some are natural in the base of the joint, or they occur naturally in certain nodes of the fingers. And it is not bad when something natural occurs in some nodes of the finger, whereas that which naturally occurs at joints often causes harm.
And of those that are naturally fleshy, the cut is light, and you should cut into them by going across their base with a sharp knife.
And of those that are naturally located at the base of joints, treatment is difficult; therefore, be careful with their removal.
And in that which is naturally located at the joints, you should know that when you start to cut into the flesh by making a round incision inside the bone, proceed to use one of those suitable saws for this task, and then treat that area once it's healed.
And this is consolidation which happens among joints due to their natural connections or from the body's condition of health, or from illness effects or fire burn injuries, or from scars. You should know that when you remove that consolidation, allowing the fingers to return to their natural shape.
And between their finger joints, place layers of lint in oil that has been rubbed to prevent them from lightly consolidating, or separate each layer by placing a thin sheet of lead between them as needed for consolidation.
And similarly, if consolidation happens in some fingers of the palm, then you should dry that consolidation according to how it has been prepared and conforms to the shape of the limb.
In terms of incisions, they are varicose.
Varicose veins are involved; they contain large, full vessels filled with melancholic excesses which appear in the limbs of the body, and their main manifestation is seen on the legs, especially for those who travel, work, or carry loads.
And you should know that when administering the treatment of black cholera's purgative for the heart, you may perform several strong expulsions, and then bleed the patient from the basilic vein.
The treatment of varicose veins can be carried out in two ways: one is to cut them and remove that black mass, and the other method is to elevate the vein and remove it entirely.
The incision proceeds in this way: start by opening the leg with hot water inside until the large mass has dissolved, which is fluidified within the leg, then strengthen the calf of the leg to the upper part of the thigh into a part below it on one bend, and proceed to drain the vein at one place or two or three with wide incisions, and then elevate the black blood with your right hand from the part opposite the leg inside and above, until you have extracted the quantity that you want and is sufficient, which will draw out the virtue of the leg.
And then apply that, and command the patient to abstain from eating the food causing black fever.
And continue the treatment with bloodletting when the veins are full and we notice improvement in the patient.
The elevation of their health proceeds according to this manner: you who raise the patient's chest, if there are boils on their back, then dip it in hot water and immerse the back area with hot water until it reddens and the veins become swollen; or if hot water is not available, let the member be cut, so that the body part becomes heated.
And then dry the cut near the vein by section in the long or back direction, or at the bottom of the patient from where you should descend, or at the lowest part of the wound you should ascend.
And then open the wound with scissors and scrape the vein from all sides until you feel pain, and you should observe the condition of the patient that responds to that treatment declining towards blackness.
And then when you have evacuated and from the wound you perform that white method where it becomes a thread.
And then place this string inside until it is elevated and passes through the wound, and suspend this from an oak branch or a lion.
And then dry another section near that section for three days, and scrape the wound from the part above the vein until you see it.
And then raise that and cut the last section near the bottom, and then extract that and lift it until it passes through the second section, and then extract that from the section above that.
And do this until you extract that from the section that is further below or a pus spot of all sections, until everything is extracted; and then cut that.
And if you do not obey to extract and lift, then insert a strong double thick needle and move that, or insert your thread and turn your hand in all directions until it is immersed. And remember not to cut too deeply; if it breaks, you'll find it hard to lift that part and the harm will spread over the patient because of that injury.
And when you have completely immersed it in water and oil and undressed oil, place over the affected area wool that's soaked in water and oil, both dressed and not dressed, and treat it until it heals.
And if the blood vessel is tight and has twists that are enveloped around its branches, not as we said it should be straight, then cut open over that at every part of the twists in it, and at the places of wrapping around them, and then suspend that with scissors until you lift all of it.
And remember you should take care of your section, not to cut the vein and do not torment that area, as it will be difficult for you to lift that; exercise caution in that.
Shape of the incision when the blood vessel is dried:
It is not as hot and sharp as other blades, nor does it have a pointed tip so as not to irritate the vein; it has a lion's thickness with flexibility, if it were too thin, it would cut the vein due to its thinness. Having said that, it should be at an adequate thickness as we have mentioned.
Concerning the extraction of the saphenous vein.
This vein is formed in the thighs in southern lands as in Al-Ategi in the Arabian lands and in the southern desert regions of India where there are very few plants, and in which neither grass nor herbs grow.
And this vein is formed in other parts of the body except for these areas of the legs.
And its formation is from putrefaction that affects the wound as if there are poisons within the body like snakes, worms and insects causing decay between the wound and flesh.
And the sign of the impending arrival of this is when this vein suddenly flares up in the thigh. Then, that place becomes inflamed; and then it begins to give rise from the site of that inflammation as if it's coming out of a plant.
And when you see it at the extremity, then guide that you place upon it a weight of lead whose weight is equal to that of one drachm. Inside two drachms, and lay that down and hang the lead suspended from the bandage.
And as many times as it recurs because of some cause outside its branches, wrap this in lead and place that. And if the pain is prolonged, then you should cut a part of it and envelop what remains; and do not cut that where it's straight until it is completely extracted, for if you cut that it will be tight and enters into the flesh causing pus to occur at the site and an ulceration.
And do so gently so that it is extracted gradually, until it is removed from the rear end of it and does not recur due to any cause in the body.
And this vein extends in some people up to the length of their palm bones and beyond, I myself have seen one that reached twice its length.
And if it is cut during its treatment, then insert the thread in its root and perforate that along the long spine throughout the body, until all is evacuated from the matter, and administer putrefaction to the area with some days of medicines; and then treat that through the cure of pus.
This vein sometimes causes redness, especially when it appears at the joint of the foot or on the foot, and flows into its openings, and it comes out from any opening branch.
And so cure that in this way as we have said in the division and what was mentioned above.
From the section about worms generated under the skin, it is called the bovine discomfort.
This disease is named in some territories as the bovine discomfort because it often appears in bulls and has a worm inside that's born between the intestines and flesh, going up and down throughout the body, being shown by the sensation of its movement from member to member interrupting the intestines and coming out.
And the generation of this is due to the putrefaction of certain fluids, thus like it happens with worms, snakes, earthworms and roundworms in the belly.
And it's found by the mischief of this, when it moves through the body and rises to the head, and reaches the nose, then it becomes inflamed in him and enters inside, destroying the nose, thus causing red spots.
And when you want to cure that and remove it, then do not do so unless you observe its movement and appearance according to your feeling, and then understand what is above it and what is below it with strength and constriction, and then dry it up around it and extract that.
And if it's found in the flesh and you don't feel it, then place a searing point on fire at the spot where it resides, and the main cause that is feared is corruption of this which corrupts the spot as we have said.
And if this thing penetrates to the head close to the nose, then press on the eyebrow with strong constriction, and then dry it up around it, and extract that; know that a patient should use alteration of their body through medicines eliminating bad putrid fluids, and guard against foods causing putrefaction.
From the section about discomfort caused by nafir (possibly related to bile or some form of internal disturbance).
This disease is called nafir in our land, and it's discomfort which appears in some body parts, then spreads from member to member.
And I already showed you the second one that I will describe. I was called to help a female patient in a village, and I found her arm swollen slightly along the funis vein. After an hour of it being like that, I saw that the swelling moved as if a worm were climbing towards this area, but less intensely than when pressed, as if it were living silver running from place to place.
And then one feels the pain in that area and stays focused on the muscle, then here stops for about an hour.
And then proceeds throughout the other body into which it reaches the other arm.
And then he told me that it moved around his entire body according to what I saw; I was too amazed by the transformation and the speed from member to member. And I had seen this before in my own nose according to that manner, however, I have seen things causing pain to be transformed from member to member. But I didn't see it like this in the nose as in the female case.
And I don't think it is merely this because the female was young, with thin body and visible veins, and in this case appears that transformed windiness is felt.
And it's necessary that it doesn't appear according to this backward flow in those who are delicate and have moist bodies with swollen veins.
And when you want the cure for this, and the patient feels that pain, then it's not as obvious at the nose like we said, instead press on that place lightly and dry it up around that spot where the discomfort is constricted, and sear the area.
But if you don't find it in your own nose, then you cure that by releasing the body and by what expels wind, and make those pills with stinking herbs and those of serapis and similar.
Regarding the extraction of arrows.
Arrows are diverse according to their species and the locations within the body where they penetrate, due to their variety including those that have large points, small ones, concave ones, and dull ones, which are solid. There are also arrows that have three angles, as well as arrows that have tongues, and those that are spines.
And of the symptoms for the head, when you find it in the arrow and it passes through the bone, it causes disorientation due to its position on the brain, which occurs from severe dehydration, blindness, dizziness, nausea, tongue swelling and pain, abdominal cramps, confusion, vomiting, and in the patient's appearance there is a sign of dampness like dust, resembling thirstiness of flesh.
And so if these signs appear to you, then refrain from the treatment and the extraction of the needle, if it is not out.
If the signs of the needle are in the chest, it means that she is close to the left nipple, and feels at this place when there's a hard cause, and not a visible one; and if you feel the movement of the needle as if it were the pulse beat, and the course of the infected area becomes black, and causes that cold sensation in the extremities, sweat starts, and fainting occurs; then know that death descends through her whole body.
The signs when the needle has reached the lung are a frothy blood flow from the wound, and the vessels near the throat become distended. The color of the face changes, one starts to expire large amounts of breath, and demands for air to be breathed in quickly.
And if the needle is in the membrane which is in the legs, and the pain occurs close to the small ribs, and there is a huge intense pain and sighing, and it doesn't affect all the muscles of the body.
And if the needle is in the stomach, then there is often a passage of pain accompanied by indigestion.
And if the needle is in the belly and stuck to it, there might be an opening of a wound or the tissue, or the hernia which gets burst, and there's no hope for the patient's treatment by removing the needle.
And if the needle is found in the bladder and urine starts to leak out, causing some process outside of it due to certain causes, then if there's pain on the back from this, know that it is fatal.
Consider the other body parts as well such as the face, throat, belly button, shoulders and auxiliary areas, and the backbones of both sides, the breastbone, the hips, and their corresponding regions on each body part. They should be treated according to the main procedures when the needle does not encounter a vein or an artery and it is not a poisonous needle.
And I advise you to understand these things that I have observed about this needle business, so that you may know how to treat it.
This is why: if someone gets a needle in the eye socket of their upper eyelid and I remove it from the other side, leaving the ear's wax on them, they get better and don't suffer harm to their nose.
And remove another needle from a Jew which gets stuck in them under the ear's wax. Let the eyelid stay intact and do not get rid of it, the needle was already hidden and could not be reached by that method. It was a big needle among the sharp needles of the Turks, made of iron without any ears.
And if it's a Jew, there shouldn't be any damage to their nose in an unfortunate incident.
And remove another needle from a Christian which was stuck in the belly button, it was an Arab needle, and that's the one with ears. And then I cut through this between two guides, it was already submerged in their belly button; and then I sharpened this, drew out that needle, and the Christian got better.
And remove another needle from a man which was stuck in his belly; I feared he would die by this. And then, considering that it had passed 30 days and there was no change to any of his condition, I cut through the needle and made an incision over it, and he got better, and did not suffer harm by this accident.
And I see another man in whom a needle gets stuck in his back, the wound is consolidated over him, and since it has been around for about seven years, it was removed from the surface of the thigh.
And I see a woman in whom a needle gets stuck in her belly, the wound is consolidated inside her, and there has been no change to her condition in relation to it, and the woman does not suffer harm during any of her natural operations.
And I see another man to whom a needle gets stuck in his face, the wound is consolidated and the needle has been removed, not causing any pain or similar symptoms here.
And remove the needle from the king's prince's nose where it was stuck in the middle and already declined to the right side, the whole needle was hidden.
And I was called for his treatment around three days after it got stuck with the needle insertion.
And then I stretched the wound from the needle spot; and then I tried to prick that with a delicate tool but didn't feel it. However, he felt this poke on the right earlobe, and so I suspected that this poke was at the end of the needle.
And I applied plaster to the area where there is an attractive and digestive force, believing that this place needs treatment as it's where I can perceive the needle's location, so I proceed with treating that spot.
And no harm occurred at the significant location where you've found that spot; I continued applying plaster on him for several days without any incident; while consolidating this wound, the ear returned from the removal process after about several days. During that period, I felt the needle inside his nose and informed you of this.
And then I applied a quick-acting corrosive medicine on the wound for several days until it opened up. Then with my tool, I tried to soften that spot and stretched out the delicate end of the needle which adheres to the shaft.
And I adjust in the opening of the wound by that acute medicine through which visibly appears the tip of the needle, and pass this with me for the spaces of time between four months.
And I aim to expand the wound until it's big enough for me to insert the knives into you, and refine that area, without allowing any inflammation. So I don't cease to think and invent with my hands in ways of technique, starting from the next day using forceps to gently remove what was extracted; then I restore that wound.
And some doctors judged that the nasal cartilage is not restored, but I have restored that and the wound has been consolidated. The patient recovers fully through health and does not suffer any harm.
And I advise you on the quality of extraction for some needles in order to consider this rule and meaning concerning what I haven't told, where the divisions of this art and the definitions of that one are not understood from this narrative nor do they understand them freely.
And the craftsmen should compare on little about movement; and on what is present compared to what is absent; and find new operation and new tool you need for the descent of the causes of foreign arts when it happens.
And so I say that needles are not found outside the members where they are placed but according to two ways: or by penetration into the location in which they enter; or opposite the other part.
And that one that is placed by the location gives entry, or the needle proceeds in a meaty place, it is thrown and placed outside.
And if you do not heed the feeling of your body when it's being treated, then wait a few days until the meat around it settles down and the penetration and its departure are relieved.
Similarly, if it is placed in bones and you do not heed your body's feeling, then let that rest for a few days and return to this with penetration and movement every day, and already it will be outside.
And if you do not heed your body for such days, then wait to puncture in the circuit of the needle throughout the bone with fine travel until the location is enlarged by the needle, and then extract that.
And if the needle is already hidden in the body's location, and it is hidden from your feelings, then you inquire about that through tests, and if you feel that, then pull that with such movements which are suitable for its removal.
And if you cannot operate on it due to the constriction of the wound and the length of the thread, and here there are no bones, nerves or veins, then work on the wound until it's enlarged and making extraction of the needle is possible.
And if it's located in the hollows of gold where it's placed from all parts to all your techniques; and think about this, if you can't release the meat in the breakage of these hollows and within their twist where you should consider.
And when you manage the removal of the needle in any place where it is, then you use twisting with forceps from all parts so that this obeys; and refine to extreme refinement so that the needle does not break and that it is done in a way that makes your removal difficult and this extraction.
And if you cannot handle this at your time, then let it rest for several days until the parts that are in its circuit settle down, and then return to this which becomes easier later. And if it causes you difficulty in blood flow, then administer what we've said about treatment in its chapter.
And preserve your skill of starting veins or nerves, or chords, and manage techniques in all possible ways for the removal of the needle; and do this with ease, calmness, speed, and strength as I have recommended to you.
And when you make the needle bend according to its own figure that which you must place the insertion of the needle in him, so that the body is better. And if this is not possible for you, then manage what is possible with these figures.
And if these needles are placed opposite the other side, or already proceed through some part to those from outside, or make the end of the needle bend due to feeling of the part above the final destination and sometimes it's prominent; then you handle that; and choose this section according to how many forceps can take it in quantity; then pull that, because it is done gently by touch.
If it is trapped in the throat, then you twist the tongue according to opposition until the needle enters the throat, expand and amplify this movement, and then extract that.
And if not, let that stay for a few days, and then continue to move that inward until it burns.
And if the needle's point is inside that, then you push that towards him/her.
If the needle's point is broken and you want to administer an impulse, then you insert into that. If it is deaf, strike the inner side with your hand until between his/her body and the back of the needle, then push that towards him/her.
If the needle is concave, then you push that strongly into it, where the needle gets relieved by that.
And if the needle is exposed, then you hollow out all the flesh in which there is the vein, if it is within your ability to do so, and then heal that according to what suits.
And if the needle is in the feet, or in the abdomen, or in the bladder, or in the side, and it's close to what you touch, then touch that on your fingertip, and if within your ability, press on that. Then press on that, avoid touching a vein or nerve, extract that, and afterwards take care of the wound where it is necessary, and heal that until it is healed.
Shape of the forceps on which arrows are placed:
Let their ends be like the tip of a syringe which are made like pliers when they grasp onto the arrow, such that they don't let it go.
And from those special modifications of them, there are large spots, few in number and somewhat uneven, according to the quantity of size of the arrow and its slightness, and the width of the wound, and the constriction thereof.
As if it were a needle, such that it relieves his/her internal organs in the concave arrow and is pushed towards that.
Regarding bloodletting from veins.
The veins for bloodletting which usually require bloodletting are .xxx, which are in the head .xvi., these are two pulsatile veins which are close to the temples, they're called auricular; these are two herbs that are in both of the temples visible; and these are two veins that are in two lacrimal areas under each nostril and are called aspiant; and there is a vein prepared in the middle of the forehead, and this one is located at the end of the nose; and these are two jugular veins which are at the neck; and these are two veins that are above the lips; and these are two veins that are below the lips; and - these are the veins called algalic ones; and these are two veins that run down the tongue. The veins that are bloodletted in the arms are .v.; And of those veins that are bloodletted in the chest are .v.; which is one cephalic vein and is associated with the wild heart; and the people call it "the head vein", and deafly, and this is a somewhat uneven vein, made up from a branch of basilica and another branch of cephalic; and they name that vein by the people as "the vein of all the body", and basilica vein which is placed above the domestic heart is called "shimmering", and the common folk call it "the belly vein"; and the arm veins, and are placed above the collarbone, and this is the one in which bloodletting occurs, and it's the one that appears on the chest for manifest appearance; and salvatella, and this is the vein that is between the so-called auricular and small pus, and they're present in its two branches.
And in the chest and ribcage are three veins; one of those is that which runs down the curve of the wild heart's base; and the second is sophena, its place being below the rib of the domestic heart; and sciatic vein, its place is above the rib of the wild heart; and in the ribcage there are other veins similar to those.
The youth of the veins that are close to the temples is for the removal of ancient and migratory, and bleeding and ulcers in the head from old times.
And the quality of pulling those is according to what I recommend you: it should be that the head is shaved and the head of the patient in the occipital area against both veins with good friction; strengthen the patient's neck with a bend where two appear, close to the temples on both sides of the head; pull this towards your right side, and if you feel the pulse of those at your right side, there is trouble.
Approach you take the cutting lance, and that is the one that is incident, approach you insert this below the vein in the neck between where bloodletting leads to the throat. And approach you raise your hand towards the vein and neck upwards to the parts above, and cut into the vein at the incident point of entry. And let the length of the incision be about two inches or a little more than that; and bleed out as much blood as you wish.
And then strengthen with powders and let that remain until it is healed.
And already in the introduction of this book, we have discussed those treatments and their use of cautery.
Two of the two veins and arteries, which are the young blood's companions in Templar youth, are migraines that are bad and recurrent, and frequent conjunctivitis, and various acute flow diseases that afflict humans.
And the quality of removing these is as I recommend you: strengthen the patient's neck and insert a stick so that both veins appear in their feeling, clearly by manifestation, and show your pulse at where your instruction says; then try it.
And then you raise the rod over the vein below the part above your instruction, and introduce the bloodletting tool diagonally there, and raise the vein in its place; and cut that like you did with the other veins; and let the blood flow according to the amount of your need.
And then relax the constriction of the patient's thigh, place your instruction over the vein for an hour, and also place it over that point with powders and strengthen that above against the strong constriction, and let that remain until it is healed.
And already we have recalled them and their introduction, as well as the procedure, in the beginning of this book.
And the youth of bloodletting for the vein on the forehead is akin to the bloodletting for the occipital artery in old facial ailments, migraines, swelling, and infected ulcers.
And the quality of bloodletting for him is as I recommend you: namely, that the patient strengthens his neck with a stick so that the vein appears; and then take the instrument which is called 'fossoria', which has this form:
Place the tip of the fossoria over that vein and press it on him from above or with another reason in his way, and let the blood flow according to the amount you want; then relax the puncture on the thigh and let that remain until it is healed.
Sometimes openings are made in bloodletting later, but one must not make the bloodletting at the tip of the acute condition like others, before it is on the side tip, and perform that bloodletting across according to the transverse way, where the bone is close and weakly it would break through him if it was thin.
Two of the veins that are in two eyes due to infection by tears and swelling in the eyes, as well as facial diseases.
The quality of bloodletting is that the patient should strengthen their neck with a stick and then perform bloodletting there, and you stand on top of their head.
And the bloodletting is performed longitudinally in a few places with small bloodlettings, where there is no flesh. And if the needle for bloodletting is thin and weak, its end will break.
And then let the blood flow as much as it is necessary for you, place on that point and strengthen those for one night, and relax those afterwards.
The bloodletting of the vein in the nose is suitable for acute fever and strong heat, as well as facial diseases and migraines that occur on the face, especially if they are old.
And the quality of bloodletting for him is that the patient should strengthen his neck and place your left hand on his nose, then take the thin needle long and put it in the middle location of the nose according to straightness, where the vein does not appear here, and where the blood starts to flow soon.
Make sure to finish your hand with the bloodletting tool gradually and let the blood flow according to your need; then relax that for one night, as it is quickly restored.
Two of the symptoms that indicate bloodletting are constriction of the guides and the beginning of leprosy, as well as bad skin diseases, itching, and corrosive ulcers like herpes.
And the quality of bloodletting for those is that the patient should strengthen each one in their neck with a stick; and place the craftsmen on the head, and have the patient lie on one elbow.
And then perform bloodletting along the length with an ample needle gradually; and then draw out blood according to season or quantity, or according to what you need as much as you want; and then pretend it is another vein.
And then relax the stick and strengthen both veins with a middle constriction so that the patient is not burned, let it remain until morning when the disease has been healed.
Two of the symptoms indicating bloodletting for veins in algeritis include small spots and pus-filled lesions on the mouth, corruption of gum tissues, bad ulcers, and cracks; as well as bad ulcers that occur in the nose and along the body's circulation.
And the quality of bloodletting for those is to have you cut in front of you with the scalpel, strengthen the neck of the patient with a stick and then rotate his lips checking for two veins; one is on the right side of the lip and the other on the left. The demonstration of each is through the blueness of both, and it's more so when there are thin black veins in their circulation; then you cut each at an oblique incision point.
If you have any doubts and do not know which of those is the case, then you should perform an incision on the most severe of those, and also if there's obvious pus present.
And make as if to touch the two veins that are in the cheeks above.
You are to cut the two veins that are in your cheek when you're young, close to the femoral vein at the location where they exist on the thigh, in front of the neck, at the base of the tonsil, and other mouths.
And the quality of performing this venipuncture is to follow your chest in front of the solar plexus and elevate the tongue from them, then observe your tongue, considering one side of the vein and the other side of the vein, and each color's hue becomes black.
And puncture each one of them; and remember not to end your hand in the venipuncture of these ones, as they are arteries that you leave behind.
And the veins that are venipunctured in your armpit are in those where pain is customary in all men, and the venipuncture of them is performed according to two ways: they place it on the mirtilat or olive vein with subtlety declining; or cut on the venipuncture knife, and call this one anesthesiology, and this is how it is done:
Shape of venipuncture mirtili:
And this olive-like venipuncture has lesser breadth and more delicate extremity; it is for the venipuncture of smaller veins that contain subtle granular fat.
Performing the juvenile procedure of the venipuncture from the basilic vein which is one of three veins: you extract the fat from the neck, shoulder area and stomach, as well as from all parts of your body.
And the one performing venipuncture should be cautious when doing this; if their finger is over the artery while they perform it, and if they make a mistake in puncturing the venipuncture point, they will cut the artery and cause bleeding, so ensure that they do not accidentally use an agonizing method before using anesthesia.
And if the basilic vein does not appear by a clear manifestation, then you must leave it and switch to another, or search for any nearby branches; or perform venipuncture at the end of the arm where this is obvious; and cut that with anesthesia in the same manner as we have said.
If you want the venipuncture of your metatarsus, then go before the constriction of your arm where you recognize the area of your pulse, and press down on it with your thumb; and bend your arm slightly while cutting in a concave section using anesthesia as we have said. Remember to apply pressure for some space around the artery location.
And when you press with your strength at the area where you've pressed down with your thumb, then in that location there is an inflation, which is the inflation of the artery; thus avoid that area.
And if the blood flows in the venipuncture as with an infant's urine, then you know it is from artery blood; thus stop your hand there for a long time and hold that area; and if the blood stops flowing out, where it has been reduced, then strengthen your arm and let that part alone.
And protect the belly of the child, as well as any excess fear towards it and do not disturb that for a few days until they are healed.
And if the blood does not stop, and you need to administer medicine for this; then you will cut into the artery if it shows up to you; where its extremity is contracted, and the blood stops flowing out. Or you might take a longer time with fists, do this, take one method, strengthen this on that location of vein against the muscle descent between the other day's dust particles.
And if the blood stops flowing out, then it's good; and if not, then heal that with the medicine of which was mentioned before in relation to the recollection of places where dust particles cause bleeding.
And the stopping of blood flow from it is difficult in certain locations due to the small size of the wound and the flexibility of your arm.
The venipuncture of the dark vein is juvenile as you extract the fat from the upper part of the head and at the lower part of the body; because it is made up of branches of the basilic and cephalic veins, as we have said.
And guide the bloodletter towards that which is excessive fear in the bloodletting of the patient, where this one is a nerve; and when you adjust in the puncture of the bloodletting and find the nerves, it will cause him to be dazed, making his recovery difficult, and makes him not fully recover. And this nerve produces feelings that are felt; if it's hidden among some men and is subtle and isn't shown, then when you place the bloodletting tool on the section where you bleed from the elbow, avoid touching the nerves with your strength.
And if the vein is between two nerves, then cut the vein along its length.
The youth of the bloodletting procedure for the cephalic vein is that you draw blood from the head and bring it to alleviate the suffering in the patient's legs.
And do this precisely, if you want the bloodletting needles to puncture at an olive bloodletting or a mirt bloodletting; which is the saved pus from all veins, and it does not harm your artery or nerves.
However, it's allowed for some patients to have a reaction when bloodletting is not done in the first press, rather than noticing any lump afterwards.
The first thing about this is knowing that bloodletting should only be administered for the maintenance of health and with hope for the patient's recovery, as well as caution against potential leg problems; it involves performing bloodletting on one of the veins in the arm: cephalic, dark, and basilic. Bloodletting should be done at the beginning of spring, after fasting in spring and autumn, and during winter near mealtime, when signs of overfullness appear.
And bloodletting should be performed when it's at least three hours after the morning meal or at the start of the day.
Bloodletting should be administered when it provides convenience and necessity to the patient or at night or during the day, in any hour and at all times.
And remember that an infant should not undergo bloodletting until they are fourteen years old, a pregnant woman should only be bled starting from the fourth month of pregnancy until about seven months, and elderly persons over sixty years of age should not be subjected to bloodletting.
And if anyone wants to undergo bloodletting for any reason, be sure to change their intestines before the bloodletting with a lion's dung enema. If they have a hidden soreness in those areas, so that the veins do not pull the excess out during bloodletting of the intestines, which are cleansed, and do not reach the main limbs.
And do not bleed patients with serious disease or malnutrition, nor before any illness or drunkenness, nor in cases of leg problems due to water retention, nor due to the loss of virtue, whether it's physical or bodily. And bloodletting should be feared when there is pain, when vomiting occurs, and when there's discomfort from the stomach, as well as after sexual intercourse and labor and any cause that dissolves the essence, either physically or in terms of health.
And when it comes to purging of the body before that, if the pain is strong with food and drinks, then consider it as well. And if medicine is possible for him, use medicines.
And consider engaging in bathing should any cause prevent it, or through some exercise that might help to alleviate the pain.
And stop bloodletting at night, around three o'clock in the morning, as we have said.
And ensure that the night of this day be watched in relation to all animal accidents, such as distress, anger, fear, and all bodily accidents, such as work, unnecessary guilt, sex, and things like them.
And according to his preference, have the reasons for using those that are common among men regarding aromatics and scent, as well as medicines and such according to the quantity of possibility.
And guide the bloodletting instrument on a cushion that is as good, if not better than, the cushion of the one who should be bled.
And adjust his arm, and press that on his hand with the bloodletting tool two or three times; and strengthen his muscle with the cord and encircle him in two places.
And for the appropriate compression, when the restriction is not equal, or the restriction is due to excess, then prohibit blood flow from the pain; or if it's due to calming down, then prohibit the spread of the pain throughout.
And for the proper compression, when it comes to the one who should be bled, press his hands simultaneously in between them while the veins are swollen and felt by sensation.
And for the bloodletting tool, smear its needle with a little ancient olive oil; and then place your right hand's final position over that vein, determining where the bloodletting will occur, so that the vein swells a little, and you pause at this point in the pressing. The vein should be felt as if it's being pulled away by a cord - which means it's full of wind. And when you place the bloodletting tool on that spot, it contracts the bloodletting tool, revealing the bloodletting process; and the bloodletting tool does not pierce the vein, but if it does, then that area is stretched out.
And thus, because of this it is understood that the bloodletter must be careful and diligent in all these causes.
And then move the bloodletting tool; but if the vein has been punctured in one place, that's fine; and otherwise, you must try again at another location for just a little more, or apply pressure with your hand where it is not swollen, if the area is not inflamed.
And if the area is swollen or the patient gets worse, then you leave it for one day or two days, and do not apply pressure, because a hot cauterization would bring out pus, nor enter with water.
And again perform bloodletting if the patient is still unwell.
And if the wound is small and there's subtle bleeding underneath, and you're afraid that it won't bleed enough of what you want, then again perform bloodletting in that area according to rectitude and adjustment on the wound, and make sure your hand isn't too close to the location before pus appears. When the pus appears in men who have been cut many times, you should do less cutting for each wound.
And if you've already seen that it has pus, then don't apply to him, there is no excuse for your action; pause on that part of the incision in some place of the oil hole, which consoles the body with the blood. And it's better in this location than oil and other oils.
And similarly administer oil incision in all bloodletting when you drain the veins, there is the prohibition of blood from the body, and perform this tyroiac ointment and salve whenever it's paused on that spot, where the blood becomes diluted and mixes when it's thick.
And if in the location of bloodletting is produced a large pus, which thick incisions occur, especially when someone hasn't been bled only that one time or on their leg, and otherwise you clean, then pause over the area with wet sponge infused in water, one that's scraped, and apply pressure for an hour, where it will dissolve.
And consider that you should do this near the seat of blood from that vein in coordination with him or another vein.
And if there remains any darkness or greenness in the area for some days, don't notice this; and if you want, place on that substance of aloes and dissolved myrra, or a substance of mint juice or calamus or similar.
And thick incisions occur with pus and swellings, you must perform bloodletting from the basilic vein.
And pause your hand on that, and if later you feel softness, then maintain your pressure over that. Then that prominence is bad and harmful; and thereafter, be sure to place on that substance of what we've said, because forcefully it will flow from the blood vessel.
And apply plaster to that area where the inflammation is concentrated, so that the wound heals, and then care for that as part of whatever other treatment brings you relief.
And consider to extract from the blood of every man according to the amount of their virtue and according to the color prevailing over the blood as it appears.
And if the blood is black, then you let it bleed within that it becomes red. Similarly, if you see thick, you let it bleed within that it becomes diluted. And similarly, if it's sharp, within that you stop the sharpness of it.
And consider for that which is full and strong and has the need of blood extraction in one place, the bloodletting should be extended to the vein and the bloodletting tool should be deep.
And for that which is pale, do the opposite of that, and consider to extract it in many incisions, and that the cut should be deep.
And the best that is administered in bloodletting from a vein is to make it cross-sectional, not puncturing.
And this method of bloodletting saves from the flow of blood and from the interruption of nerves, and is highly praiseworthy and very safe for bloodletting according to width and length.
And in which, if you are accustomed to experience fainting attacks, then consider treating that before bloodletting with a little of a poultice in wine made from milk thistle or simple water mixed with vinegar; and extract the blood from the wound in three incisions or four.
And if it has been mixed with complexity, then before bloodletting take an infusion in the essargap of myrrh or in flavored honey in essence such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger and others like that, or in a flavored and aromatic syrup.
And if fainting occurs, you must perform bloodletting, and it is the cause of his excess of moving blood, then consider to take drinking water from meat and flavored syrup with a subtle odor; and use aromatization in some way, and limit his food there.
And use the other causes we've mentioned in the division for treatment of fainting due to evacuation.
And if someone wants to expel their arm and dissolve their blood again in the second time, consider that for those with blood evacuation, and his virtue is cold, that it should expel the blood gradually, according to the quantity of his virtue on consecutive days.
And if someone wants to expel their arm and get rid of their blood again in the second time, and their body is strong, then do this about seven or nine hours after the first bloodletting.
When someone wants to direct the blood flow of their body against its natural direction, it happens that this event occurs on the second or third day.
When the body has moved blood that is already weak and sharpens it causing fever, it happens that this event occurs on one occasion and a large amount of blood is discharged, which amplifies the feeling until it causes syncope. For this reason, you should keep all conditions for phlebotomy; and when your hand rests on the pulse of the patient, you will control their blood flow so they do not die due to syncope instead. This often happens when the phlebotomist is ignorant and careless.
And when you want to straighten the arm and evacuate the blood for a second time, as soon as you close the opening of the vein and it becomes difficult to release the blood, you press under that area with forcefulness and slightly bend it back, this is too bad.
Having the layoff in place for a second time during bloodletting; or let it stay at this point until the bleeding from bloodletting has coagulated in the opening of the vein; or press with that of ammoniacal plaster, or of chalky substance, and apply a light compression under which the blood is expelled.
And if the vein has been punctured, then lay off that one and do not touch it until the abscess is quiescent.
And if necessity prompts you to evacuate the blood again, and it's not an excuse, then prick that area or on another limb at another vein.
And the vein called "the tendon of the arm" is bloodletting in place of the gallbladder or basilic vein, when they are not tied up or hidden, which is composed of those.
And the quality of bloodletting for a patient is that the sick person immerses their hand in cold water while it becomes reddened easily and the vein appears clearly.
And tighten over that area with a gentle ligature; and perform bloodletting on the transverse line, not laterally or longitudinally.
And make sure the feeling is wide and your bloodletting on that about the joint of the hand is little.
And if the blood flow is prohibited, then you dip your hand in cold water and let the blood run in the water until you achieve your need.
Understand that if you were in the days of summer, then you are excused from dipping your hand in cold water, and similarly, you hold back the flow of blood in cold water during winter times.
And the bloodletting through this vein is safer than through all others, for you do not have any pulsating vein or nerve left on it.
And the bloodletting of the thumb artery is beneficial for the diseases of the arm.
And the quality of bloodletting for this is that you strengthen your hand with a ligature or with your own hand, because you have it laid out in cold water, while the vein swells and is demonstrated by shaking; then perform bloodletting on this transversely; and if you insert into all veins, you should not do so recklessly.
And remember that you don't finish your hand during bloodletting, because on you it's the nerves of the fingers bare of flesh.
And tighten your hand in cold water and let the blood flow through it; if you don't tighten this part in cold water, the blood will coagulate in the opening of the vein, which is prohibited from flowing.
And when extracting blood according to the amount of need, then you pause over the vein oil and salt, so that it is not consolidated gradually; similarly ensure that you do this in all ramified veins.
Understand that the youth of bloodletting for this in your left hand is beneficial for diseases of the elbow.
And do something similar with bloodletting of this as you did with the other one.
And the youth of the cephalic vein in bloodletting is for diseases that are found on your body's sides, just as with mother diseases, and retention of menses, and diseases related to veins, as well as diseases of cheeks and old sores, and they resemble other diseases.
And the quality of bloodletting for this is that the patient immerses their hand in cold water and performs friction there until veins appear; lie over the joint of the arm with a bandage; and for the place where the apparent vein lies, you should apply it at that spot, and from that it branches on the chest wall towards thick patches.
And so perform bloodletting on the widest branch or leave the lump at the spot of the aggregation you are adding to it, which is better and much safer.
And if you perform bloodletting on the chest wall, then you protect from the nerves that are located in that area on the chest wall, and stop your bloodletting at the point where you are performing it across, as if you were trying to insert it.
And when bloodletting is possible for you.
Understand that if blood release is prohibited; then you immerse the patient's hand in cold water and let the blood flow through it until it is evacuated.
And if the bloodletter misses in the first attempt, then try again with a small incision where the fluid comes out; and do not fear for his skill, but rather protect yourself from the nerves as we have said.
And similarly do it on the other side of the neck equally.
And for the sciatic vein, as we have said, you should leave the ankle at the hollow of the wild part.
And the young art of bloodletting is in the thigh area when it comes to using a cautery tool.
And the quality of bloodletting is that the patient enters bathed, and quickly strengthens their thigh on their side under the ankle above four fingers in a long, subtle bend, which only appears like this.
And when it appears, then you perform bloodletting there according to each organ that is possible for you and according to the transverse direction, which is better; or if you insert it through insertion or if you remove it through discharge, where the patient feels relief.
And she is in the heart homes many pleats; and if you find it, and there is no sensation of all, then bloodlet through a little part of it, and that which appears behind the lungs above the finger bones is that.
And watch out for the nerves, and let the amount of blood flow as you wish through the cautery tool.
And then gently untie the constriction and place your hand on the bloodletting area, strengthen the location, which is quickly healed.
Regarding ventilation and the qualities of using those [tools or techniques].
Ventosases can be made from horns, or from reeds, or from wool.
Ventosation is performed in two ways: one of them is like incision and the extraction of blood, and the other is ventosation after incision.
And this ventosation that follows incision is done in two ways, whether it's with fire or after using fire.
And among the ventosas that are given with incision and blood extraction, there are 14 body locations. The first is where the ventosas are applied, which is in alnocratis, it being the last part of the head; and the middle is on each side of the neck. Ventosas for the chin leave the mandible further from the mouth; and ventosas for two spoons; and ventosas for alohoster, they're around the tip of the penis; and ventosas of two pokers, they're about three inches apart; and ventosas for two hollows; and ventosas for two thighs.
Ventosation does not extract blood but only from small thin veins in the flesh, and thus it does not lose its effectiveness like with bleeding; similarly to how pressing is done with bloodletting. Nor should ventosation be performed with fire or after using fire on any illness where the body is full inside until the entire body has been evacuated.
If necessity requires the use of suction for illness or continuous discomfort, administer that throughout the entire menstrual cycle and at its end, in the middle part of it and at any time.
And when it occurs in any of those causes, especially if it's around the middle or later part of the menstrual cycle, then it commands that suction be performed as soon as possible after passing three hours of the day.
And the young art of neck suction is that when it affects severity in the head and combines with what's settled into the lungs; but it's important that this involves evacuation of the entire body.
And this suction is for the bloodletting location on the cephalic region.
And it's not recommended to use that which is for rubbing fullness or in those who have catarrh, as it causes significant harm.
And thus it's not advisable to use that on old people, or on their heads where illnesses are present.
And for those who continue on that over it, it causes forgetfulness; thus you should order the suction tool user to keep their hand just slightly above the ventosa application areas, fearing the production of forgetfulness.
Vineos of alcohol is in the bloodletting location of the dark vein and basilica veins: thus it causes asthma, constriction of airways, and division of the lung, as well as coughing and congestion.
And it's recommended that the alcohol-soaked ventosa be slightly dampened; if left too dry, it can cause weakening in the body and stomach.
And alcohol application during suction causes accidental head pain and eye problems, as well as migraines, excessive tearing up of the eyes, and pain in tooth roots; this is for bloodletting at the basilica location.
And tell the surgeon not to press their hand during incision so as not to puncture an artery and cause bleeding.
Perform cupping on their mouth using alcohol, and the decay of the gum, resembling conditions within the mouth that are akin to dental issues, and place them in areas corresponding to bloodletting from hemorrhoids which are located at the two lips.
The cupping performed on the two spatulas corresponds to heat, which is done by filling with quality.
The cupping done inside the two parts of the furnace corresponds to youthfulness of bloodletting from three veins - the basilica, dark, and cephalic. These veins draw the blood from all those larger veins within the flesh, and these smaller veins of other veins into the larger ones where the suction reaches the three veins.
And tell the person doing cupping not to cut too deeply, where the area is stripped of flesh, and leave their nerves and arteries alone.
And this cupping is like that which is done on the buttocks, corresponding to hemorrhoids in the anus and ulcers, leaving them as they are.
And tell the cupper to apply strong suction, and that it should be rhythmic, as where there is a need for firm drying; and with gentle, strong suctioned cups, he should puncture during incision.
The cuppings on the inner thighs gradually decrease due to apparent diminution, drawing blood throughout the body and correspond to old pains of the lungs and the womb, and of the bladder; they induce menstruation, and correspond to uterine bleeding and abortion, as well as in locations corresponding to bloodletting from two ears, and throat; and it is also where bloodletting from two cavities takes place.
However, movement weakens the entire body and causes fainting in men during movement.
And regarding cupping with hanging, youthfulness corresponds to the youthfulness of cupping on the two thighs.
And the quality of the position of the cupping is that you place the suction at the beginning view and continue for a while with heated suction, and do not extend the position of the cups, rather pause them slightly, remove them gradually, and ensure the fluids come to the area evenly. And do not stop repeating this until you see the area already turn red and swell, and that the flush of blood appears.
And then you puncture with some heat, and subsequently adjust the location considering the distribution of the body.
For a person with rare flesh and veins, it's wise to puncture them only once or not at all, so that the area doesn't become inflamed.
And tell the cupper to expand the puncturing slightly and then let out a little, always maintaining easy suction.
And if in the blood there is thickening, then it's advisable to puncture twice; in the first instance, open the pathway for filtration of blood and fluid. And in the second stage, examine the acquired extraction of thickened blood.
And if the blood is highly viscous, then it's done that way to achieve the last stage.
And gradually, when we want to extract blood little by little or a small amount, until we achieve one puncturing.
And if we want extraction of thick blood, puncture with thick puncturing; and if we know that the blood is viscous, then it's wise to puncture through wave-like puncturing.
And the term of puncturing until the depth of the thread is only as much as necessary.
And if for someone whose thread is thick, hard, dark, and their veins are strained, it's wise to apply the cupping locations gently, widely, with more resolution; during summer time, you might use oil of Aloes or oil of violet, or oil of lemon zest, or oil from poplar; and in winter months, then consider oil of narcissus, or oil of linden, or oil of chamomile, or blood, alongside those corresponding areas.
And if the excess is thick, hard, then consider using turpentine oil, or oil of Balm, or oil of Aloes, or aniseed oil, alongside those corresponding areas.
And if the cupper has large veins with thin flesh, it's advised not to use oil, and consider using water or jasmine-scented water for washing around the areas of cupping near the cupping process, or water from lemons, or water from onions, alongside those corresponding areas.
And for the one whose blood has a moisture content, wash his/her cupping areas with vinegar, or water infused with mint and sumac, alongside those corresponding areas.
And for the one whose excesses are thick, wash his/her cupping areas with old vinegar, or water from sage (which is a type of mint), that is majorana, or from decoction of anise, or chamomile, alongside those corresponding areas.
And it's wise to have cupping done before bathing; in addition, consider providing rest from the water for an hour or two after applying cupping, and allow sleeping near the cupping.
What is necessary that should be regulated before performing a blood-letting physician prior to cupping.
And when considering at the beginning: then if the cupper or the one who needs blood-letting has a fiery disposition and the blood is very hot and inflamed, it's wise to take cooling remedies, such as vinegar salads, lettuce with vinegar dressing, milk, quassia, julep, and alongside those corresponding areas.
And feed them with foods like fowl, game meats, cooked with herbs, and foods resembling theirs.
And for those whose complexion is pale, advise them to drink hawthorn tea or tea made from the ashes of burned nuts, and sumac; and that they be instructed to limit their intake of water and food, and serve fowl, hemp, rabbit meat, cooked game birds and doves.
And have them drink more in windy weather and during bloodletting than the food they eat.
And have them drink for some hours before certain men take Tyrothricin or muscle medicines, such as magnesium or calcium, or in front of windiness or before bloodletting or nearby, so that their main members may be comforted and the pain become subtle; and do not have them take this scraping.
May the windings that are cuts be woundings made over the stomach and gout, and on the navel, in the places of joints, and on the pubis area; these members do not endure cutting wounds upon themselves.
And it should not be desired by those for pain from member wounds, such as suction on the breasts in lactation disease of blood discharge from the milk glands; and use that to dissolve windiness that thickens body fluids, such as suction on the abdomen and navel; which stiffens the member and relieves the pain that solves windiness.
And when it is sucked over the lungs if they happen to be filled or overflow, through the force of suction the patient empties and removes the phlegm from its place.
And similarly when it is sucked over the stomach and liver, it relieves windiness in those confined places.
These suction treatments are administered regularly with oil alone; some are given with fire.
And some treatments involve water baths in milk diseases.
And that is why the suction is full and produces a lot of pus, so it's plain water or water with herbs suitable for the water.
Procedure for applying suction with heat: make the size of the opening like two fingers, according to how we have made it; and the amount of heat should be as much as a palm's length; place it at the left side, in the location on the circuit, the full length of it, let the tube be small according to the quantity that enters one needle.
An incision is made of elderberry or citrus, with large cuts, lion's, equal and round ones, in such a way that does not allow the member to move its position upon it.
And at the highest point of the cross-section of elderberry or iron, where a candle is placed over the fire.
And this suction is much larger than that which we have described; and the slight amount of medicine according to milk diseases and the state of whoever uses it.
And the suction cups for children and exhausted people are different from those for young adults and larger individuals.
And the quality of applying this suction cup over the member is to spread the heat from the firewood decently in front of a small candle of beeswax, and place that on the middle point of the cross-section at the middle location of the suction cup, so that the fire may be lit near that part to prevent burning the patient's body.
And it should be placed over the patient's member, and let there be only the one we have said about on that tube; when having suction cups and they do not require the one we said to remain and vaporize upon that tube, then that suction will soon dissolve.
And according to their custom ignite the firewood, and repeat this if you need more of that.
May be in suction therapy for milk diseases where there is no cross-section or tube, and only water is used, it is not administered unless it is full of water, and placed solely over the member.
And this is how it is for it: and this suction cup, the larger it is, the better, so that it can receive a large amount of water.
Chapter XCVII.
Bloodlettings are not administered on swollen members but in the members where it is impossible to position suction cups, due to their smallness, such as the buttocks and gums, or similar ones; or on naked member of flesh, such as that one and nose and similar.
And the quality of using those that you have found bloodletting suction cups in the watery bases of pus-filled areas.
And they should be left in water for the day and night until they subside, and ensure no cause of infection within those stomachs; and they should be evacuated from the body during bloodletting and suction treatments; and they should be rubbed on the patient's member until it turns red; and they should be placed upon them.
And as they are full and in case.
And if oil from the area can be applied with suction, it is better to do so during youth.
And if not, then wash the area with warm water and afterwards use a poultice of water; and it should be rubbed and squeezed.
And if the patient's chest has extended towards the location of the blood vessels, and they are causing a build-up, then you immerse a cloth in cold water, and place it over the area where the discharge occurs.
And if the sickness is multiplied, then apply over them vitriol that has been trisulfated, or similar substances to those of the stiptics, until the sickness subsides; or let the seeds of boiled fava beans be laid on the area, and leave them where the fava beans adhere, and when the sickness subsides.
And if necessary, perform the operation of bloodletting, whenever it's possible to move those parts.
And if bloodletting is forbidden by suspension, then rub the area with recent sickness or place a needle in the areas where the sickness causes pain; and keep them in that position, so as soon as any pain is felt, it lifts immediately.
And when you want to relieve them, apply a little of powdered castor oil or salt or ashes over those areas, and cauterize immediately.
So begins the treatment for the latter part: restoration. This chapter discusses necessary operations in the art of medicine; it is about the restoration of fractures and accidental dislocations in bones.
Oh, son, realize that many doctors and common people, as well as those who do not deserve the works of the Ancients or read them even a single letter.
And for this reason, this method of the scholars in our land is privatized; and I have not forgotten what deserves attention over time; and I have not cited anything that was acquired, but rather due to the length of reading from the works of the Ancients and studying their understanding, extracting knowledge from those.
And let him direct towards experimentation and study throughout his life.
And I have described in this chapter all that concerns my science and on which I have conducted my experiments; thus I will abbreviate this for you others and deliver it from the occupation of lengthening; and abbreviate it at the end of abbreviation; and show it at the end of declaration; and form it into various forms of disturbances that are administered in those, as was done with declaration, so as I did in two preceding chapters.
First chapter.
The summary and collections from the essence of bone fractures, from which it is necessary to start before we begin recalling fractured members and various ones for each. Therefore, let us call in the prologue of this chapter the summaries of speech; and the chapters whose understanding leads the craftsmen to begin with the art and stand on the truth of those; these are you and those who are quick to know or learn this noble art from others.
And thus say that when an accident happens to a bone fracture or dislocation or twist or compression, then you should consider at the beginning for bloodletting or applying something cooling there, or any other time, if no contraindication is present, such as vertigo, or it's where the accident occurs, or rather in decrepitude, or it's a time of strong heat, or of strong coldness.
And then be content with food of herbs in cold water and rabbit meat and crabs; and prohibit large meats and fill yourself up with foods and all foods that fill the veins with sickness, so you are safe from a boil if you have a cautery ready, and if you don't fear an effusion in the body.
And then return the patient to their original position as they usually are.
And when the broken bone begins to be restored, then you should feed the patient with nutritious foods that are heavy and dense in consistency, such as bread cooked in water, rice, apples, fish, belly of cattle, hoes, fresh meat, and similar things, and on this regimen there is coagulation of pus from the fracture more gently and well.
And know that the bones grow when they are in the young adults and in the elderly, it is not possible for them to be continuously growing according to their nature by drying out their limbs.
However, nature adjusts and connects over all the broken bones throughout every cause similar to gum in which thickness adheres and strengthens it while they are being coagulated and solidified, within periods of becoming stronger and tougher at the beginning, so as not to prohibit any cause during his work.
And for this reason, it is necessary to stop the foods of the patient, those that have heaviness, viscosity, and thickness as we have said.
And know that the species of fractures are various according to the diversity of bones, a fracture of the jaw bone is different from a skull bone fracture; and a foot bone fracture is different from a thigh bone fracture; similarly, all other bones are different among themselves.
And I will conclude with a recollection of every species of fracture, detailed in its chapter separately from the others.
Various types of fracture within the body. Various types of bone fracture occur in their joints; some are curved fractures or those that happen in the stars; and sometimes, fractures occur according to the length of the bone: these include fractures related to the back and stars as well as non-related ones, such as when writing is prepared, there is a fracture at the tip and disruption in the head, and there is a small crack fracture.
And for every type, there is a specific remedy in the restoration according to the memory of each one distinguished in their places.
Various signs of bone fracture. And thus, the bone fracture is known: it is the twist of it, and that prominence and appearance to touch sensation, and those when you press on it with your hand.
And therefore, when there is no apparent twist or sensation when you touch it while pressing the bone during your palpation, and the patient does not experience much pain, then it is not here that the fracture occurs.
It is possible that there could be a twist or small crack, where you must palpate the area with your hand and during compression of all sides; make a pause about it considering the medicines which have memory to that moment which corresponds to that place; and then straighten it through subtle constriction.
And know that when the place is curved and does not split into two or otherwise does not occur in the back, as it swells up entirely from its circumference, then you should begin correcting your time starting with where the inflammation appears from the cautery burn.
And if there appears a burn blister at it, then smooth that for several days until the blister disappears; and then equalize that according to any method you can use for elevation and treatment.
And know that the restoration and realignment of it is a more delicate task than when you encounter back in bone.
And then strengthen it according to the memory of this remedy.
If in the bone it's back injuries, then an extension of this broken limb from two parts is necessary, whether it be the hand or foot; or with your hand if the member is small; or on two strings or with one string and a hand.
And if you place your position at which you pause the limbs at their equal according to their natural figure, while spreading the parts from the broken member, then make sure that you return those additions on your own and according to any method you can apply in their places.
And watch to ensure that you don't cause damage to the patient due to your action or injury during operation; and make sure according to your ability that you apply one bone against another in its best forms, as they are companions.
And know that during that useful time you touch it with your hand, and if you find any different cause here, correct that and equalize it according to the quantity of your virtue.
And avoid excessive extension and compression, as some old doctors do when performing operations that can lead to burn blisters due to their actions, or cause contraction in the limbs, as we have seen this through their operations.
And the quality of the constraint of the broken limb is what I've prescribed; for you should know that limbs are diverse in their smallness and largeness and in the shape of those.
And among those that are small, like the arm and similarly easy ones, then know that the envelop should be of thin elastic fabric.
And those that are large, like the thigh or chest, know that in such cases there should be a firm and hard envelop, so that the elasticity of the material connects to the large and strong limb from all sides with equal constraint, as it does not allow for marks.
And then begin your process of equalization, make a moderately comfortable pause at that, above the site of that fracture with three envelops or four according to which member it is; and strengthen your hand slightly on that membrane.
And then go to that part closer above the site of the fracture, and strengthen gradually so as not to cause your constraint where you have strengthened the site of the fracture. And then lengthen a little the envelop at the site of the fracture, and gradually soften the constraint as you take hold of a large portion of the place.
And then take another bend and envelop that other wound over the broken site with an envelop, and then go to those envelops closer to the last part of the fracture; and in your operation focus on constraint and softening in the envelop as we have mentioned in the first envelop above.
And then place between the arches of the foot a cloth or strip on which matches the curvature of the fracture, if there is curvature in it; and if not, do not press any cause in it.
And then place another object upon it, and properly cover these star-shaped envelopes just made, if there is no inflammation or abscess in the area. Then place on that which contains the abscess; and let that one rest for a few days; and then strengthen over those stars.
And let the stars of the cane's tip be made in red, or formed wisely. Or they may be made from wood, or from palm leaves; and each star should have this size and shape:
However, ensure that the star placed over that fracture is much thicker and smaller than the other stars. The length of the star according to its size and fineness as read in members; then strengthen on those stars with another object according to your first stricture; and place them decently upwards according to what we said about stricture, it being your stricture more according to the location of the fracture, and the longer you extend from the fracture, heal the stricture.
And let the threads be medium in thickness and fineness, and use many of them. If the threads are thick, like I've seen during an operation where others placed those cord-like threads during stricture, that's a great mistake, when it was equality with respect to stricture.
And thin threads are not convenient because you will not be able to achieve the stricture with those that you want. And let there be no more than one span between each star.
And if the patient is laid out at the ends of the stars near the stricture in their locations, then place these on the foot or with padding inside that will not harm them.
Some fractures occur due to disease and disruption in the chain, and I will come back with a reminder in that respect in the Capitol according to uniqueness.
And know that not every broken member should be strengthened with stars on the first day; the reason is that when the member is large it may not allow you to press onto the stars but rather around three or seven days, or more, according to your confidence of a potential abscess.
And this is the method of the plasterers among which the ancients worked, who placed them over fractures, dislocations, and twists.
The method of plastering as briefly explained in the restoration of fractures, suitable for complicated issues and mostly for women and children, which should be done on what does not receive heat or friction: and you take corn flour powder, which is the essence that floats out from the movement of the grains in the walls of the mill.
And do it like this, rather than sifting it with egg whites, and apply the preparation not thick or fine; and then use that.
Another method for treating fractures and dislocations: mix assafetida, lapdanum, acacia, anula, and myrrh, which is prepared with one thousand grains of salvage, all weighing a drachm each; add five drachms of frankincense and thirty drachms of aloes; use twenty drachms of almond oil or album from the egg if the patient's skin is irritated; then apply this plaster, which has good composition and restores broken bones slightly, and strengthens men's muscles.
Another method for plastering which helps with fractures and twists: mix myrrh and white alum at a ratio of one drachm each, frankincense and crocus root in the ratio of five drachms, acacia in the ratio of six drachms, and Armenian madder in the ratio of twenty drachms.
All these are ground in the mortar with the twisted matter, they are sifted and mixed with water or egg white and then administered.
Method of treating joints and bones detached from their places, and accidental pain occurs in those and at cracks and fractures: take wool thread, immerse it in warm vinegar and oil, then place it on the area.
In this plaster, not just restoration is present, but also an application of a cautery and expulsion of pains properly.
Another method of plaster that restores broken bones: take fig leaves and poppy leaves; mix them together and make a plaster from them.
A shortened plastering method for administering restoration of bone fracture and when you want resolution of the remaining pus: use essence of aloe vera, chamomile flowers, violet flowers, flour from poppies, all in equal parts. They are three times wine and one cup of vinegar, if the member has not been cut.
If it has been cut, then use water infused with elderberry or just water and apply it accordingly.
Another method of plastering pus for quicker resolution than the first one, when an abscess occurs and requires bone restoration: use aloe vera essence, garlic seeds, dandelion, honey suckle, wild pansy, chamomile flowers, all in equal parts. They should be three times and then each cup with water from artichoke or twice with water or wine, according to the quality of the member and the color of its rest.
Ypocras does not divide in his free text that should be placed on the flaccid limb requiring restoration, so a cerotta (a kind of bandage) is made of wax and oil rather than any other reason; it's recommended to keep it at a medium consistency between coarseness and fineness.
Gualia is seen as being placed over the broken limb for its restoration and among the causes of which drying occurs due to quality heat are such like myrrh, ashes and resemble those reasons that we have recommended.
A plastering method that alleviates injury and pain: use powdered ashes, burnt bones or elm bark, aloe vera, salt, all in equal parts. They should be ground, sifted, and then mixed to make the plaster.
The quantity depends on how much inflammation is and should be slightly reduced; you need to consider if there was no pain or swelling, nor has the bone been broken, then it's not moved for several days. And if there is strong pain or swelling at the spot, then you should treat it immediately or move that (the affected part), and keep your plaster on it.
And take linen cloth and a sea sponge that is wet with vinegar; immerse that in warm water, then wash the affected area until the pain stops and the pain is soothed. Then lay down to rest for an hour; place over it wool thread immersed in vinegar and oil or boiled oil, cover it overnight until you are sure of using a cautery, and ensure the swelling of the limb subsides, soothing the pain.
And then gradually loosen that tightness with small plasters and do not strain your first constraint, apply them gently until it is healed.
And if you notice that the pus and rigor and pain and swelling and all accidents have already subsided completely, and you need neither plaster nor constriction, then proceed in this way as you did at the beginning evenly.
And if there is no cause for the limb from those we have mentioned, then do not move it but wait approximately three to four or five days. And some of these treatments should be left for twenty days according to how it appears from the ease in moving the limb, as we have said, until the fracture adheres and settles into the coagulation of flesh over there.
And then adjust the constriction more than in your first constriction overall, and adjust to the increase in the thickness of the meat's artery, according to when memory returns for you.
And if you notice that the fracture site has dried and weakened more than it was before, then know that nutrition can no longer reach there; hence, cover that with vinegar water throughout your treatment. And do this for all three days. Then slightly adjust the constriction, and through this operation to the limb brings about nutrition, it is healed lightly.
As the people who restore bone fractures in limbs do another treatment when it is not restored properly from the beginning, according to how it progresses and is restored according to its curvature, this is an error according to their operations, causing great fear; if one follows these instructions to widen the old ones in their texts and applies them to this work.
And I have not seen any of theirs do that, for which it is more reasonable that this does not happen.
Section Two: About fractures when they occur in the head.
The types of fractures are impacts and their figures are various, and the causes are distinct. Some fractures are caused by impact from space, where the impact stays throughout the bone inside the cranium, which leaves the bone alone; as if it were in the shaft, and for this reason, this type is named 'ascial'. Or the space hits a part of the bone, hitting the flesh of the body without passing through its rear end. And this kind of fracture is called absolute elevation.
The size of these two fractures is either large or small, and concerning the type of fracture - one that is compressive or expansive. The cause for this involves impact upon or striking into bone, and they resemble each other in their appearance.
And this fracture is one that nearly reaches the eye socket, leaving damage to it; or it occurs within the bone itself. The size of these types of fractures can either be large or small.
And when the fracture occurs within the bone, in its subtle depth like hair, thus this type of fracture is named 'capillary'.
And this is the fracture that occurs through impact or striking of bone, resembling it in appearance, causing some layer of the bone to enter into the parts inside, and it occurs at the concave area like what happens when there's an impact on nails resulting from their striking, with the exit part entering into the parts inside.
And this type of fracture mostly occurs in wet bodies, such as children's heads.
And among all these types of separated fractures, they are like stars that are separate. And I shall recount all this in its proper place.
And I know all these types of fracture through their detection and examination, as well as the investigation into their causes and symptoms of corrupted flesh that are present on them.
And the capillary type is known for being revealed on the bone, and it is cleaned off, and its edges are inspected, whereupon a black fracture appears.
In the treatment of fractures, consider the patient's condition, and if any symptoms indicate clear meaning related to health loss, such as vomiting due to cholera, swelling, loss of understanding, vocal obstruction, fainting, acute fever, nasal irritation, discomfort in those areas, and signs of conditions in major positions. Indeed, they are not healed.
And if you encounter non-accidental symptoms, you expect health, then you start the treatment for them.
And the reason is that when you come upon a patient in their condition as they are, especially during winter days, then you should study at the bone's edge on the twelfth day for complete position.
And if it's during summer days, then you should examine the bone's edge on the seventh day, because what is left of the bone after being damaged by the eye socket, and accidents that we have recounted can occur.
And if the fracture has already reached the eye socket, affecting parts that are narrow and expansive, then you should insert the divided part and rub it as I will instruct you.
And this is when you examine the head of the patient that is affected, uncovering upon the bone according to custom and manner as possible for you depending on the shape of the injury, and it should be lighter on the head.
And if this occurs to you, you must detect the bone, pus from infection or abscess formation, then you oppose against it according to what suits. And you fill the place with draps soaked in an infusion and rubbed oil, causing rest for the injury inside until the abscess is numbed; and be sure of blood flow; then start around the circumference of the bone and in its removal.
And this should follow one of two operational methods.
And the first method is that you insert the bone with a straight incision instrument, and this is its form: Then you administer another incision tool, one slightly later than the first; and this is its form:
And then administer another incision tool slightly further than the second one.
And you should know that there are various names for different incision tools, some of which are longer than others; and some of them have shorter blades compared to the others, and they end in a sharp point. They can be made from iron or steel.
And use them with ease in impact on the incision for not damaging the head and causing injury to it.
And if the bone is strong and hard, then you should pierce at the circuit in front of it before administering any incision tools at its tunnels; these are named as tunnels that do not go deep.
They are not named so merely when they do not reach the end of the bone's test bed up to that which is close to it, for then at the tunnel there would be a rounded end or margin over what remains of its sharp head similar to a margin or small circle. This must prevent being submerged and going beyond the thickness of the bone.
It is advantageous for you to use a large number of these tunnels, each of which corresponds to the thickness of every bone, while having the tip of this tunnel be sharp at all times. The quantity in length and width should match the thickness of this particular bone.
This is the method for three types of operations: when you are piercing through the bone's fracture line, you place the instrument on the bone and move it back and forth with your fingers until you know that the bone has penetrated; then adjust the tool to another spot, and hold it in such a way that all the quantity of the thickness of the ray or approximately this is removed.
And then you should insert the instrument in such a way that it is between each slice of the bone, making a delicate pus under it as you lift it off, just like we have said, while excavating the bone, or with your hand, or using any other tool with which you might be equipped, like small forceps and similar instruments.
And ensure that with all caution, the cutting instrument does not touch any artery.
And when you have perforated the bone and separated it from the artery if this continues in the patient, and extract it, take care to press and equalize that on the roughness of what is inside the bone at another instrument similar to a cutting tool, but rather use one that is more coarse and delicate than other cutting tools.
And if there is any piece of bones that escapes and sticks, then take it with ease on the part where you are supposed to work with instruments; then treat the wound with lint and ointments as we have said.
And the other method of operation is easier and far from pain, as Galien and Laузec performed with great skill; this is what he said: it's necessary for you in the beginning to start uncovering the part of the bone in the spot where the fracture is more violent and more obvious. Once you have discovered that part and placed your hand on the tip of this instrument that moves slowly and happily, here's how to proceed:
And that the conical part is hard and does not touch any organ, while the sharp part is at your fingertips in two directions along its length, as you have seen; that the conical part should be close to the artery against the face of the sharp part when it meets the bone.
And then strike the cutting instrument from one side with a slight force until you cut all the bone at ease as it has moved, and be sure of your balance so that it doesn't hit in any way the accident you fear; indeed, if the surgeon14 was the root cause of all these things and the most ignorant of them; certainly, if he was asleep.
And when any organ attached to the bone of the patient is broken in certain parts of the bone, strike that from you at the tip of this conical instrument, and remove it easily; what is removed from you is free of your nerves and arteries.
And if the bone's fracture doesn't penetrate into the skin, and what is separated or remains of the bone is its surface, with its roughness and delicate parts, then take care to smooth that roughness and eliminate those delicate bumps with small razors you have prepared for this purpose, in various quantities so that it's possible for you to apply these according to their convenience and use the right pus from them as per where you lose your operation on this broken bone and its figure.
And ensure that when you start to manage the bone with your razors, you use more of the coarse pus from those razors. Then proceed using the delicate pus of it, and don't stop doing this until you've been able to administer the coarse pus and the delicate pus of all these.
And similarly in any other small blood vessel or subtle fractures, ensure that you provide treatment according to what you lose when correcting it.
And this is why the treatment isn't applied over all those who have studied in that art. And we have shown on what we've written about large fractures.
And if the skin gets stretched when you excavate the bone, then take cloth according to the size of the wound, immerse it in oil rubbed on, and place it over the wound's opening; and then take another piece of cloth folded or triple-folded, immerse it in vinegar and oil rubbed on, and place this over the first layer, providing a gentle pressure that doesn't hurt the artery. And then apply lard to this area, without pressing too hard, just enough as per what is required by the wound alone.
And leave it with this treatment for one or two days until you are sure of the abscess rupturing; then remove it and start administering medicines that prevent excessive drying, such as linseed oil, flour of wheat, powder of ashes and aristolochia, and other similar remedies.
And it's that you use this medicine as powder to be sprinkled on the wound when they are dry; in general, administer to that all medicine with properties which should cleanse and not irritate.
And observe according to your wisdom that the wound in your treatment should be clean; and it should not be in the viscera of ointment or any other place; nor let you introduce toxicity there; when placed on the skin membrane, it corrupts it and poisons that area, leading to a malignant mischief near the patient.
And it happens at the artery of the head, as in this case when dealing with the bone and especially if the treatment is improperly applied, there appears a dark color on its surface; thus consider now if any mishaps occur to the patient that we've said, know that they are harmful throughout.
And if there is no occurrence of blackness but only due to the medicine that has been applied upon it, and it results from the effectiveness of that medicine causing that blackness, then you should take a portion of honey and a part of roasted oil. and place those lines on a cloth, then apply that to the head; and prepare a cure with the spices of medicine so that it becomes healed.
Take three parts.
For the restoration of the nose when it is broken.
Know that the nose is not broken but rather two parts at once have pierced upwards, or one of those occasionally ruptured ones, through where there are two bones in you, and the part left is cartilaginous, not broken, it does not hit you but causes inflammation and deformity and nasal obstruction.
If only one of the two parts is broken, then you should insert that small object into your nose, and adjust that fracture internally to your thumb's indication, and also on the outside of it, so that when it returns the nose follows its natural figure. And do this yourself with ease, and watch that you don't damage the patient further with your operation.
And if the fracture is in the upward part of the nose, and your thumb doesn't reach there, then you should equalize at the tip of the ray where there is a small thickness.
And if the fracture is in two parts, then you should make as though to do this.
And restore him with the treatment of his nose on the first day of the fracture if possible; otherwise, wait about seven or one-third of the duration for pus to form after cauterization.
And insert a piece of cloth near the tip of the nose if the fracture is in one part or place two cushions, if the fracture is in two parts. In the cushion(s), fill up with as much thickness as fills your nose's nostril(s).
And do as some ancient restorers instructed that the cushions be enveloped in a bandage, and are changed every day, but I can't see it done; you should have the cloth be enveloped in egg white mousse mixed with powder of ground bones; then let each cushion soften until the bone is set and the cartilage becomes hardened.
And some ruptures should be inserted into the nose instead of cushions, risking an accumulation of pus enveloped in a lion's skin cloth; and if you already have nasal fracture with intense pus, so that the patient cannot breathe.
And this treatment is not necessary for you; if you want to, do it like this way, and if you prefer, do cushions.
And if another pus-filled cauterization occurs, plaster your nose with cerotic or with a fat-oil mixture, or with vinegar.
If there is no cauterization pus, then you should plaster that outside with saffron flour and with bone powder mixed with egg white; and place a lion's skin over it, and do not disturb the nose for any reason.
If the bones of the nose are broken in minor fractures or they are constricted, then you should split over them, and remove those with instruments suitable for them; and prepare the incision area, and cure that with what promotes flesh formation and consolidation, and with plasters that are appropriate.
And if an inflammation occurs inside the nose, then you should treat that with cushions and administer lead tubes until it is fully healed.
Take four parts.
For the restoration of the jaw when it is broken.
When the jaw bone is broken and the fracture is not due to inflammation, look if the fracture is only external, and is not broken into two parts but curved inside, in which case its perception is mild.
And then do this: if the fracture is in the right side, insert your left thumb into the patient's mouth; similarly, if the fracture is in the left jaw, insert your right hand's index finger. Guide the curvature of the fracture inside with ease towards the outside parts from the other hand's side of the bone; do this appropriately on both sides.
And if the fracture of the jaw is already separated into two parts, then you should administer extension to both parts according to rightness until it is possible for their equilibrium.
And if there is tooth pain accompanied by dislocation, then strengthen those you expect to break into gold or silver or glass; place a plaster over the broken jaw and also on the cloth, another cloth in a decent diamond pattern, or a piece of wood as long as your jaw; then lay that above according to how your tooth sensitivity is perceived and make sure it fits for application so that it isn't destroyed.
And command the patient to rest and be calm, also pause his food for lion's service.
And if you estimate that it has been altered in some way, then do this and loosen that on the third day; and correct whatever has been altered of him and plaster him with bone powder, with egg white, or with saffron flour, since you will have removed all his cerotic, and place a lion's skin wool over the plaster.
And then confirm that this plaster is attached to him, and the position of the bone is not altered, let it be, do not remove it until he is healed and strengthen the fracture; for this fracture should be strengthened in three weeks.
And if another abscess should happen after a pointed cautery, then administer what we have said about treated abscesses within their relief until it is healed, and remove that abscess again.
And if the fracture is in bone splinters, then consider whether they are separate pieces or stuck together, then you delicately remove those splinters with what suits and align them during their removal from the muscles.
And if the wounds of the plague are wide, then you enlarge them with the bloodletting according to the quantity of your need.
And when you have removed those splinters, and if that wound is not healed after, then widen the wound if it is wide; and if not, place one of the plasters that suits with this under it until it heals.
Capitation v.
Restoration in the case of a hanging scapula.
Treated abscesses involve breaking the scapula at the front of the joint, and this fracture occurs in three ways.
If it is broken, if it separates, or if it separates into two parts other than splinters; and this is easier for the restoration of it; or if it happens with splinters in you, and it is difficult for the restoration of it; or it is so that the fracture is in bone.
And the operation in that case, when the fracture is in bone, you must have two ministers present, so one has the assistant and follows the broken scapula, and the other extends the neck over that part.
And when you have corrected the fracture with your own words until it has taken on the form according to its context, and is not in a slight or concavity.
And if you need more extension, then consider that you place your hand on the patient's hip bone pocket with a cloth or wool padding, and its size according to the quantity of your need; extend and elevate the scapula and tighten the pocket with your hand until you correct the fracture as it extends.
And if you cannot pull the end of the scapula to the parts outside, then consider that it is turned upwards on its neck, and place your hand over the patient's muscle with a cushion of medium size.
And the minister places his hand on the muscle of the patient at the parts between them until the bone of the scapula is elevated as it is in front towards its back, and then you correct the fracture and align that with your own words.
If you feel splinters of the scapula and they are difficult to extract, then consider that you cut above it and remove those splinters with ease.
And if it is held in the bone, then you devise incision of it with one of the scalpels which you have equipped for this purpose, since you had placed your scapula on the muscle that serves the chest; and this is the shape of it:
And it is similar to a spatula of which this is the curvature; and its width according to what you need from it, according to the size of the bone or the softness of it.
Let the length of it be according to what is possible in the operation; that there are two ends thusly, and one end should be wide while the other is narrow.
And if the disruption of the wound you have incised when extracting the splinter from the bone is wide and there is a certainty of an abscess with a point, then adjust both edges of the wound for suture.
And if the disruption is small or you fear an abscess with a point, then use the wound with cloths and powders according to the quantity of the wound's cut.
And if an abscess with a point occurs, then apply a cloth soaked in vinegar and rubbed oil to it and place it over that.
And altogether, that the table does not get stuck under the broken bone; and consider that you see the hip bone every day, so when the swelling has softened or you see that the table is already hardened, then you correct this and strengthen the connection.
And then place the patient's head on their neck, and keep their heartbeat pulsation steady. You should have them sleep with a small pillow under their head at night; so that when they are in bed, lift the helper from their left side, thus lifting the fracture of the furcula muscle or having their arms hanging by their side.
And do not release the inflammation if it happens suddenly in that area or in an abscess, within about twelve days.
And then renew the plaster when you have seen the face of the patient to that water, and adjust in the constriction and restore it and smooth until the restoration is completed and the fracture of the furcula has coagulated.
And it is strengthened and made comfortable according to the month in twenty-eight days, and some people perform exercises at intervals of that time.
Capitol .VI.
Recovery from shoulder fracture.
A spatula tart is broken in the left side of the patient and it's not breaking the patient but only the margins.
And when it is broken in the patient's body - and it breaks in the middle of its body - and is not known except through touch, then according to what is the shape of the fracture forces you to prepare for it and reduce that according to the natural figure in all manner of art which is possible for you.
And then place over the spot powdered album from the hen's egg and stop the lion; and then place powdered flour of doubled cloth; and then place over the patient a stripe of thin table fabric according to the amount of the spatula, or more if necessary.
May it be so if the stripe is curved in some of the spots of the spatula, then you match that curvature with lion's wool, and then adjust the stripe according to equality.
And then strengthen from above with human saliva for digestion and from the firmness of the stripe until it is not swollen in its place.
And consider the inflammation on each day; and all times when it is softened, apply another time and strengthen it and adjust the stripe if it becomes swollen in its place.
And place the patient on their left side there.
And the spatula is restored in 20 days or in .25 (which might be a typo and could refer to 'and a quarter').
And when this number is completed, then you dissolve the inflammation, and that you know securely that that comes from the bones where it began should not be feared nor its dissolution.
And if you are dealing with the part of the bone and you place your thumb on it, then you divide over them, keep the thumb, do as we have said in the fracture of the furcula from the danger of abscess in the cautery, if it happens here.
Capitol VII.
Recovery from the fracture of the foot.
The foot, in some occasions, is broken in the middle of its body and that's how it fractures; however, the ends of it must not be crushed or broken.
And of the accidents when it is broken in its middle, it tends towards the parts inside and happens to it great pain, difficulty in walking, coughing, nausea and vomiting; and it becomes known in the cavity of the broken bone and is not hidden from sensation.
And the recovery of the foot is that you have the patient lie on their back and place a cushion between their shoulders; then press into the muscles of the body, adjust the ribs according to two pairs of ribs, refine in the operation, and do it according to every manner which is possible for this, so as it returns the shape of the bone according to its contour.
And then place over the body the plaster and cover it, placing a thin table cloth of leather or felt on top, so that you wrap that in cloth; then refine by spreading that over the broken bone without swelling; adjust according to roundness on the back for some times, strengthen with firmness of the bandage; and then consider the swelling at all times, and when it softens strengthen that.
And if necessity requires you to disintegrate that, or causes corrosion, pain, or abscess which happens in the area, then remove and release that, discard the plaster, correct whatever happens according to the method of treatment for this; and reduce the plaster, if you see that its shape has changed; adjust to the bandage until it is healed.
Capitol VIII.
Recovery from the ribs when they are broken.
Know that the breakage of the ribs happens only in large areas that resemble both; and from the ends of them on the front part, they do not cause that friction with those because they are cartilaginous. And knowledge of him is not hidden from your sense; you should inquire about his feelings, as well as his complaints.
And the restoration should be as swift that you widen the fracture in his bones according to possible methods, so long as it is contained when it's being pushed, and then apply plaster and strengthen the broken parts with metal plates, if it is necessary.
And if the fracture of the ribs is descending within, then it begets intense pain and puncturing in him, as with the pain that occurs when someone has wept or exerted themselves, and through this they place the metal over the wound; and he experiences difficulty breathing, coughing, and vomiting due to irritation. This type of injury has a hard healing process.
And already the Ancients were skilled in those remedies for motion sickness.
And they say among themselves: when you eat food in the stomach that causes inflation and wind, so that the abdomen becomes inflated and extended, and the fracture is pushed outwards.
May we avoid causing such an insignificant reason to generate a pus-filled blister; if it does happen, then help in that regard.
They say some among them that the wind should be held above and near to rub with strength; it's akin to reasoning, but indeed, it is feared that the wind carries excesses away due to weakness.
They say some among them: when the place is covered with wool that has already been immersed in cautery oil, and powders are placed between the ribs where it's full, to make the heat equal as you wrap that according to roundness; and then treat the patient with digestive grief relief medicine and remedies.
And if causing intense constriction makes the patient suffer, and metal is placed over the wound with a puncture made by teeth, we fear for the patient; then you should cut above the place, uncover the broken rib from the chest, and then prepare the instrument that follows this tradition, which I will use to guide the hand as I perform the operation, and remove it.
And when adjusting the two lips of the wound, if it's large, with stitches, and then treat that area with plaster until it heals.
And if pus forms internally, then you should scrape and insert powders in oil rubbed and place them on the spot, and treat the patient with what heals inside the pus.
And it's laid to rest over the side where he sleeps, until it is healed.
Capitol IX.
Regarding the restoration of fractures in the thoracic and cervical spine.
Some symptoms may indicate a fracture in the bones of the neck, and similarly for those affecting their ligaments, as well as for the thoracic vertebrae. And when this happens to someone and you want to know if they will recover or not, then consider this: if you notice their hands already softened, numb and dead, and cannot move, extend or strengthen them; or when you press those onto your own fingers or pierce them with a needle and do not feel any pain there, then understand that it is not healing, and during such states they are fatal.
And if you can move those and feel the constriction in your fingers and a piercing, then know that the neck of the bone is saved and that the patient will recover through treatment.
And if you see similarities with this in the thoracic vertebrae and want to know if it will heal or not, then consider his feet.
And when you notice that they are already softened, it's similar to what happens in the hands. If when touching your own back, you experience wind and loss of appetite according to their will; or if some symptoms show them lying on their back and trying to urinate but cannot, then know that it is fatal. Therefore, do not hope for his recovery.
If no cause of those happens, the cause is better and more minor.
And the treatment for this involves working on reducing the heat of the pus-filled blister you place on the ligament torn in oil rubbed, or with hot water compresses; apply this to certain points throughout the day until the heat from the pus-filled blister subsides.
And then place one of the plasters soothing and breathable, with strength over it; and instruct the patient to rest and remain calm and not sleep on the side where they find pain until it is healed.
And if it happens that the ligament of the bone is torn or any cause that separates from him, then you should cut through the chain and extract that bone; then adjust the two lips of the wound, with stitches if it's large; then treat that area with some ointment until it heals.
And if the end of the bone is broken in the buttocks, which is at the tip of the tailbone, then you should insert your right hand's palm into the buttock and widen the broken bone with your other hand as it can be done according to the second equation; then place over him a plaster and iron sand if needed; then strengthen that area.
And if you feel torn ligaments in him, then cut over that area, leave it there, and treat the wound with the treatment prescribed until it heals.
Capitol X.
Regarding the restoration of the girth.
The bones of the wide limbs are broken, and when they break, their fracture is merely communication at the extremities of those parts and inscribed along their length; it declines within; and happens to cause pain in the spot and piercing sensation, and the change becomes numb when there's a fracture.
And the restoration for him is that you extend your hand over that within which is above the fracture, which is the shape of him.
And if the fracture is only in the extremity of him, then you encircle that according to what suits you by equation inside which his shape is similar to its natural figure.
And if the fracture is in the length or that which declines within, then you have the patient lie on his belly under which your preparation for restoring that fracture is ready. And when you have encircled that, pause on him plastered, and place your hand on that spot of wood or bone, and strengthen with a tight grip on the one which do not fear piercing of fracture nor movement of the star.
And encircle the cavity with that which fills within where that receives a grip according to equality, and command the patient to sleep on his two or neglects his side.
And if pus occurs in the cauterized spot, then you cease extension of him and his restoration within which that pus is sedated, and pause on him that which sedates that as it proceeds; and soon return to restoring him, and strengthen that thus like a cover.
And if there's an issue in the mouth or teeth are broken, then you treat them.
Chapter xi.
On restoring a fracture of the assistant.
The assistant is that which is between the shoulder blade in front of the head of the shoulder.
And if it's broken, restoring him is in one of two ways, of which you take wooden planks of moderate hardness according to this form:
And if there are laths in both extremities two ligaments, then have that suspended from the elevated place.
And let the patient lie on one pillow; and place his broken arm outside over the pole until it reaches to his nipple in the middle part of which is attached the curvature of the pole.
And suspend above that something heavy or the doctor extends that over his own parts. And direct the doctor to examine the fracture with his hands where the fracture returns according to a cover.
And the other way is that the patient be raised on his own neck and suspend the collarbone over his ligament; and command two servants to each one of them have what is above the fracture with their hands; and the other holds his broken part. And let every one extend according to his own part.
And if you want the extension to be stronger, then strengthen over the fracture on ligaments and over that on another ligament, and each of the two servants extends according to their own parts.
And if the fracture is close to the extremity of the muscle, then cover it making half of the ligament reach to the nipple and the other part of the fracture place on the shoulder blade.
And similarly if the fracture is close to the shoulder, then cover it making the ligament reach that spot and on that shoulder.
Encircle that with ease and proceed the work, and when it's equal according to how you go and is applied by a good application, then strengthen that if there doesn't occur pus in the cauterized spot.
And if pus in the cauterized spot occurs, then smooth the constriction within on day seven, and pause on him with lint which has been gauze-bound on day four and oil rubbed inside where the pus rests, and then you strengthen that.
And the way to strengthen that is to place plaster on the fracture, and then pause envelopment of new cloth around the plaster; and adjust his arm over this assistant, and let his hand open over his own muscle.
And place the cloth and strengthen over this assistant his arm in case that his arm is at a location of stars, otherwise forbid from any cause of the broken bone.
And then use of stars.
And that is what you pause on over the fracture this star which is more ready and stronger than other stars; and pause between each star the width of the digit, and make the length of the stars according to the breakage with addition of three digits from every part.
And then strengthen over the stars on this constriction which I said at the beginning of the chapter.
And that your constriction over the place of the fracture be stronger. And when the pus is increased the fracture should be less constricted.
And then if you determine the position of the stars and the constriction as we have said when restoring the limb to its original position in the time you restore it, then do this.
And if you fear pus in the cauterized spot, then let the constriction and the stars be on day seven as we have said.
And then consider the ligament in all parts for three days so that nothing happens suddenly or swelling; or it's forbidden for food to reach the limb by disposition of excess constriction; and therefore correct everything according to what we have said.
And if you are confident that no cause will happen from this, then don't loosen the ligature but rather three days or more.
And let the patient lie on their back, and have their hands on their stomach.
And place on top a helper tray full of evenly spread wool, and consider at all times throughout the night or day whether the figure of the broken member is not dissolving or has not hardened, or if the ligament has softened; therefore, adjust this completely according to your skill.
And let the food of the patient rest according to the order in which we have placed them, ensuring that the food is subtle at the beginning so it strengthens; and then cook the food for him.
That the strength of the helper and the patient's leg lasts for forty days; then cook until they are tender, and administer baths which are medicated with ointments that correct this.
And if the fracture is already rubbed out, then do not disturb that ligament and wait between days or two months.
Chapter XII.
On the restoration of a broken arm.
An arm is made up of two bones which are called the humeri; one is small and it's called the head, and the other is large and it rests on top of the smaller one, coming out from below.
And a light break affects only the larger humerus, or the smaller one, and they both bend at times.
And when the smaller humerus is broken on top, then its restoration is lighter, and its healing is even lighter.
And when the arm bone is broken from below, the fracture of him is bad, and his healing is difficult.
And it's even worse when both bones break at the same time.
So if the bone that is broken is the small one from above, then it's convenient for the doctor to restore him, making minor extensions in order to facilitate its equalization until that point is reached.
If it's the large one that bends, then it's necessary to make greater extensions.
And if both humeri bend at the same time, then you should do the extraction more forcefully.
And make sure to place the hand figure for him while restoring his arm and extending it over a pillow, with his wrists above all else. Moreover, let your other commands be lower than that, and have his thigh hanging over a dropped seat.
And place a pillow in front of him at the height or inclination of his body, so that his thigh doesn't strain during work.
And then, the minister should extend the arm from below towards his own hand or ligament, and another minister should extend similarly upwards.
And then the doctor should align the bones so that they reduce according to the best figure that is possible.
And if there are any deformities in the bone structure, then you must reduce all of it to its place with your skill.
And if there appears any isolated deformity that interferes with the continuity and is not within your hope for restoring him, then you should treat him according to the method we have described above.
If the fracture is due to an injury, I have already addressed this in a separate chapter, and therefore take care of him from that point onwards.
And if it happens that an abscess appears at the beginning of your restoration, then you lay out a cloth with a wick made of roasting oil and white beeswax, making it between thick and subtle, and cover this cloth over him with a subtle bandage in which the abscess is allowed to drain; and then leave the wick on, and apply a plaster made from clay and butter powder, and place a star above that. And the star should be placed closer and more firmly over that fracture.
And know that the number of stars on the arm varies depending on the major dispositions, or whether the fracture is in one humerus or both at the same time.
And then place your bandage on the site of the fracture more firmly and more forcefully, and when it is as far up or below that fracture site, leave the bandage slightly damp according to the treatment you are following at the beginning of this chapter.
And the cloths that cover the fracture should be moist and damp, not hard or coarse, and the thread with which they are sewn is of a moderate thickness between subtle and thick, as we have recommended.
And consider the member and the ligament for some days. And if any cause arises that requires correction, just like what happens to the member itself, then you should immerse the member in cold water until that pain subsides.
And let the member rest without being strained, and then return the bandage.
And if the bandage has already softened and the bone has been reduced to those points, then correct all of this according to your skill.
And consider more if nutrition is prohibited from reaching the member due to excess bandage, then you should make that area slightly softer and leave it for some days until the nutrition flows towards that point, and then strengthen that.
If nothing happens to the thigh as those we have mentioned, then you should not allow it to be loose within about twenty days or roughly that period.
And have the patient's hand suspended by their natural flexibility of movement, and make them lie on their back.
Know that this fracture is restored within xxx days or in xxxii days, or a slight injury is restored within xxviii days, and all this depends on the constitution of the body and the dispositions of the nature.
Chapter XIII.
Regarding the restoration of fractures in the hand and fingers.
Know that in the hand and the joints of the fingers there is a kind of fracture, and it does not occur to them but due to wear and tear.
And when it occurs in the hand fracture or strain, then guide that the patient should lay on their back and in front of them stretch as equally as possible, and place the patient's hand over that stretched out.
And have the surgeon extend the broken bones and the doctor adjust those within them for good alignment.
And then guide that you place the plaster and the bandage, if it does not cause an abscess. And have the straw placed under according to the amount of space, and you have already enveloped that in a linen cloth.
If the twist is in the inner parts going into the palm, then make a semblance of a bowl of cloth, and command the patient to hold that against their twisted palm; have it strengthened with long cloth.
And if the straw of the heart is in the cloth on which it rests, so that the heart can be applied to the palm; strengthen that according to what you guide.
If the fracture is in the outer parts, then guide that you place under straw and another piece of straw for the part leaving on the palm, so that the hand can be opened and straight; have the constriction placed, as if the hand twists between the fingers towards the wrist.
And if it occurs a fracture in one of the joints of the fingers, then when you hold that finger down, adjust it according to what you guide and have it strengthened on the palm. If you wish, place a small piece of straw straight for making the fracture elevated and not causing pain.
If the fracture is in the other fingers, as in that of the middle section, or on the index finger, or on the ring finger, then adjust and hold it against that finger where you place that one; or they are all held straight in a continuous line, which is better; or place a small piece of straw over that spot, as we have said for the finger.
And consider in your restoration and nearby, the condition of an abscess caused by a hot application - during your operation - against what you guide when any cause of those occurs, according to what is repeated about it.
Chapter XIV.
Regarding the restoration of fractures in the thigh bone.
The thigh bone, worn out and broken, is felt to be converted into the part in front and above the knee.
And the restoration is done so that the muscle is strengthened over the fracture and other muscles below the fracture, and the patient lies on their belly and face.
And have the surgeon extend all the muscles to its part according to quality, when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
If it approaches the size of the thigh bone, then have the muscle approach to the back of the part of the femur, so that the extension reaches its length and the other muscles below the fracture.
And similarly if the break is near the knee, then make the muscle come to the back of the knee and let the extension be towards the parts below.
And have the doctor adjust the bone on both sides of their hands so that you reduce it according to natural similarity and the bones are joined for good connection; then guide that you place a plaster and a bandage if there does not occur any abscess in the limb. If it occurs abscess in it, then you let that rest for a few days until the abscess caused by heat disappears, and have you return to your treatment.
The bandage for it is done like this: guide that you envelop over the fracture a hard cloth, fold that two or three times, and remove any excess from it; then guide to envelop the part until it reaches the knee and the thigh bone.
And insert a long needle between the thigh and the area near the knee on the parts below, let the ends of the needle reach from the part behind to both sides, then guide to rotate around the area and thigh bone any excess from the cloth.
And have placed on the thigh at that fracture spot straw, and place another piece of straw over the bone in the area where the part is.
And have filled the gaps between the thigh and the knee with many cloths, so that the bandage can be clotted.
And have begun with a strong bandage in the middle over the site of the fracture with three or four coverings, and as you get further from the site of the fracture, your bandage should be smaller and more gentle and wetter.
And extend the ends of the needle to the parts below until it reaches the chest cavity, and strengthen both ends of the straw from the other part so that the muscle is not pulled out of its place.
And carefully massage the structure over that area, so that no injury occurs to the member, neither a cauterization nor pus formation, nor swelling; and if any cause of those happens, then prepare yourself for the patient's fainting, and correct whatever is happening nearby according to what we have discussed.
If there is a piece of bone in the mouth which can be placed, then carefully dig out such that you equalize it according to your ability; and if not, do so on him and keep touching it, and treat whatever precedes the remembrance within until he is healed.
And some discussions suggest that this break in the foot is strong like this other bone adjustment to your stars, as we said about the assistant and the arm.
However, in the restoration of this manner to the patient, no limpness occurs to the sick person; and if it is restored alone, otherwise than what is applied to his other side, then it is necessary that he limps for as long as it lasts.
And know that the foot is strong for about 10 days or a few months, and all this depends on the diversity of constitutions and other dispositions.
Chapter XV.
On the restoration of the break in the knee joint.
And know that the break in the knee joint is somewhat awkward to correct, but it usually causes visible deformities.
And if it happens to him that there is a break, then it is merely a crack or strain in his parts, and this is either an inconvenience or many inconveniences, and everything on this is based on the feeling.
And the restoration of this is such that what is broken in his parts should be equalized among these, and then added and connected as far as possible according to the principle of harmony, ease, and fabrication.
And then apply a plaster and press over that round star, if you need it from that; and strengthen above with the ligature according to what is convenient.
And consider all the arrangements that we have recommended in other breaks, such as cauterization and pus formation similar to those until everything that is convenient opposes any accident while he is healing.
Chapter XVI.
On the restoration of the break in the shoulder joint.
And know that in the shoulder joint there are two bones, one of which is thick and called by the name of the shoulder; and the other is delicate and is called easy.
And it happens to certain types of break which happen to both bones in the arm, and that is how he undergoes restoration like restoring the arm equally, and the operation for this is one.
And if two bones are fractured at once, the shoulder joint becomes affected in all parts.
And if only the delicate bone is broken, the shoulder joint affects the front parts.
And if only the thick bone is broken, you'll find it in that place, and those are causes not within your consideration.
And then administer extension, equilibrium, and ligature of the tendons according to that equalization.
However, if the break in the shoulder joint is distant and without visible symptoms, let the extension be gentle and favor your strength.
And in the shoulder joint there is an operation reason on the arm, which happens when you equalize your stars and complete all of your operation. In that case, you will take weights from the thigh bone, which are placed under the reasons that are paused on solid ground, and they are made from palm branches; remove those to which slight roughness applies, and do not use heavy hands, and have their length according to the length of the shoulder joint, and within the break for the arm.
And then envelop each area with two layers according to the length of the body, placing one over the shoulder joint on one side and the other on the opposite side, and they should be within the break inside the chest in a suitable location.
And align the two stars at three points of both extremities and at the middle point; for this structure is prohibited from bending towards the right or left part, it stays in good station.
And once a braid of string has been applied according to the length of the curvature; then place the curvature under it so that it retains its original movement.
And mostly make sure you do this in a fracture, and when you have that specific injury.
And consider for each day the curvature and study it thoroughly from later on, and protect it from pus or swelling or other similar causes; and when any cause of those occurs, then apply to it what prevents it until it is healed.
Chapter XVII.
Regarding the fracture of the heel and bones of the foot, as well as the fingers.
To the heel it does not occur to have a complete fracture; but in relation to the bones of the foot, there are some occurrences of fractures; and with respect to the fingers of the hand, few fractures occur, and they do not happen among them unless during the months when they are ready.
And if fractures occur in the bones of the foot, and sometimes those bones are lifted above each other, then the patient should place their foot on a prepared ground like this, as before.
And place one foot on that which is elevated from those bones, and press the others, and apply pressure evenly among them until they return to their original positions.
And then apply plaster and cover it up, and place the patient's chest on a small table with two cushioned seats.
And strengthen that part of the leg in relation to its natural descent; because you have enveloped that with cloths and other remedies.
And as three or four days pass for the patient, then you loosen the bandage, which you will find with bones evenly set, or if they are swollen or dislocated, and the operation is done in that manner just as you would know.
If some fingers are swollen, then restore those, and place them evenly as I have recommended to you in the restoration of the fingers of the hand. And place a splint on the swollen finger according to its length, and add just a little padding under it; then have the patient lie on this table as recommended to you, and strengthen that part in relation to its natural descent.
And if what is swollen is from the bones of two, three or more fingers, then place on each finger a splint wrapped in lion cloth, and strengthen the table at the lowest part of the chest, and while standing on one of the cushions under the table have the patient's chest so that it has good support.
And it is important for you not to forget that you should not consider all the causes, as we have mentioned in other fractures of accidents we've discussed; apply this principle to every situation where it applies.
Chapter XVIII.
Regarding the fracture of the thigh bone and the bones of the knee, as well as the knee joint of the body.
When the thigh bone is swollen, then make that settle into a downward position, and incline it slightly towards the right part, and have it held behind.
And then the midwife places her hand on the knee bone, and has it placed in the knee bone as she desires; and have the woman bent down, and lift each of her child's arms gradually. All this is done so that it faces forward towards the front part of the thigh as desired and the swollen bone returns.
And then place powders on her back, and when she wants to urinate, help her lift up the knee so that it can be done easily, and allow her to urinate. Then return that according to the method in which you have mixed it at the beginning, and return to her first powder.
And do this for seven days or roughly around those, until that is restored.
And if you wish, take an oyster shell and place over her thigh one of the hollows of the stomach; then immerse the entire bladder in her thigh, and blow into the tube with force so that the bladder is inflated inside the thigh, where the fracture returns.
And then fill it with the knee and stay like this for as many days as we have recommended, until it is healed.
And when the knee bone of a man or woman is swollen, then administer in its restoration and adjustment what we have recommended about the thigh bone.
And what is straight does not get hidden in these nearby fractures that seldom occur, especially when it comes to one with some study and understanding of this my free advice; for that fracture means to you in the major ways of mechanical direction in its restoration and adjustment, so understand well.
And in the knee of a man when it is swollen, take guard of it with a poultice, and place the knee in that; then cover him/her with a bundle of cloth, have it wrapped, and leave him/her for three days or roughly around those, until he/she is healed.
Chapter XIX.
Regarding the restoration of fractures when they are infected.
It is convenient in the case where you suffer from a fracture that is infected, especially if the bone is large such as the bone of the knee or elbow, or similar to those, then you should take care and use bloodletting on it immediately if your conditions for bloodletting are met or can be justified as we have previously mentioned.
And if the wound discharges pus, then take care to retain as much of it as possible that you dust over it with powder you mix with water, unless there is another cause not present.
And start to restore the fracture on that specific day, and do not prolong this treatment, if an abscess does not occur.
May it occur that an abscess forms, then let the restoration of your patient happen within the 7th day, until the abscess subsides, and do not approach this for a total of 4 days, where you will cause unnecessary mishaps.
May it happen that the broken bone is protruding over the uncovered wound, then take care to reduce and equalize that with your hands in facilitating and achieving a minimal extension.
May it happen that extension is not in your preparation and equalizing you with your hands, then reduce that with your hands using this tool; and this tool is made of iron, its length being 7 or 8 dits long or according to the size of the wound; and for this, a doctor must have three or four depending on how much this suits in the treatment for all types of fracture.
And if it's soft and also in that little coarseness for fear that it might bend, you should compress on it during the operation time.
And if it has an acute end with a margin on its ends; and the top of it is coarsely tensed, and inside the patient towards the parts.
And this is how it is in the patient:
It's named in Greek as "volentz atelarem" which translates to a small palette.
So that you ensure the end of your patient is raised above the protruding part of the bone.
And push that in a groove until the bone returns and is equalized with any equilibrium.
And therefore strive to equalize the ends of the fracture between them. If the broken end is subtle and does not take that tool well for access, then you should insert the end of that bone into a place where the instrument has power over this.
May it happen that you cannot reduce the bone to this extent as we have suggested, then cut that according to what is suitable for your scissors which we have mentioned; or cut that with one of the saws in any manner possible for you.
And carefully remove that which remains on the surface of the bone that is rough and thin.
And when the bone is reduced and during this reduction, the patient feels intense pain, you should know that the bone has not returned to its natural place. And then give your patient a good rest.
When your restoration to the bone is completed, then immerse a cloth in a black stoptic wine, especially if it's summer, and do not apply ointment or any other substance on the wound that might cause infection and erosion.
And after your completion of the restoration of the bone, administer ointments during that time, and leave the wound uncovered so that you cut it with a scalpel and use bandages according to the size of the wound.
And be careful to not let the wound touch the fracture, as cuts made this way by doctors often cause death or paralysis or severe pain in their patients, that is health. And if your wound is slight, soft, different from the stiffness of other fractures.
And if the wound is large or a bad wound, and you fear those other bad accidents that we have mentioned, and you feel pain in that spot, then do not assume to apply bandages there, but instead cover that with hard cloth instead of bandages, supporting your patient at that point.
And when about one or two days have passed and the wound begins to heal, let there be a bed for your patient under that cloth you laid on it with oil, and then administer calks, ointments according to our usual practice which medicate wounds, thus like tetrastarch and similar ones.
And it is important for you to loosen the bandage and assess the wound every morning and evening until it consolidates and heals, and so that the infection runs from your patient towards the parts left with ease.
If the wound takes several days and is not consolidated or detached from your patient's bed, then you should know that here are small delays due to which you need to examine the wound with care. And from those delays that are separated and are removed, those that do not separate and cause the member to suffer pain, strive to cut those according to what is possible for you.
And if the wound turns green or blackens, it's stenophthalamia or another kind of corruption and decomposition, then you should stop applying each one according to what is suitable for your treatment as there is a detailed explanation in its chapter regarding this.
And in the case where you need to use good judgment and prepare your presentation: when the bone is large and broken, elevate it like the bone of the thigh and auxiliary ones and similarly as those of large limbs, and do not presume to injure him, nor the removal that cuts lead to death; leave it there until it can settle in, which will fall down by itself after about 20 or 30 days. And then cure the wound if you see it, and if not leave that alone.
Chapter 20.
Regarding the treatment of dislocation that occurs in the aftermath of a fracture.
Dislocations occur in this dislocation during the healing of a fracture, especially close to joints, and is stretched by the figure of the limb; and strongly prohibit movement of its normal operation.
Then consider if the dislocation is recent and administer medicines that have a stopping effect such as those of aloes, onions, garlic, vinegar, and similar; you may take some or all of these, and confirm whether they are effective in stopping pain, or if they reduce inflammation, or improve circulation, and place these over the dislocation covered by cloth, and ensure good compression on it.
And leave the compression in place for several days without removing it; then remove it and replace another one until the dislocation is healed. Or apply a lead plate on top of that layer, as lead has the property to reduce whatever is inflamed in limbs.
If the dislocation has hardened and cannot be reduced naturally, then you need to make a small incision, and cut it along the upper part of the swelling, or remove the excess and prominent parts. Or apply some remedies inside until it is healed; then treat it while it heals.
Chapter 21.
Regarding the restoration of fractures when it is restored, and then allow that to happen according to the nature of each limb.
When a bone fracture is restored, and then you have to do this with the slight and flexible limbs, not according to their nature: from which there are several causes of disease. One is an excess of fluid in the muscles and the connection of what was done wrong; or by excess constriction of the muscles where nutrition can't reach the limb; or by excess grease causing inflammation; or by unnecessary movement at the wrong time; or due to weakness of the blood within the patient's body and due to debility.
And the treatment of this is to give strength to the patient and make the body of the limb tender where the blood multiplies within it; and apply baths; and insert oil and joy on it.
And then place honey on the limb, in order that the honey attracts its nutrition, or continue with the application of the oil mixed with hot water, so that nutrition can flow and return to its natural shape.
Chapter 22.
Regarding the treatment of fractured bones that are bent or twisted, and prohibit their natural operation when it comes to them.
When it happens that the limb has been restored and there is a deformity or prominence in the fractured bone and dislocation, thus changing the shape of the limb, however, the limb is not prohibited from its natural operation, so you should accept the word of the one who believes that this limb was newly broken.
Justly so are there many doctors and restorers who have done this in our land; and this operation is very reprehensible causing great fear in the sign of which it leads to death.
If there is weakness and dislocation are recent, then it must be treated with water containing herbs that soften, such as hellebore leaves and root extracts, and milkvetches, and similar; this should be applied to the plaster of a softening mixture like that used with colic. Or if it's taken from raw gelatine of hellebore and is cooled in gauze or with oil from cumin, then it should be applied covered with that one. Or if it's taken from fat fruits and strung with string made of silk, and similar; this must also be treated using medicines known as consolidating agents.
And sometimes it is dissolved by repeated light rubbing while wet, and should be administered by moving the limb throughout its entire body at all times.
If the deformity has already been there and was forced and hardened to become stiff, requiring treatment with iron, then you must dissolve what's above it and allow continuous bone to be dissolved, and cut off that excess from dislocation of that part in the bone using fine incisions, and should facilitate this treatment by diligence and study.
Chapter 23.
Regarding speaking on dislocations.
Dislocation is the displacement of any joint in its place, so it is forbidden to move, and it distorts the shape of the limb, causing great pain and serious injuries on the patient.
So when it happens with a dislocation, you must immediately puncture to reduce it, and not delay in reducing it, because if it is delayed, the place becomes inflamed and strongly resists the reduction of dislocation.
And for this purpose it should neither be too hot nor too cold during the inflammation phase, as several causes lead to convulsions and intense pain.
And when this happens, it must be treated with the mustard poultice of the patient, and then left for it to rest in the abscess; and the limb should be covered with warm water and oil, and immediately reduced with ease.
And the entire limb is treated with that which will recall its memory to its place.
And I have already organized the chapters of dislocation according to what is preceded in fracture; from the body part pus goes inside to the other part, leaving it.
Chapter XXIV.
Of the treatment of dislocation of the jaw, you leave it.
So, when the two jaws are dislocated and they do not touch; and the dislocation of both is done according to two ways: that either are slightly moved from their places by a little movement, and become somewhat soft; or are completely dislocated and completed, within which they make saliva come out of the patient's mouth and cannot have that nor can close their mouth, and the tongue of the patient is enveloped in its own saliva.
When the dislocation is slight, then in the larger positions it returns by itself due to a small cause.
When the dislocation is complete and full, then it must be that a gentle reduction of him be administered, and not be delayed at all.
And the minister must have the head of the patient, and let the doctor place his one hand on the point of the dislocation of the jaw inside the mouth if the dislocation is from one side; or insert both his hands at once, if the dislocation is from both sides, and the rest of the commands for the patient's hands are outside among which equalize; and command the patient to stop moving his jaws and let those move in any direction; and the doctor makes the jaw equal and thrusts the jaw back into its place.
And if the reduction of him is difficult, especially if both jaws are always dislocated, then administer evaporation with hot water and oil, within which a slight reduction of both takes place and does not delay the complete reduction of both, as we have said.
And therefore when they return and are equalized, and the mouth of the patient is closed and it is not softened, then place on those powders of drap in cerot, and make them with wax and oil rubbed; and let them be done in favor of softening.
And let the patient sleep on his back, his head between two pillows, so that he does not hurt either to the right or left side; and do not force him to have any cause by force; have his food be forbidden meat, within which when the pains are softened and the jaws are closed, then let him have whatever he wants.
And let this be administered in ease, and do not work on the edge of the mouth with eating, drinking, or blowing, within which the jaw is closed and healed.
And if the reduction of two jaws is difficult when they are dislocated in any hour and do not convert to their places, then mild fevers and frequent soda occur, and it becomes very clear that the patient's stomach has become inflamed, and it becomes very clear and experiences cholera vomiting.
And when you do this, then know it is loss; and mild fevers will kill the one to whom this happens within three days.
Chapter XXV.
Of the reduction of dislocation of the sternum and extremity of the muscle.
The sternum is not dislocated inside the chest by its continuity with the ribs; and sometimes it becomes dislocated outside of the part, which is declared by feeling.
And the restoration of him is that the patient lies on his back and extends his arms. And press the place with your hand with strong pressure, so it will return.
And press that area with plaster and powder, strengthening it.
And the extremity of that which is in contact with him does not become dislocated at all; so it must be reduced and equalized according to what we have said and according to your equipment.
And press that area with plaster and powder, and tourniquet, and command the patient to rest and have peace until it is healed.
And with this treatment of healing, the extremity of the muscle is reduced when it is separated from its place.
Chapter XXVI.
Of the reduction of the dislocation of the muscle.
Know that the muscle is dislocated in only three ways, of which one is that it is dislocated at the part of the nipple to the other side.
And the second is that it becomes dislocated at the top of the muscle, which happens suddenly; and it is not dislocated at the back parts by the shoulder; and it is not dislocated at the front parts by the nerves.
And it is especially dislocated and situated outside on the sides of the parts opposite to the nipple, and especially in those where there are few muscles, slightly dislocated; but in those with large muscles, it is located outside with difficulty.
And it often happens to some people with a blow or impact, and the muscle of him is puffed up from the pus pocket, and becomes dislocated by this already being dislocated.
Therefore, if you experience this while you are overburdened with him, then proceed in the treatment of him.
And when you know the dislocation of him which is at the sides opposite to the nipple; then distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the intact muscle, which you find among those obvious differences; and find in the head of the muscle a concavity and opposite to the nipple of the muscle as one year, and the patient cannot reduce his hand to his elbow, nor even that by all movements.
If it is dislocated, you should move or align it, and then you easily find it by palpation, not hiding it.
And for this dislocation, a slight reduction is performed when it is cold and the patient is in pain.
And the reduction for you is that the minister raises your hand to his parts above; then he holds your feet near you so, and lifts your joint with strength in its own place. The minister raises your hand, extends it there; then he pauses it near you so, causing it to return slightly.
And if it is not returning because of what we have said, which involves the cause that occurs in dislocation, for a few days, then prepare that the patient be bathed in hot water and be administered a salve that soothes and calms him so as if he were made from high-quality wool, fenugreek, and dill in water, and it should be administered.
And then have the patient lay on their back and place your hands under them while waiting for wool that is equal between lightness and tightness. And then the doctor places his arm over the lump, raises the muscle's head with strength, and pulls the hand of the patient so it doesn't get stuck in the parts below; another minister holds the head of the patient, making sure it doesn't get stuck in the parts below, until that returns to its place.
And if you wish, reduce that second in this manner: and make it so there is a man present who is longer than the patient, standing on his side next to him, inserting his muscle under the patient's feet while elevating the patient's feet towards the parts above where the patient is suspended in air, and another minister pulls the patient's hand from the parts below his abdomen. And if the patient is slight, then it's covered that another cause might be suspended by him, since due to his seriousness that dislocation returns immediately.
And when it is reduced gently in this other manner: and place on the ground a long stick with its head rounded in shape, like a mortar's handle, which should neither be thick nor thin, then have you place the patient under it; as they lay on the head of the stick covered with linen, and the patient stands according to the length of the stick, and have their hand extended towards the parts below the other side; and extend your body from the other side with strength, so that the joint returns to its place at speed.
And if reducing you is difficult due to all the causes we have said, then use this treatment: and take a stick whose length is equivalent to two arm lengths, its width should be four fingers wide, and its thickness should taper at the tip according to this form:
And then place linen rags on the rounded head so that the stick does not crush the patient.
And then have the patient place their feet under them, and extend their hands or arms over the stick between the parts below, and hold the stick on the support and the arm, and the end of the hand.
And have the arm placed on a ladder according to its width, and the hand extended towards the parts below. The other body should be suspended from the other side, so that the joint returns immediately.
And when the treatment of you is completed according to any method possible, then cover that you place under a wool cushion of equal quantity; and then place prepared plaster with powder of moly root and egg yolk on the entire muscle area, so it is mixed above. And then strengthen your hand at the tightness area decently. Then roll out the plaster, and the hand of you should be connected to your neck, and left alone, without causing any strain to your hand for seven days.
And it's covered that the food of the patient should be light during which time the member is comforted, as this is more favorable to their recovery.
And then the food should be given more to seven or five times and exercise is done. And so if it's closed and not softened, then it's already healed.
And if the joint is dislocated due to several days of moisture that affects it or by another cause, then it's covered that in that case, cauterization should be administered on three wounds, as mentioned in the section about cauterization.
And if all this is done and after seven days the ligament and joint are released, but the plaster and tightness are reduced on several wounds without being closed, and they cannot lift that arm towards the parts above, then you should know that your nerves, which are at the head of the muscle, have already been cut or stretched or softened, and you should know that the joint will not be fixed in its place for any amount of time.
For the dislocation of that which is caused by lifting or the breasts or parts behind, the reduction is performed with impulse and extension towards the chest, so that it returns.
And administration of the other tightness should be done, and treat that until it is healed.
And if the healing is greatly delayed in the limb and late with the movement of it, then the patient uses baths for several days until that heaviness is relieved and returns to its original nature.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
On the treatment for dislocation of the shoulder.
Know that the shoulder joint is dislocated with difficulty and similarly returns with difficulty; it has been dislocated in all directions, but mainly towards the front and back. The dislocation is not hidden when you feel it moving or touch it according to its specific position once dislocated. And when adjusting the dislocated shoulder, it clearly shows that the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm, nor touch it with its muscle.
And know that it's the shoulder bones; reduce the dislocation immediately before reaching its synovial pouch. If it reaches its synovial pouch, reducing it becomes difficult, and your healing is not complete; especially when it's in the back areas, which are worse than all other types of dislocation, causing intense pain, and wounds often result from that leading to death.
And the restoration of it, which is possible to reduce, is when your hand is extended between two breasts, and your arm is outstretched, and the doctor's hands are on the shoulder and under you, and he pushes the joint with the heels of his hands or against the base of his palm, where it turns back into its place.
If the dislocation is in the front parts, then it returns in this way by bending your hand against your hand, hitting the shoulder with the base of his palm.
And if the dislocation does not yield to reduction, then apply vigorous extension and forceful movements.
And it is that two assistants should extend the arms, and have this understanding with two assistants to prevent any resistance during extension.
And then rotate the arm in all directions, as it is enveloped by a folded long cloth around your hand, or tightly.
And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, apply oil to that for it helps in causing those factors which assist in the smoothness of the joint and facilitates it; then he pushes the joint vigorously until it returns.
And the reduction of it is that it should be placed on that soft bed where there is a stiffness and movement of fat in goose oil, and it should be stretched with a tight bandage; the arm should be suspended from the neck, and left for some days.
And then it should be released; and if the joint is formed in its place, then you release the bandage around it and leave that area.
And if you see that the joint is not strengthening, then you repeat the plaster and bandage, and leave it for some days until it is tightened; then release that area.
And if it happens that the gravity interferes with reducing the joint, and your position is in motion, then you apply moistening in bath and subtle friction, or compression, while it's being lubricated; or you place a smear of moving grass oil on the joint, on its soft skin; then bind it, and leave it over the bone during the day and night. And then hold that position, and place your shoulder in the bath; when it gets wet, then you rub the joint with a mild friction, and then apply it repeatedly on that area using a smear of moving oil, one time, and then the second, and the third time,. Corruption has already spread within the abdomen, into its limits.
And if you wish, place yourself on that wet and scraped cow's opening with strength on it; do this several times while it is still wet, until it returns to its position.
Chapter XXVIII.
On the treatment of dislocation in the forearm, which is between the arm and the hand.
Sometimes part of the hand is dislocated, and the reduction of this dislocation is easy. However, for other joints, it's different; yet it needs to be quickly reduced at the moment of dislocation before stopping or if there is a cauterization in that area.
And the reduction of this dislocation is that you place the hand joint of the forearm on a table and have one assistant extend the arm of the patient. The doctor places his hand or palm against the edge of the joint, pushing it until it returns to its place.
Yet it needs to be considered if the palm has already reached into the arm, then the patient should place his two hands on a table with extension and reduction; and if dislocation occurred beforehand, then the position of the hand is inherently over the table, so that the doctor's hand rests against that edge of the joint.
And if it returns quickly, it's good; and otherwise, apply it with wet plaster on the cauterization site and leave that area. Don't repeat this process though, for if you don't, you won't endure nor can you proceed with reducing it as time passes, which is bad.
Yet the joint is determined according to its curvature; and don't expect any cause from the patient other than that the arm has been softened and cannot strengthen any cause; then you know that the nerves are injured or torn, and thus there's no work for it but to be strengthened with cauterization nearby and apply force accordingly due to this cause.
Then when the badness has returned, then place on their dressing which we have re-created, and let it be laid out and strengthened for three days; and afterwards let it be removed and let it be laid out again and work your hands on it.
If the patient's movement has persisted and has caused him any degree of gravity, then apply this with water jet and some frictional movements, during which it will be relieved.
Chapter XXIX.
On the treatment of dislocation of fingers.
Some movements can dislocate the fingers in all directions.
And when one or more fingers are dislocated towards the two sides of the palm or towards the belly of the hand, then stabilize the finger and push back the dislocation with your thumbs, until it returns.
And hold the tip of the finger in place, suspend that part towards where it is dislocated, and leave that there for two days.
And lift that up and extend that until its strength matches in that day.
And when the night comes, repeat it according to that instruction, and do not stop removing it throughout the day and exercising with movements, and lay it at night; and do this for a few days until it strengthens.
And make a similar thing if it is dislocated towards the belly of the hand, and lay it there and do this as your first operation until it heals.
And similarly do this when it is dislocated to other parts.
Chapter XXX.
On the treatment of dislocation of the shoulders.
When it happens to one of the shoulders or collarbone causing a complete dislocation, and if you reinforce them with straps at those places, then in that case there is no cure, for death follows the patient.
The sign of this is that the elimination from the patient goes beyond his will and he cannot hold it; and some movements can soften certain parts or two sides or arms of him, or one of those; or you reinforce a shoulder at its place, and with movements you soften and movements are done to move those towards four directions.
Then that has already been moved to the behind parts and it is called hyperextension.
The treatment of the patient is that then you consider whether hyperextension occurs during childhood, for in that case there is neither cure nor healing of it.
In cases where it occurs due to impact or by force or in similar ways, the ancients would have said that their treatment methods were lengthy, from which only profit is gained; I have already abbreviated this according to what one of them considers excessive in detail, given my proximity to a middle exposition on the subject, for which I have done this and elaborated it using various tools from which I will show this and expand on this.
And for those, only that which occurs in the two properly at what I have recommended is cured.
And that the patient be laid on his face over the pillow in such a way that it is close to the wall, and have his legs stretched out in order that his feet do not touch the floor.
And have a straight stick placed, fixed in the ground at the end of the pillow around the head of him, and another stick near his feet at the other end of the pillow.
And let the attendant hold the stick, and do not make it fixed in a hole; and another attendant holds the other according to that form.
And wrap around the head of the patient and leave him the lion's mane fastened; and extend the end of the mane to the stick which is supposed to be under his head, and lay it there; and strengthen the other band on the buttocks and knees of him, and place them under his chest; and adjust all the bands and lay those in the other stick that should be under his feet.
And let the attendant extend the band to the part of the stick at that point, and do not reinforce both sticks and the bands at their places where they are fixed, but rather not as tightly as we have said.
And the doctor places his palms on the shoulder blade with strength until it returns, or places one table there and let him adjust his feet to that table until it returns.
If it does not return in this way, then take a table whose width or length is about three arms' lengths, and dig into the wall as we said was close to the patient at a place between the end of the table. And place the top of the table on the shoulder blade, the doctor puts his feet on the other end, and stretches there until the shoulder blade is compressed and returns to its place.
And if you wish, open up the arm that is turned inside the body; and let you place under ground the head of the patient at the back of the pillow with two sticks, whose length is one arm, and place his head at the back of the pillow in exactly the same way with two sticks; and let the distance between each stick be a hand's width, and it has been done in every stick to pull that turn around, and each is firmly placed under ground so as not to move.
And make a small incision where it hurts, and turn it in both directions on each of the two bars.
And at the end of him is a bar in which the rod is formed, whose length is one palm where it is turned; and on the other two rods there is something similar to that.
And reinforce the bands you tightened on his feet in the bar that is placed at the head of him, and the bands you tightened on his thighs in the turn which should be under his shoulders.
And make each joint lie with one minister who twists the turn at his hand, and the doctor equalizes the spondylus according to what we have said.
And once the spondylus has been returned and the area has been equalized, then cover it with a poultice of dried material mixed with pork fat, and seal; then place on the poultice until the surface reaches the width of three fingers or roughly that amount, and the length be whatever takes up the area of yellowness, and over the part of the spondylus.
And place on it the band we said, and use the patient to nourish with subtle matter so that he may heal.
And if there is any lingering concern in the area at the end of the healing, then cover with medications that soften and cleanse during the period after the table has been administered for a long time, which we have recommended; and it has already been administered in that area with a sheet of lead.
And sometimes there are lingering concerns at the end of the spondylus of each side, and it is pained by that dislocation; and this is the bone which has already weakened so much that it should not be assumed that you will incur death from this medicine, for it will make you suffer death.
Capitol thirty-one.
Regarding the treatment of a dislocated hip.
Know that the joint of the thigh and the joint of the muscle do not deserve mere dislocation only, and does not happen to them what happens to other joints with little movement and curvature.
And the joint of the thigh is dislocated in four ways, which are dislocated to parts inside, or to parts outside, or to parts frontward, or to parts backward.
And it is mostly dislocated towards the inside parts, and less towards the front or back parts.
And a sign of the dislocation towards the inside parts is that when you adjust the healthy ankle to the foot, it becomes longer and the heel is more prominently than the healthy one, the foot cannot bend at its ankle and should be bent backwards by so much that the knee cap has already penetrated here.
And the sign of what happens in terms of dislocation is towards the outside parts, it is that his accidents are contrary to this accident.
And the sign of what happens in terms of dislocation towards the front is that the swelling of his leg expands according to the fullness, however it does not bend at the ankle where there is pain and if it is pushed forward it cannot go beyond that towards the front; and his urine is retained and his gait is restricted, you should walk him on his toes.
And the sign of what happens in terms of dislocation towards the back is that it does not expand the heel, nor can it bend forward where bending would make him nauseous, and his leg is shorter than the other one, his gait is softened, and the knee cap should be at this point.
The proper reduction of these types of dislocation is that you consider them, then if the dislocation is old and ancient, that it has already happened to those around you, so with his disposition you administer reduction to him and according to the way he should be; and thus there should not be any assumption in that particular treatment.
In the case where dislocation is recent, and it is one of the four types of dislocation, then you take care to return the joint and extend that towards inside parts and outside parts, and make her bend to the right and left, which will make him return and there is no need for other treatment.
And if it does not return in this manner, then prepare strong ministers and extend his leg from the part further down, or on his thighs, or with a band that is applied over the swelling above the heel; and another minister extends his hand above him so that his knees touch his feet. And strengthen with the bandage around the knee area, and have another minister hold the end of the bandage.
And extend his leg or from inside parts to the pain in the part of the cleft, or from back parts to the parts on each side.
And let this extension of all be done in one go where the foot is raised to his chest on the ground and hangs down.
And this type of extension is common to all four.
And therefore, if the dislocation returns as we said, it's good; and otherwise, then for all four types, this requires its own treatment according to its own cure.
In his own reduction, when it is dislocated and the dislocation is inside parts, you should have him bend his leg towards his buttock; then place the bands on the knee area in that spot which is between the head of his thigh bone and the spot where he should bend backwards. And extend the band further down from the part of the pain to the other cleft side.
And then another strong minister takes hold of the patient's arms, and hardens the fatty area on the lower thigh cushion, and extends all parts outward by vigorous extension, so that it returns to its place.
And this method is for a minor surgery on the member in which this part is reduced compared to other methods.
If you excuse yourself and do not follow this method of treatment, then insist that both the patient's feet are placed at the same time, gently, lightly, on both the legs and both the heels.
And for each of them, measure the length according to four fingers, and make the patient's leg longer than the other by two more fingers.
And then have the leg lifted above the head, and let it be in the air; and the length of the leg from the ground is four arms.
And then command a strong young person to lift the foot of the bed, and have it suspended with the leg of another young person, and the other young person decreases the leg with extreme strength, so that the joint returns to its place quickly.
And in the proper reduction, when there is dislocation outwardly, it's important that the patient bends over a table as we have recommended during our wax baths; and reinforce the muscle on the inner leg appropriately and on its feet.
And have two beds laid out, one under the patient's foot and the other at their head; and lay out two beds adjusted to the middle of the buttocks on which wet cloths are wrapped, so that the leg is not dampened by the bed being between the thighs of the patient, because you must allow for extension in all parts without it being pulled.
And each minister extends according to their part, and the doctor holds the reduction with his hand as per the art.
And when the dislocation is in front of the parts, then you should have the leg extended lightly, and as per this half description on the bed; and the doctor places the palm of his right hand under the loin, and gently forces it with his other hand, and with that force pauses that extension to all parts except for the part behind.
And if the dislocation is in the parts behind, then you should not have the leg extended towards those parts, but lifted above the ground; and you should have it paused on a hard surface, as you would for the sitting position if its width is dislocated outwardly, as we mentioned about his lying over two widths; and it's above her face and muscles are stretched out, as we said, almost completely.
And you should have compression administered on the table over the area where the joint is located.
So when the reduction is completed according to this - and you can't hide the signal of the patient's reduction, which means that you should extend the leg twice, and when you make those equalities and let the leg stretch its muscle and expand his discomfort, then you know that the limb has been returned as per your actions - and then you adjust two thighs, apply plaster, and stretch in this way so that no width is lost in any of the parts; and keep the leg at rest for three or four days.
And then loosen the bandage and plaster, and compare one thigh with the other.
And when you see those equalities in view, then you know that the dislocation is already healed, and hence allow the leg to move.
And if you see any sign of softening, then return and plaster that area again, stretch it according to your first stretching, and allow it to rest for three days.
And then remove that, have the patient walk around with support for a few days until it is comfortable.
Capítulo XXXII
On the treatment of dislocation of the thigh.
The thigh can be dislocated in three ways: it can be dislocated outwardly, inwardly, or the parts on the outside are more dislocated than those on the inside; and the parts facing forward do not get dislocated.
And the signal for a dislocation of the thigh is that you command the leg to apply its muscle on the knee; then you know that the thigh is dislocated.
And the restoration of all these ways is that you straighten the leg outwards, so that it already extends its muscle if possible; apply your two hands to his face and pause his foot between your feet; then make the thigh stick to your palms, hold those together with force on the dislocated part of his thigh while another minister stretches his foot in order for the dislocated part to return to its place.
And the signal of restoration is that its muscle sticks to the knee at rest without effort.
And then apply plaster to it and have the muscle stick to the knee, and then keep those in one position for three or four days, and then remove those.
And do not use the patient for walking for a few days, until they are healed and comfortable.
If the reduction of you is justified for me, then administer a strong extension from those willow branches which have been previously mentioned in the treatment of the hip.
Capitol. xxxiii.
Regarding the treatment of the dislocation of the humerus.
The humerus is sometimes dislocated due to small displacements, and at other times it is dislocated according to the complementarity of its parts, and your dislocation can be caused either internally or externally.
And the sign of your humerus dislocation is that you feel it swollen moving towards the part where it is dislocated.
The treatment for your displacement should be gentle and easy on the hands, and it must be equal until it returns.
When treating your displacement according to complementarity, you should have the patient stand straight and place a strong and brave servant behind them, at the middle point of their back.
And place your right hand on the top of their head and your left hand at the bottom part of the body near the pit area.
And pull the body towards you with your right hand, and place your left hand twice on it, and extend your left. And push the bottom of the body with your right hand where the knee is supposed to be.
And do these two movements as we have discussed.
And push the bottom of the body towards the back at this third movement, and you are at the pit area.
So if it returns in one or two movements according to this manner, and if you find the body equal, it's good; and otherwise, then with this method operate again until it returns.
If you are unable to reduce it using the method we've discussed, then have the patient lie on their back on the ground, strengthen a firm mat under the ground, place it between your legs, and already wrap a cloth around them to prevent the body from moving.
And the servant of your body holds their legs, and another servant extends the body with their hands or under the willow that lies on top of the chest; and extend each servant against the extension of their pair, and the mat is present between the thighs of the patient holding them, so that the body of you is not pulled towards the parts behind its extension.
And the doctor equalizes the displacement with their hands, and another servant holds the healthy leg at the parts behind, where the displacement returns easily.
And once the displacement returns and you are informed of your recovery from this treatment, then stop with the plaster and strengthen that firmly, and place the body against the back.
And when you fear or protect from the nerves that are behind over the humerus, to ensure the muscle there is not overly vigorous and does not harm it heavily.
And after two or three days, let that rest; and if the muscle has softened, strengthen that again.
And after one more day or four, start to move the patient without assistance for forty days. If it is necessary to go ahead of that space, then don't do it until you are sure the displacement has not dissolved and corrupted elsewhere, and do nothing without treatment.
And if you happen to have pus come out, then know that you should administer in the recovery of your what we previously mentioned in our account, at another place for treatment and medication until it is healed.
Capitol. xxxiv.
Regarding the treatment of dislocation of the fingers of the feet.
Ensure that the one which is dislocated returns to a slight extension of three fingers; and what is not difficult, before it becomes easier.
If the dislocation is in some bones of the sole of the foot, then know that you should have the patient stand with their heel on a spot equal to the ground or on a table, and let them stand as if they were walking.
And step up on your foot, place your heel on what you intend for the joints, and have someone step with their foot against yours against its height so that it returns. And watch as it is equalized and does not appear at the location of the joint.
And place your foot of the patient under a table that takes up the entire foot, with two heads, and strengthen it against three days of stiffness and firmness; then let him step off for several days until he is strengthened and movement can be assured.
Capitol. xxxv.
Regarding the different types of dislocations that may occur from a wound, fracture, or at any time.
When some cause of those happens, and you dedicate yourself to the treatment of that and restoring them, multiple attempts often lead to death.
And therefore do not presume on the treatment of your, but rather one who is skilled in the art, long used, merciful and compassionate; he should be patient, not hasty nor presumptuous, using medicine that allows pus to come out only as necessary, and leave the patient to divine judgment, not for the sake of alleviating distress, which may show some hope. And then it strives to quickly make the reduction in the beginning of the cause, before it becomes an abscess from the cautery.
And then if the member returns as we wish, then administer treatment which allows for an abscess from the cautery and cares for the wound according to what you deem suitable with these dry salves.
And if dislocation is akin to fracture and occurs in the separate bones of the skull, then you should perform their articulation, and do as we have said in the simple ailments pertaining to this, as described in those locations.
And follow and avoid according to your wisdom that within the treatise in the paths of fear as you are preceded by my preaching; for this is better to you from which you owe your Creator, more permanent to your glory, and more health for those who see it in your time. And thus conclude the words of Al-Bucasis perfectly from which God may be praised. Amen.
