O children, grant me the completion of this book, which is the last part of medical science, for its completion brings peace to you, and through its exposition, and through your declarations, it appears to me that I can complete this treatise, which is a segment of my operation, in other words surgery.
For the operation in our body is now largely private and not as public as before, making the science of this field suffer greatly, and its traces have been forgotten; it has not advanced much beyond a few small descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which corrected many misconceptions and errors within their studies, causing misunderstandings of these fields and extending the effort required.
And it seems to me that I should regenerate this treatise in the manner of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and for the forms of the tools such as cauterizers and other work instruments like adding a description, and for preparation which is necessary.
The reason why it is difficult to find a skilled craftsman in our own hand for this period, is because the art of medicine is long and requires knowledge that comes only after being exercised in the science of anatomy as described by Galen. He knew about the joints of the members and their forms, their connection and separation; he had knowledge of bones, nerves, and veins, their numbers, and their function. He was familiar with pulsating veins and quiet ones, and the locations for their emission.
And that is why Hippocrates says about this name that it might be a mistake in the small work, but mostly in the art of our hand.
We have already mentioned this in the introduction of this book; whoever does not know what we have told about anatomy will fall into error that could kill people, just as I have seen too many of them, who are formed in this science and abandon it for another science and its experiments.
For I saw a physician foolish and experienced who developed an abscess in the neck of a woman, and he incised some arteries in the neck causing great bleeding leading to the woman's death among her companions.
And I saw another physician who was about to drain pus from a man whose condition had worsened in his state, and the pus was large. He operated on it and removed that pus with a piece of the bladder, causing that man to die on the third day.
And I have already attempted to drain it, and I saw that due to the size of the pus and the position of the patient below him, he would die.
And I saw another physician who was paid a salary by a duke of our country for surgery, and he treated a black soldier who had been debilitated by his fracture; and due to the physician's lack of knowledge, he removed the fracture, on the wound, with pins and staples with strong tension, and did not allow the wound to heal.
And he would follow it according to his wishes, and afterwards he would dress it, and let it heal for several days, and command that we remove the bandage; and thus within which the wound and the flesh have developed pus, leading to destruction.
And I had requested this from him, and he prepared to remove the bandage, achieving tranquility and alleviation of his pains.
However, the corruption was confirmed in the member, so I could not suppress it, and it continued to spread the corruption within the body of the patient.
And I saw another physician who punctured an abscess and cancer, and some days later it became magnified in the lord of the patient.
This is the reason why the cancerous ulcer is pure of melancholic humor, so it does not spread throughout the body, but rather that it's in a member that suffers from being exposed to all.
And for this reason, children, it is necessary for you that the operation in our body be divided into two parts: it is associated with health in the operation itself, and work which involves risks in major positions.
And I have already discussed this in all parts of this book where there is operation involving error and fear; so it is necessary for you to consider this and avoid it, so that the pages do not get involved in speaking and deceive you.
And therefore take your weapons for solicitude and protection of God, and your patients for happiness and strength.
And use the best way through God's grace for seeking health and hopeful succession, and leave your terrible patients with difficult recovery, and keep your weapons of what makes you afraid, so that recovery remains in your faith and your name does not forsake you: for it is only then that they remain in your glory, and even more so externally in the world and ultimately in your sanctity.
Galen had already said in some of his monographs: "Don't treat sick patients badly, for bad doctors are not found among them".
And I have completed this book according to three chapters.
The division of the book begins, and it starts with the first part. The first chapter is organized about the feet, concerning the forms of instruments and the tools for cauterization, and what is necessary in an operation.
The division of the second part. The second chapter, concerning drying and piercing, as well as suction cups, plagues, extraction of arrows, and resemblance to those methods; a fully detailed and organized description of the tools' forms.
The third chapter, concerning restoration and dislocation, as well as the treatment of torsion and resemblance to those methods; an ordered chapter about treatments within the limbs, and the forms of the tools.
Know that I will speak about the quality of those burnt areas and their healing, and in what state is it forbidden to perform a cautery.
Then I say that the discussion about the quality of the burnt area and its healing is long and tedious, requiring deep knowledge, and hidden behind secrecy. Much has been said on this subject by great scholars, and they disagree among themselves, yet I am content with a little of their teachings, fearing prolongation.
And thus I say that applying cautery affects the whole body universally, its nature being either pure or impure matter. Except for two conditions, those are the scrotum's pure matter condition.
In the condition of the spine and the back, there's impure matter; some would argue that applying cautery should be beneficial to such areas, whereas others would disagree, stating that it is not suitable for diseases that are due to nature and dryness, as fire's nature is one of dryness. It would be inconvenient if a disease from pure and dry material was treated with heat and drying that leads to healing.
And he points out that what you've said is the opposite of this, that with cautery, youth should be applied in all diseases of the spine and back that occur in men's bodies. When you compare a man's body to the conditions of fire, you find that a man's body has been burned.
And I say according to this discussion, which I've experienced myself several times and have discovered through experimentation.
Nevertheless, let it not be said that this comes after what has already been discussed and exercised in the chapter on cautery techniques, where one learns about the variety of body conditions among men and the locations of diseases within their limbs, as well as the causes of these illnesses, their incidents, and the time span for those situations.
In other conditions, there is no cause for alarm, especially in wet and damp diseases; all doctors have agreed on these matters, and they are not divided when it comes to applying cautery to such conditions.
Know this, children, about the secret of healing through cautery using fire and its benefit: when it comes to cautery medicine, burning is involved; for fire is simple, its action affects only the member that is being cauterized and does not spread to other members with the same intensity unless causing minor harm.
The action of burning medicine reaches to those members that are in contact with it, and it forcefully brings on difficulties in healing the diseased limb.
Fire, due to its power and the quality of its substance, does not do anything other than overflowing. We have known this through experimentation and many years of service studying the art, understanding the truth about causes; hence I excuse myself for the length of my discussion. If it weren't that such knowledge isn't freely available to you on this subject hidden behind fire, and the quality of its operation within bodies as well as its expulsion which pushes out diseases through a philosophical demonstration that would sharpen your minds, then I wouldn't be taking so much time with this explanation.
And know, children, that there is disagreement among them about the time when it's best to perform a cautery and they suggest waiting until spring.
And I say that cautery should be done at any time; because the harm caused by time-related accidents is submerged in the healing of what happens with the application of cautery and especially if it's for pain or necessary pains like swelling and pus, which don't tolerate delay due to fears arising from those that cause malice, which outweighs minor harm entering through time.
And do not worry about this in your minds, children, as these are only considered by the common people and many doctors; what they mean is that for every disease being healed with cautery, it's not appropriate all the time, so they hold onto that conclusion.
And the reason is not this simple when they are concerned about it; cautery is simply in a category of medicine that alters condition and dries out wetness, which causes pain.
But indeed, unnecessary cautery is superior to medicine due to the value and effectiveness of its operation and the greatness of its master.
And it's possible that their illness could return at some point in time, depending on the nature of the disease and its location, as well as its effectiveness, and what is accumulated within their body due to excesses, and what gets delivered to them through eating or other causes related to those. It might not return the same kind of pain if cautery is applied to a subtle illness in a limb with few excesses and wetness, like tooth cautery for pain and similar cases; it's possible that such pain won't return within them, although this happens particularly in small cases.
And the common language is that cautery is the final remedy of medicine, and it's a professional term, not for me to understand in this context, they believe that burning without medical understanding or other reason does not result in healing.
And the cause is against this; and I understand that cautery is the final remedy of medicine only when administering methods of treatment in certain illnesses, and those medicines don't work, therefore towards the end of the case one administers cautery, it brings about improvement to that. And from here, in a more nuanced view, that cautery is the final remedy of medicine, not according to my understanding which comprehends common folk knowledge and many doctors'.
And the ancients said that cautery with gold is better than cautery with iron, and they didn't say this simply because of the equality of gold and its limited quality compared to the material.
And they said that the location for cautery does not cause pain, as this is not absolutely true; already I've tried this and found out that it doesn't cause this way in most patients, but cautery with gold is good and better than iron too like they were saying; however, when you do cautery with fire using gold, it's not something to be declared, for it burns according to the quantity you want by the intensity of the gold, and to receive its fume; and if you place the flame on it, the gold melts from the heat, and in the heat several layers form for the craftsman to work on that.
And for this reason, when doing cautery with iron, one should apply it more gently and more precisely to the right orientation of the operation.
And I have already organized this chapter on cautery according to chapters, having organized those about the use within the feet for you, just as I am asking what you want from them.
The first chapter.
This cautery treatment allows the humidity and coldness to cause a surprising accident of which there are two causes, it is due to excess and fluidity of traumatic flow, called spasm, from the head to the parts of the body and from the ear fluids, as well as restlessness, pain in teeth and stomachache, and universally for all illnesses caused by coldness, whether they be paralytic, excessive or apoplexy, and resembling those illnesses.
The form of this cautery treatment is as follows, we first advise the patient to be treated with a laxative medicine on their head for three or four nights, depending on what suits the patient and their age and their usual routine.
And then instruct them to wash their head with a razor, and then have them place their hands under one of the benches lying down and have their hands placed on their feet.
And then place the palm of your hand close to the nostril, in between their cheeks. However, when the place you've described has been reached, apply the olive cautery to that area by tracing it with your hand and using this method for cautery:
And then place that [cautery tool] on the heated area by descending it, in such a way that your hand constrains it gradually and you rotate it.
And then lift your hand gently and look at the area; if you see some quantity of bone being exposed from within the head, like the quantity of wax in an ear, then lift your hand; otherwise turn your hand with that iron or another tool of the same kind, should it be due to coldness, so that what I've told you can be seen.
And then take a little salt and dissolve it on the area and let it rest for three days.
And then place the burnt end of the stick in hot water and let it rest until the layer of smoke is destroyed. And then treat the area with tetra-formula balm until it is healed.
And it was said that when the wound opens up, so much more do you feel pain relief, for which it is better and more restorative.
And they said that the cautery is performed inside the ear canal, and that the cautery should be kept until a portion of the specificity of the bone is adhered.
And then let this part of the bone adhere, and then let it heal.
And they said that when the cautery reaches to the bottom, you should begin to exert force within the bone until the bone falls off, and this is how you perform a little surgery: And it is expected that from that place, vapor from the head will expire.
And let the wound remain open for a long time, and then be cured until it is consolidated.
May be that in some cases I do not see these two types of cautery of this kind, but rather in certain individuals due to fear; let it rest, you should know, it's better for health when done; when the head is treated with continuity therapy as we have testified in other body parts, and especially when the head of the patient has a cool nature.
And the first type of cautery is better and more effective, you should know this; from that method and by doing that work for health.
Second chapter.
Regarding the cautery of the head.
When throughout the head there occurs chronic and long-lasting pain in the patient, and it's a continuous issue with them, and they use pillows, cushions, cap compressions, plaster applications, bandages, cloths, various remedies, and especially if their head has already been treated by one cautery that relieves them of those causes, then consider this; if the head of the patient is strong in its creation in nature; then it doesn't experience much heat or intensity from the coldness, therefore they should be treated with another cautery using a different method for that cautery to last longer. And then apply a cautery on that above the forehead, within the cauterization where the cut is made. Make an incision and expose the quantity of bone that we have measured, then apply a cautery on that with a cautery in the back part behind the head at the spot which is called gout - and this is the spot where suction is placed. And hold your hand in oil, and do not expose the bone, because the patient will feel a great different pain from the pain of all other head cauterizations due to this.
And I will tell you this about the cautery in its place, for this cautery is like when you cauterize the corners of the head and the occiput is a more subtle cautery than that which cauterizes the mid area of the head; this is how it should be done.
Head done.
Regarding the non-traditional cautery for migraines.
When there is pain in the head, or pain spreading to the neck, it should be treated with medicines that cool and reduce the head, and then another treatment is administered; this is what I have described for illnesses of the head. If all these do not help, then the cautery treatment is done in two ways: one with medicinal acute burning cauterization, or with iron.
Apply medicinal burning cautery as follows: take a dollop of garlic and crush it, then remove the tips from both ends. And place the tip of the lancet where there is pain on the temple, inside which it makes a hole; then leave the incision, inside which the wound is hidden.
And strengthen yourself on it by stopping any downward stretching strain, and let it go through the spaces of three hours; then stretch the garlic and leave it for two or three days, and press your finger under water until the place becomes warm.
And after that, treat it with ointment until it is healed.
And if you see this, do so with some burning medicines which I have written about in the detailed treatise on burning medicines.
The cautery using iron is done like this: heat it up to use as a cautery, which is the way:
And it is called the lock-knob, where the head of the patient resembles a thorn in shape with some curvature, and there is a small elevation in the middle of them.
And hold your hand over the area of pain, and keep your fingers - to prevent them from being burned by the iron which you have placed there - and move the small iron piece gently at a slow speed.
And if the amount that gets burned due to the size of the cut is more than half of it, raise your hand so that the artery which you have placed there does not get burned either, so that no blood flow comes out.
And then dip your finger in salt water and hold it over the area, leave it for three days; and after that place wet cotton on the wound, and treat it with ointment until it is healed.
And if you notice this, cauterize at the end of the cuticle as per cautery, and watch out for an incision in the artery in this non-traditional migraine.
Head fourth.
Regarding the traditional treatment of migraines with cautery.
When you treat migraines with the treatment we've discussed previously and in the divisions of illnesses, if this doesn't resolve the issue, due to the illness not being alleviated by what we have described for the first cautery with medicine or the one with fire, then understand that you should heat up the surgical knife's cautery until it becomes white-hot. This signifies pressing your finger at the area of pain along a line which is as long as most of what was discussed before, or where the pain is concentrated; and pause for a moment and press that with strength into the artery while piercing through to the bone.
However, it is necessary for you to be cautious about the continuation of the mandible which causes difficulty in chewing; ensure that the saliva does not stick and the nerves that affect this do not get burned, also making sure there's no muscle spasm.
And if it's about the fear of blood flow from the artery that is cut, there's concern especially in those who do not understand what they are doing and are inexperienced; leave the operation as it began with the patient.
And I will recall the regulation of blood flow in an artery incident according to their method, at their place for this freedom.
And if you see this illness that does not benefit from this cautery and observes the tolerable body symptoms, cauterize in the middle of the head as we have measured it, and treat the wound until it is healed.
And if you notice this, administer the cautery which we mentioned in the chapter about blood vessel constriction with fire on both fingers, and this is a better type of cautery and more effective.
Head .v.
Regarding the treatment for ear pain with cautery.
When there is pain in the ear due to irritation and it is treated with anti-inflammatory causes and with another treatment that I have described in the division, if the pain does not subside, then heat up the cautery, which one has the name of 'puncture', like this:
And if it is necessary to make points near the navel, then lead them around the entire area of the ear as if riding a wheel, or in the circuit of each time when the pain is in any. Continue with the pointed cautery from the tip of the ear gradually, making sure to test and place your hand where you aim.
And if the cautery hits all parts of the ear, then move on, and after that, treat the areas within them until they heal.
Crown it today.
Regarding cautery treatment.
Gout that is cured with cautery treatment is none other than the species of diseases that come from phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of illnesses.
Avoid cautery treatment for the species that results from dryness or muscle twitching of nerves.
When you treat that species of gout using pins and ear-pinchers and poultices, and if you don't confirm your treatment, then know that when you apply cautery to the patient, you use three applications: one on the tip of the ear, another slightly below its warmth, and the third at the junction of two lips.
Hold your cautery against the opposite side of the diseased part, where there's only relief when the affected area becomes healthy.
The method of applying cautery is to apply it near the tip of the ear somewhat above and slightly on top of the crown's base, and then another in the middle area where its length corresponds to the length of this hand gesture, after that hold your hand with the application of cautery until the amount of the disease's essence is burned out.
This is the method of applying cautery, and it belongs to surgery, its form being before mealtime. However, it is also very subtle that one or two like this; and note that when applied to excess coarseness in them, it may be done so.
And after that, treat the area until the condition within it has healed.
Crown it seventhly.
Regarding ancient apoplexy treatment with cautery.
When apoplexy is ancient and you treat it as we have said without confirming your treatment, and if the patient does not have fever, then apply cautery on four occasions: over all parts of their head; with each application and the midpoint of the head, as we have said; and apply cautery to the neck. The way to do the cautery is done according to what was mentioned earlier.
And when it has been treated over the mouth of the stomach; and it's more behind; and then treat that which proceeds.
Crown it eighthly.
Regarding cautery treatment for oblivion caused by phlegm.
Note that when given to the patient at mealtime, they should be provided with large pins and ear-pinchers for poultices.
Then shave the entire head of the patient and pause over their neck, covering it with an adhesive poultice as described in the treatise on poultices.
And hold that for a few times, which is the method of applying cautery. Do this as instructed in that order, which I have already mentioned.
And if it is well with them; but otherwise, then do this to them three times on the last part of their head, which descend from the more prominent part of the head towards the less prominent neck area. And pause between each cautery for as long as this has been mentioned, and then treat the cautery according to what follows.
If you increase it and the patient tolerates it, then apply cautery in the middle area; and if your dosage is greater, then apply cautery over both ears.
Then treat that until it has healed; and apply the olive oil according to the form given beforehand.
Crown it ninthly.
Regarding treatment with cautery and general relief of all over the body.
Note that when you proceed with poultice treatment on the head using pins and as we have said; then shave the patient's head, then apply cautery in the middle of the head area, and apply cautery over all ears, and apply cautery to the last part of their neck, and apply three applications of cautery to the cervical vertebrae.
And if it is necessary for the gout of relief in many parts and the patient tolerates it, but the illness is strong, then apply cautery to those four areas on both sides, gradually applying cautery until all the disease's essence has burned out, and lift your hand. Then treat that until it has healed, and this is olive oil cautery.
Crown it tenthly.
Regarding treatment with cautery for epilepsy.
Only the phlegmatic type of epilepsy is treated with cautery, not other types.
And note that when you modify the brain for them at mealtime with ear-pinchers and another treatment as we have said in the division when the patient is large and tolerates the side effects of medicines.
And if it is a child who doesn't tolerate the medicines, then administer poultices and chewing masticators with ear-pinchers beforehand for several days to improve food digestion.
And then cut the patient's head, and then apply a cautery to that spot with a pointed cautery in the middle of the head according to the previous method, and apply another cautery to their forehead, and over each ear on his head she applies a cautery. And if the patient is strong and can bear it, then apply those cauteries with a paralyzed and softening effect on the vertebrae of the neck and the vertebrae of the back.
And use an olive oil-based cautery as previously described.
If the patient is a child, then apply a subtle cautery according to this method.
Title:十一
On the treatment of melancholy by cautery.
When the causes of melancholy are damp and decay in the body, then apply those cauteries we have mentioned in the abdominal cavity.
And if the cause of melancholy is excess declining to melancholy, and the body of the patient is wet, then give them to drink what purifies the brain as we have previously described in the division.
And then cut the head of the patient, and properly make an incision from it around the circle, and then remove that in the middle of the head.
And if the patient is sixty years old, and has been taken care of everywhere.
And then apply liniment; it is worthy to use an old remedy from sheep. And heat that over the fire for a while until you reach a measure, which when more is applied to him causes suffering. And then apply it in the middle of the head around the circle, and let him inside until he cools down.
And do this with the patient throughout the week once, using his other regimen while he is being healed; or if you wish, apply cautery making small punctures according to what suits him best, otherwise hold your hand over a cautery like this: this is type of cautery that moistens the brain evenly.
And then apply that cooked piece in oil or in powder from mussels.
Title: XII
On the treatment of descending water by cautery.
When you have been told to start the treatment of water descending in the stomach by the symptoms which I have described in the division, then begin and give the patient what purifies his head, and protect him from all dampness.
And make that sugar dissolve in water to be drunk for a few days.
And command him to cleanse his head and apply a cautery in the middle of the head; and then apply two cauterizations on each temple if it is the beginning of the discharge of water in two stomachs, or on one side if it is the beginning of water in one stomach.
Apply all the cauterizations to every vein and artery that leaves the network; and let the cauterizations extend in that length across the temples.
And protect yourself from bleeding when it is being cauterized; and if you see his bleeding, stop him with some medicine that's available to you.
And I will come to knowledge about the remedy for extracting arteries and against those, with caution regarding bleeding.
And some times it is cauterized in the neck between two bones by two cauterizations made one after another.
Title: XIII
On the treatment of old tears.
When tears from the stomachs are old and come out through the veins and arteries located manifestly on the head outside, and it is confirmed that this excess causes phlegm-producing humors, then apply a cautery with the one we mentioned in the introduction to water treatment affecting the stomachs, and apply a cautery in the middle of the head, and two cauterizations in the neck between the temples, and two cauterizations in the neck between two bones. And if you are experiencing excesses, then apply cautery across the entire length of the stomach wall on the outer edge of the eyebrow with a small cautery.
Title: XIV
On the treatment of nasal odor by cautery.
When you are treating that with what we have said in the division and your treatment is not improving, then prepare and give three nights worth of hog's mucus to the patient; and then cut the head of the person, and apply an iron cautery treated with olive oil. And then apply a thorned cautery over two small scratches on each eyebrow, and do so with two cauterizations.
And watch yourself to ensure you don't ignite that artery.
And this is the method for the thorned cautery.
Title: XV
On the treatment of softening of the eyelids by cautery.
When the eyelid of the stomach is softened due to illness or dampness, then apply that eyelid with this lunar cautery; and here is how it should be:
And if you do this, apply that over the two eyebrows in a small area with two cauterizations all around, and let them extend to the temples. And let the length of each cautery be according to the size of the eyebrow.
And do not press too much on your hand at the cautery, but according to how the inner part of the eyelid is heated.
Chapter XVI.
Regarding the use of a cautery on the eyelid when the skin turns into parts inside and at the palm of the hand.
When the skin of the hand turns inside and I prick the hand, there are two ways to use a cautery, whether it is with fire or with burning medicine.
If you use a hot cautery, ask the patient to hold it in front of them until they feel their skin similarly like those who are being burned, ensuring that they stay that way until the skin burns; and if you place your hand there, then when it comes out from their birth, then strengthen their hands so that they don't burn themselves while the skin is forming.
Then until they are formed and equalized, ask the patient to hold their head in this position, then place your hand on the eyelid of their hands, with a sign indicating it according to the shape of an oak leaf, and make the marking point close to the skin.
And place your hand gently in the middle on the pus of the wound or in the lymphatic swelling on the hand.
And heat the cautery which has this shape for use.
And heat it on the figure which was marked, little by little, in spots that are visible, until the surface of the lesion is burned entirely, appearing just like an oak leaf.
And a sign of health in the patient's work is that you see the eyelid of the hand already tightened and the skin of them being raised from their puncture on the hand.
And raise your hand and leave it there for three days, then place the middle of your hand on their elbow where the skin should have risen by that time. And treat that with ointment until it heals.
And if there's any cause for them returning to their origin and the eyelid is softened, then do another treatment with the cautery on that area just as you did initially.
And if the skin is still in the eyelid, then heat that until it rises to its natural place and becomes equalized, so that the skin doesn't pinch the hand.
And for the cautery with burning medicine, this is to command the patient to feel their skin until it's extended and equalized, then have them make an oak leaf shaped mark on a piece of cloth.
And take some familiar soap and a live ash with you. I., or point one, refers to the first item, section, or element in a list or series. In this context, it might signify the beginning of a new chapter, step, or category within the medical treatise. Do this as instructed, and mix those ingredients well, then perform the operation quickly so that it is not delayed; spread this from here on the paper which was made in the shape of an oak leaf, place this above a hand or both together; place your hand near the affected area with pus, and keep the patient's head in this position.
And place the medicine on it and press that a little bit but don't burn yourself as long as the patient feels the sensation of the medicine's bite, which feeling is like being bitten by fire.
And when the patient tolerates that biting sensation, then remove the medicine and keep it in this position; once the biting stops, then reapply the medicine and wash your hand with water; then consider if you've seen the eyelid raised like when washing off a scab, whether that process is done with fire or incision, which is the case here; and if it doesn't return to the place of applying the medicine on the spot where no medicine was used, don't let it heal until your operation is complete and the hand is tightened.
And place your hand in the middle of it for its entire duration until the lesion is eradicated from the adjustment, and treat that with definitive ointment or another until it heals.
And for this to be necessary, you must keep vigilance in your operation so that the medicine does not fall from your hand onto the skin. If the eyelid is softened after some days and any cause of the hair pinches the hand, then reapply your medicine on that spot which softens the eyelid, precisely as you did initially, and surround it until it heals.
And this is the shape of an oak leaf.
Know that men's hands vary in size and thickness, so adjust your treatment according to this.
And do not conceal the path of rectitude leading to that which is studied in this art.
Chapter XVII.
Regarding the cautery treatment for a fistula that is in the tear duct of the hand.
When you treat a fistula with what we have discussed in the divisions of maladies and do not proceed with your treatment, then follow this method for cauterizing it: command the patient to hold their head in this position, and place one of their servants' hands under yours so that they are not burned or disturbed by their head.
And place your hand gently in the middle on the pus of the wound or in lymphatic swelling on the hand.
And you apply the heat of the cautery which this is in its form:
Which is heated, like the shape of a cane or a turkey feather pen, from one end where the cautery is applied.
And if you see that it is penetrating into the other end. And if you want it to come out like trying to remove it.
But the one that is heated up is better for your work.
And apply pressure to the fistula if it has opened, and take out any pus and dry it up there. And if it hasn't opened, then open it and remove the pus from inside.
And place over it the heated cautery which has been lit, and hold your hand with the hot end of the cautery near the nose opening, so that your hand doesn't disturb or alarm the patient, then pause the cautery in the gray area of the nose and soak that.
And if during the start of your cautery it penetrates into the nostril, it's good; otherwise, then reapply the cautery once or twice, as needed; and leave that for three days, then place a bandage over that spot with grease inside until it is healed.
But if it has been more than eleven days and it hasn't healed, then place on the area a quick acting corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed, and scrape according to what suits you in your judgment.
And another method of cauterizing a fistula is as follows: take the place of the fistula and make an incision there and apply over that crack a thin material with the shape of it: And in that area put about one inch of melted lead; and hold your hand to have good control, so not to alarm the patient since the melted lead won't enter into their nose; and when you place on the nasal area a bandage soaked either in egg white or water, the lead will adhere to the fistula site and heal it through wonderful healing.
And if the fistula has healed with what we have said about cauterization and healing, it's good; otherwise, then it's necessary to perform nasal surgery and reduce the fistula into the nasal cavity according to its proper location.
Chapter XVIII.
On cauterization of the cut on the foot.
Infections occur in cuts, and especially in the cuts of babies.
Then, as you treat those cuts with what we have told you in the sections and do not deepen your treatment, then apply the small cautery knife according to this shape that we will show:
And let its size be determined by the subtlety of the scalpel.
And place that heated tip inside those cuts until the cautery reaches to the ends of the cuts.
And apply bandages inside where it is healing.
Chapter XIX.
On cauterization of the fistula in the mouth.
When in the base of the uvula or on the palate or in the base of the teeth there is pus and you make a cut, then when it bursts open, then when it has healed, correct that cut and do not deepen your treatment, then use as directed the size of the cautery according to what received inside the fistula, place this lit into the tube of the fistula, hold your hand so that the heated end reaches to its ends, and do this once or twice at the back; then treat it with what we have told you about treating inside where it is healing until it heals.
And if the healing has been removed and it is healed, it's good; otherwise, then it's necessary to expose the area and remove the infected bone according to what suits your judgment.
Chapter XX.
On cauterization of teeth and soothing of the gums.
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth are inflamed, and you treat those with medicines instead of cauterization, then place the patient's head in its usual position, and then apply the heated cautery in such a way that you place the tip of it on the tooth and immediately let the heated point penetrate into it gently, while holding your hand close enough to the heat of the fire so that when the end of the tooth is reached by the warmth of the flame.
And lift your hand, and then reapply the cautery several times according to what you want.
And let the patient wash their mouth with salt water and keep it for an hour, then rinse that out, so that the inflamed tooth is calmed, the softened gum is strengthened, and the excess moisture is dried.
Chapter XXI.
On cauterization of toothache.
When toothache is due to coldness, or there is a boil or worms involved, or you do not treat with medicine, then cauterization can be done in two ways: either on the area near the neck (neck region), or using fire.
Cauterization on the neck involves taking cow's horn and boiling it in water, then take out its end and wrap it around the tip of a needle, then immerse this into the hot water, and place that over the painful tooth gently until it is cooled.
And then apply some burns there where the heat of the fire reaches the root of the teeth.
And if you see, immerse wool or cloth in the potion above mentioned, then place that over the aching tooth, and place the burning iron over it until the heat of the iron reaches the tip of the tooth's cavity.
However, when dealing with the application of heat from fire or iron, you must wait until the tip of the flame or metal is in the center of their chest and the intensity of the heat does not reach the opening of the patient's stomach.
And then hold the cautery in a form that will be applied, place it on the tooth and put your hand inside where the heat is being conducted; do this until the pain increases or even the next day.
And then instruct the patient to fill their mouth with good broth due to that heat and keep it for an hour, then they should drink; this is how the heat treatment is done.
And apply the cautery wherever you see fit according to what is possible for you.
And this is how it looks like in the application of the cautery:
Chapter XXII.
On the treatment of protruding intestines by cautery.
When the protrusions are caused by phlegm and mixed fluids that do not yield to digestion with medicines, yet you see a slight digestive change, then you hold the cautery in this way, having two hub-like extremities so that you can heat one end of it with smoke from the other end. Place the burning iron over the abscess once, and if necessary again until it reaches the tip of the abscess.
And if the abscess is small, then hold the cautery according to the size of the abscess, and rest it on the patient for three days, placing a moist cloth in hot broth over them while that which the fire has burned increases.
And then treat it with ointment and attempts at healing until it is healed.
Chapter XXIII.
On the treatment of gouty swelling and constriction by cautery.
When moisture invades the pulmonary canal, especially when it is due to a cold body condition, then instruct the patient to start with medicine for evacuation and apply cautery at the site of the kidney's depression.
And make sure that the cautery does not reach the kidneys and do not burn too much of their body, just a little.
And apply the treatment with another cautery at the junction of the throat in the lower part of the spine. Apply the same method for the cautery on his collarbone as before.
And then treat that with what has been prescribed until it is healed.
Chapter XIV.
On the treatment of lung illness and coughing by cautery.
When coughing and lung illness are caused by moisture, the patient does not have fever or consumption and it is an old lung ailment, then apply two cauteries on the sternum at the depressed areas of the thorax and abdomen; and another cautery in the middle of the chest between the breasts; and treat the collarbone with the same method as before.
And if you wish, let your treatment be puncture with the cautery that is called punctum, and its method precedes in the puncturing of ear pain.
And make punctures on the chest; and then treat that with what was prescribed until it is healed.
And once you have the cautery with three points that constitutes this treatment: for each use, you can perform three cauterizations according to this method:
Chapter XXV.
On the treatment of the tickling at the head of the penis (titillication).
When the head of the penis is displaced due to slippery moisture and does not return in time, you should reduce its displacement until it returns according to what is usually customary for returning. Then, while making a slight movement, reposition it so that it turns as we have described. In this case, first reduce the displacement, then make the patient lie on their back or on one side, and raise the part which is at the opening of the gland from above the points of your left hand when you are touching them, if the location is displaced inside.
And then hold the cautery with two ends; and this is how it should be:
And then apply the treatment with the cautery until it penetrates to the other side; and here will come the image of the cautery treatment as follows: using four points of the cautery.
And some burns are adjusted according to this count and because there are eight cauteries.
And then place the salted iron on the cautery and have the patient lie on their back, and let the body not be burned for any time until it is comfortable.
And if the dislocation is in parts above and below the knee, then do this, apply a cautery to the muscle with an iron rod or with a point-shaped cautery, until the joint is confirmed and moisture is reduced and the patient is healed.
Chapter XXVI.
On the use of cautery for the stomach.
When there is inflammation and moisture inside the stomach that exceeds its normal capacity and multiplies within it, and if you continue with the treatment methods without changing, then you might find that the patient is upside down over their knees being stretched out, both their hands and possessions. Then do this: apply one cautery to each foot equivalent in size to a single pointed cautery, and at two cauteries place them on either side of the stomach's opening, forming a triangular pattern; elongate those that are not properly fitted for cautery application by doing this process.
And if the depth of the cautery is equivalent to the size of two thirds of the thickness of the chain's knot.
And if you want, apply a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form; and here is a circular shape for a cautery as follows:
And the stomach should be treated with a point that reacts to this cautery: and you apply a point on the stomach according to your desire with a needle, then do so by applying a cautery at those points; and treat it with healing procedures until it is healed.
Chapter XXVII.
On the use of cautery for the kidney area.
When there is pain in the kidney due to coldness or moisture, or by excess wind that exceeds its normal capacity, and if the patient has been treated as we have said without changing, then you might find that the patient is lying on their back with their head elevated, placing three cauterizations according to this form; place this quantity of treatment over the kidneys where they are located under the armpits, taking into account the position of a person when lying down.
And let there be the space between each cautery according to the size of a finger, and let the cauterizations follow the length of the body diagonally.
And do not underestimate what the patient feels about the heat from the cauterization.
And if the amount of moisture that is absorbed by the length of the chain's knot equals the quantity of the patient's heat; and do not make it too tight; and if the patient is standing on their feet; and if they are not standing, then let them lie down, which has already stretched out their limbs, and raise their arms.
And it might be possible to apply these cauteries with a surgical knife, when you have skill and caution in this art.
And be careful not to overdo the cauterization process, ensure that the heat of the entire chain is absorbed so that it reaches every part of the body and penetrates through tissues where the chain is delicate. Understand this.
Chapter XXVIII.
On the perforation of kidney abscess with a cautery.
When there is irritation or an abscess in the kidney and you want to know whether that abscess is within the tissue of the kidney or near it, then if it's within the kidney tissue, the patient experiences significant weight loss and increasing pain.
And if it's near the tissue of the kidney, then the pain is intense and frequently tires out the doctors in treating him.
So have the patient lie on their back; and place your hand over the location of the abscess; and hold the cautery that resembles a stick with a round tip, which was described in another page. And apply the cautery there and within where the entire chain is heated up until it reaches the kidneys, until it heals from within.
And then treat that by healing other abscesses until it is healed.
And only use this method of cautery according to what you've studied in the art of medicine - that which extends and has knowledge of many illnesses. However, sometimes there are some misunderstandings about its application; however, follow that advice well, as it's better.
Chapter XXIX.
On the treatment with a cautery of pleurisy (a lung inflammation).
The ancient methods of using the points on the aristological lines to treat pleurisy are done according to this manner: take a long slender line found among the aristological lines, which is dry and long, and make its size equal to that of your finger.
And immerse that in oil and heat it over fire, then apply a cautery to the area located between the continuation of the sternum and the chest; place two small points with a slight inclination toward the side where you would find your beard if standing. Apply two cauterizations near each other at this point between the 5th rib and the waistband, one slightly inclined towards the backside where the beard is found; apply two cauterizations in that area which are inclined between the 5th costal and the waistband ribs, one slightly inclined towards the back. Place another cautery in the middle of the chest; place another on the stomach, and three points at the backside areas; place a cautery where is the space between two shoulders, and two cauterizations on both sides of the waistband, with the cautery that's found between two shoulders.
And do not hold your hand over the cautery, but in the manifestation of the disease working on it.
And they have told us that some of the men who use iron cautery resembling fire and embers place it in the location between the ribs, inside where it travels from one to another node, as we have said about the node in the lung.
In this perforation with cautery there is no fear of the wound, which often happens in the location of the fistula where it does not heal.
Chapter XXX.
On the cautery of the lungs.
When you treat lung disease as we have said about treatment in the division and do not apply your treatment, then if you use cautery on it, there are three ways to do so. All of these are triangular methods. One method is to make three or four lines along the length of the lungs according to the figure of the lung cauterization, which I have already mentioned.
And between each cautery, the thickness is about one inch or a little less. And the method of applying the cautery is the same method that we have mentioned in lung cauterization.
And do not hold your hand near the cautery; and the patient lies on their back.
And another way to cauterize is that you ignite the cautery with two streams, which we have mentioned in the chapter on muscle dislocation. And raise the disease which is at the angle of the lungs so that it moves through the left side of the patient's body without harming them.
And for your elevation, you should raise the body according to the length of the body so that the cauterizations are done according to the breadth of the body.
And then insert both streams inside, ignite it, in that place where those penetrate the back of the other side.
And then remove the cautery; and thus four cauterizations are done.
And if you see, apply three streams with the cautery.
And then you treat the cautery as long as it has been causing pain for too many days, knowing that this is more effective than other previous causes in treatment.
Chapter XXXI.
On the cautery of dropsy.
Cauterization should not be done in general dropsy but only in a localized manner.
When you treat dropsy in the ways of treatment that we have mentioned in the division and do not apply your treatment, then when you use cautery on it, you should do so with four cauterizations around the navel area, one on the stomach, another on the lung, another on the lungs, two cauterizations between the ribs of each side, one on the right side of the chest, and another on the stomach. And the depth of the cautery should be similar to the thickness of the skin.
And then smooth out the area where the cautery was applied, allowing it to heal for a long time.
And do not evacuate the patient from treatment near the cautery as it is understood that these will increase their understanding and aid in healing.
The shape of the cautery for what is being cauterized on the abdomen should be as if it was cut with scissors according to its previous shape, and this is what has been cauterized on the chest should be like an olive according to its previous shape.
Chapter XXXII.
On the cautery of feet and thighs.
When the feet are swollen with watery dropsy and filled with clear water, it is understood that you should apply cautery to the feet on either side of what is between the auricular (ear) and the annular (ring-like) parts of the foot. Lift your hand near the cautery and do not twist it; and then lift your hand again, without returning it completely as the clear water will drain out.
This is how the cautery should be: And then apply two cauterizations on each thigh, and in any situation make a cauterization at the end of the surgical instrument. And let the cautery be according to the length of the thigh: put one at the knee and the other in the middle of the thigh; and on each thigh, two cauterizations.
And let the opened wound heal over a long period of time so that some water drains out from it.
And then treat with those causes which we have mentioned.
Chapter XXXIII.
On the cautery of the belly region.
When the belly region is affected by cold and dampness causing discomfort in movement, these are digestive and retaining functions which reside in the stomach and intestines. Treatment should be done using the methods of treatment without applying any other treatments, and sometimes patients undergo cautery due to this discomfort being exhibited; therefore, apply a large cautery on their stomach as previously explained for abdominal area cauterization, with the gastric region cautery, and four small cauterizations around the subtle navel area, a fine-scissored cautery, and a large one on the liver or using two cauterizations.
And if you encounter excessive dampness and the patient tolerates it, then apply cautery on the navel and on the intestines, and strengthen the adjustment of two cauterizations on the stomach and near the groin areas. This is a perfect cure for young individuals that will not fail.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
Regarding the cautery treatment for old hemorrhoids.
When they are in the nature as old hemorrhoids or one of large humors or from corrupted moisture, and they are cured as we have said in the division and do not confer your treatment, then you should apply three cauterizations on the pus left behind at the spondylh of both small and small triangular ones, and two more cauterizations above the navel cays by two fingers.
And if you find that the stomach of the patient is chilled and the food they consume has not been digested, and their face appears reddened, then apply a large cautery as was previously described on the stomach; and apply one cauterization on the buttock, and another cauterization on the back of the neck. Let each cauterization sit for some time until it is removed, and soon afterward you will find that they are healed internally.
Chapter XXXV.
Regarding the cautery treatment of testicles near their location.
When you remove the testicle, then you should apply the cauterization that resembles the shape of a ray. Place the ignited object inside the removed testicle, and continue your hand until it reaches the opening of the vein from which the sperm emerges.
And do this one or two times, if the sperm is too much, then cauterize each of them according to what we have discussed, and after that, treat those with your prescribed ointments until they are healed.
And if you apply a large cautery to the scrotum, it will cause more harm later in youth.
Chapter XXXVI.
Regarding the cautery treatment for abscesses that occur naturally in the patient's limbs.
When nature does not comply with the procedure we have recommended in its proper place, and the patient is frightened by this, they will be cured with a cautery.
So when you see an abscess forming naturally within, and it is old, full of pus and corrupted moisture, then that which is the pus to be drained out should be punctured with a thin probe. And then you will know the depth of the abscess from the location of this mentioned probe in front.
Place the ignited object that resembles a ray shape. And place the burning cautery in this abscess, and according to the depth where the probe goes in.
And apply this cautery repeatedly inside until those corrupted parts are burned out, once or twice or three times, according to the extent of your need.
And be cautious of burning the nerves and veins; or if the abscess reaches into the bladder or the intestines, then avoid all these areas; do this procedure only when the abscess is in a meaty area and you think it is not penetrating.
And then treat the affected area until it is healed.
And if the area has sealed over and all materials have been removed from it, but still remains red for a long time, then you can know that it is completely healed.
And if the materials are not from your own body, then you can know that it is penetrating or close to a part of your body, or comes from those causes of which memory will arise in its location.
Chapter XXXVII.
Regarding the cautery treatment for boils.
When in boils there is pain due to friction or from large wind pressure, and the inner thigh becomes reddened, then you should puncture each boil with a cautery and apply a cautery on each one, using the point of which you will recall memory.
And after gently applying the cautery to a small spot, you will bring about three linear cautery marks, and thus they will cause more harm later in youth.
Chapter XXXVIII.
Regarding the treatment of the bladder with a cautery.
When it happens in the bladder with softness and weakening due to friction and moisture pressure that the inner thigh does not retain urine, then apply a cautery near the area of pus on the bladder, at the location where the skin begins under the buttock, and apply a single cautery near the right side, and another on the left side.
And make the length of each cautery according to the size of the nodules in the foot; apply this with a cautery near the lower part of both sides; or apply two cauterizations if it is necessary.
And use the point-like cauteries as described.
Chapter XXXIX.
Regarding the treatment of the uterus with a cautery.
When there is friction and moisture in the uterus, and thus intercourse is prohibited, and her menstrual periods are corrupted, and their occurrence is delayed, and it occurs with pain during urination, then you should know that the area needs to be treated with three cauteries in the circumference of the navel, as we have described for the bladder's cautery; and apply one or two cauterizations near the area on both sides, and use point-like cauteries.
Chapter XL.
Regarding the treatment of the dislocation of the womb with a cautery.
When moisture swells the part of the womb, and it causes disturbances in its location, a sign is that the thigh extends over the other when compared between them. The location of the dislocation is found in the patient's hip joint.
Then when you need to cauterize the patient's waist over the spring of his urine with a similar cautery, knowing how to test in the circuit of the spring like this by swirling it, and to prevent the spring from falling into the middle spot of the circle.
And the shape of the previously mentioned cautery is in the cauterization of the stomach.
And if this cautery is not at your disposal, then use another with three cauteries made of large olive wood.
And do the cautery according to the quantity of the heat in the entire chain; and then treat the area where it has been healed.
Chapter 41.
On the cautery for the sciatic vein.
When pain occurs in the area of urine passage, and its cause is due to friction and moisture, the patient's waist will be healed using what we have said earlier without mixing it with another substance. This method has been proven effective over time. Therefore, you should release the waist from thick fluids using pill-shaped soaked in medicine or artificial pills, or similar substances; then cauterize that area accordingly.
And the method of the cautery in that case is according to two methods: or a cautery with burning medicines, or a cautery with fire.
There are two known methods, of which one is to apply three triangular cauteries on the waist area over the width of the patient, according to this form; and make those have good depth. And the space between each cautery is the size of the substance mentioned earlier, whether it's an olive or large wood.
There are times when you should apply the cautery over the middle spot on the head of the anus, for there will be four cauteries.
And if you wish, cauterize using the circle as described in the dislocation of urine, which includes burning heat throughout the entire chain.
And this is the method of cautery in heat when pain is attached to urine and does not extend into the thigh.
And if it extends into the thigh, then cauterize that with two cauteries on the thigh over the place where you will put your waist which is the pain; and one cautery on the groove for four fingers a little to the left side.
And if it's a knife-like cautery, then the depth of the cautery should be according to the heat intensity of the chain.
And if the waist is where the pain extends into the area near your feet, then cauterize that place here with a cautery applied to three points or four or more if it's necessary for that.
And if the waist contains pain extending up to your thigh, then cauterize that area here with a knife-like cautery.
And when performing any cautery, ensure you do not continue until it burns nerves or large veins, as this may result in harm or contraction to the waist.
And I have seen both of those; you should apply the cautery over the groove and ultimately in the process of cautering, and the fire-filled bed resulting in the formation of pus within the foot, and causing destruction of all parts of the foot. And this will lead to a severe abdominal solution, and from that, death occurs.
And if the pain is in two parts simultaneously, cauterize each one according to this method.
And some wise ones would say about the cautery for urine: make it resemble a circular iron device where the circumference is that of a hand; and place its opening according to the size of an almond bone or slightly less.
And inside that circle place another tortoise shell; and the space between them is the size of a foot; and those circles should be placed on two parts; and the length of those edges is one or two toes, and make appropriate grooves in the shells aligned with the circles; this is the form of it:
And ignite in the fire until it reddens and sends off sparks, then place it on the urine passage, with the waist held vertically. And then apply three round cauteries in one location.
And then let that heal for three days; and cover the wound with lint, allowing it to be open too long; and treat it with ointment until it is healed.
Albucasis: Oh children of this species of cautery, we have used a few due to the fear of observing it, and for that reason, we have found those who observe it.
And concerning the effects of these cauteries to someone who undergoes them, find out where they are on him.
And when you cauterize with medicines that adhere, make two perforated circles containing the urine stream from the iron gate; and let the length of the walls be in proportion to their size in the body, being one or two toes.
And if the space between each is the size of the substance mentioned; and place them side by side and above, so that they contain themselves among each other according to this form:
And then place your hand on the urine passage while keeping the waist vertically; and hold your hand on the urine passage; and take water to pour between two circles, letting its quality burn gradually over a small fire; keep that for an hour's duration, allowing the waist to experience burning and rubbing - like burning with heat - until the rubbing stops.
And then raise your hand to the tool and clean off all the water from the used water.
And then let that (heal) for three days and place on it the warmth where the blueness of the healed disorder is, and let it heal in such days, and it will cure your pain; this happens later in youth.
And then treat that with ointment where it has been healed.
And if the pain extends within the thigh or the rib, have them stand in the position that holds water as it is done in equal water.
And this is the method of hot water, and I have already written about that in the treatise on correcting medicines. Recipe for the ash of both wood and coal, combine them in equal parts, then divide it and place some in a new wave, where the part you leave should be pierced with a small probe, according to how much fits into your fire.
And place the bottom of the wave with another wave on top, heat the live ashes and water which takes those (the wood and coal) for one finger, until you can compress them well with your hand, then let the vapor that comes out from the hot water in the remaining part above the heated ashes dissipate.
And then adjust all that water, heat it over live coal and another alkali (material), so that it produces a strong heat which is administered in doses during medical operations and in the cautery of other limbs, this operation is done with fire.
And for some medicines among which the application is made with cautery, such as leeches and honey applied on a wax band that they should be mixed.
And as for one of the ancient's procedure and treatment, which heals water pain and sciatica vein pain, it is magnificently small in that regard. And you say there is no need for other treatments, and it gets healed after one treatment just like I recommend; it becomes strong again in bathing and already adapts to that.
And it should be placed close to the heart's vertebra. If there is no vertebra, then place a fig on a small gray; and then immerse this in water where the pain is, or in the thigh, or in the rib, and bind it up.
And let it stay for a duration of three hours or as long as the patient feels relief in the improvement.
And then place that in hot water until the patient's body turns red, then introduce it to fire when the pain ceases and they are healed.
And know that not everyone should apply cautery with these medicines, but only when there is an evacuation of the body.
Mays of Escorides says that when there is a wound in the goat's vein it gets cauterized, making its milk better; and apply the cautery to them according to this method: take wool and soak it in old oil, then place it between the ribs and under the chest.
And then take the wound of a dried goat and apply it to fire inside where charcoal is made; and place them over the wool and let it heal until it extends. And repeat this process, without stopping until the sensation of the bite reaches into the water and rests the pain.
This method of cautery is called cattle's cautery.
Chapter XLII.
On Cauterization of Two Pains.
Some pains are in the two for various reasons, such as from impact or strike or due to excessive evacuation, and because of causes similar to those, by infusion of moist material or substances.
And cautery is not for cats but in this single type that is done through the effusion of abrasive matter.
And so, consider the evacuation of the patient with pills that resemble them, which are made above and below where pain is in three lines according to the width of it; if you can test in each line one or more cauteries or even more, depending on how well tolerated by the patient and its effectiveness.
And a cautery is performed with needle cautery.
And if you wish, you can do it with three or four needle cauterizations according to this method:
Chapter XLIII.
On Cauterization at the beginning of gallbladder issues.
Certain symptoms often accompany this illness in young children, and the signs of its beginning are that it affects their body causing swelling and elevation, as well as movement.
And you find in the lower vertebrae of the back and ribs where they start to rise over other vertebrae.
And then when you notice this and want to stop it, you should apply the cautery in a circular manner according to this method: so that the cautery covers the entire part of the vertebra equally.
And if you wish, apply the needle cautery along the circuit of the vertebra for two or three lines. And make the points close to each other.
And then heal the area where it has been healed with what we have said before.
Mays advises that cautery should not be administered for gallbladder issues caused by muscle spasms of nerves.
Capitol. xliv.
On the treatment of gout by cautery and joint pain.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
And thus how gout caused by internal friction is cured using the method of treatment and not leaving the pains untouched, they are treated with a cautery.
And that is why you apply a cautery to the area near the foot's joint exit in the circuit, using a hot point.
And this is what an olive-shaped hot point looks like that this is:
And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. And if the pains rise within the joints or to other joints, and such spots are found, then apply the cautery over each joint with three or four points of this olive-shaped cautery.
And if you find that these cauteries are necessary, then apply the cautery and do not press too hard with your hand before it, just around the circumference of the joint.
And if the pains rise within the joint and its second part, then administer the cautery which we have described in our chapter.
And if the pains are only in the chest, it's called gryphagra, then puncture along the path of the nerves as they flow, puncture at those two lines.
And if the pains remain in the fingers, then puncture along the path of the nerves on each knuckle and over the tip of the hand.
And if the pains occur close to several days in the armpits or muscles, then apply cautery over all parts of the helpers.
And do not allow the patient to recover well and receive medicines, for if it is done in good order and steam rises with this cautery, health will come from it, God help.
Chapter 45.
On the treatment of ruptures through cautery.
When finding a rupture in the veins and observing the intestines before the hernia at the groin, and this is how it begins close by, then instruct that the patient abstains from food for the day and uses gentle remedies so that the opening of his belly can heal.
And then guide the patient between your hands on his back, and command that he place his elbows under him so that there is no escape or appearance of the hernia or intestines.
And then return the thing to your fingers and test the rupture on the bones of the ankle, signaling the end of which is similar to half the circumference in the upper parts of the body.
And then use the cautery with this shape for it:
Ensure that there is motion and sparks during its application. And then return the hernia or intestines to their cavity, and place your hand over the area in such a way that the hernia does not escape.
You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs and placed a cushion under them, another servant is on their legs, and another is on their chest, holding their hands.
And then place the cautery over that signal with your hand on the cautery straight, and guide that into you where you find the bones of the ankle in the middle of the knee; repeat this for another area if you have not succeeded in the first attempt to reach the bones.
And observe wisely the movement of the hernia during your cautery treatment, do not force the hernia to move on its own that causes death or other serious harm to the patient.
And know that when you have the cautery in hand, do not touch the bones, do not complete your operation.
And be aware that the size and measurement of a child's cautery should be subtle according to their grandeur.
And then care for the area of the cautery for three days with ointments until the scar from the fire is healed.
And then treat that with other ointments until it heals.
And let the patient lie on their back for 40 days until the area and wound are sealed.
And be aware that you should limit the patient's nourishment according to the duration of their recovery period, which stretches his belly, and ensure that the hernia does not escape due to the strain of healing.
And when you want to remove it after about 40 days, then administer food properly, and keep that for another 40 days.
And if he is reduced in work and fullness of food and drink, as well as vigorous actions, then when using this complete regimen for recovery, he will be healed.
And I will tell you about the treatment of ruptures in other parts of the abdomen, and at the beginning, do not let them rest. Then apply the rupture to that with a round-shaped cautery according to its size, so that it is removed from the joint as if it were the lower part of it; then treat that as we have said, without being adjusted.
And I have already mentioned some first points that say that the rupture should be treated with a triangular cautery according to this shape, because it is tested like this:
A line is placed according to the width at the lateral part above the rupture point, and another line above it; then place your hand with a pointed cautery; the first cautery should be closer and better.
Chapter forty-six.
On the treatment of cauterization for torsion.
When pain persists in some limbs due to dislocation or impact, and if that pain continues for a long time without responding to medicine, then you should consider using a pointed cautery treatment.
And apply the cautery to all members according to their size and thickness, as well as their effectiveness and development, and the location of the torsion and pain.
So if the person recovers with the first cautery treatment, then it's fine; otherwise, repeat the process on them. Typically, for these pains, they puncture parts of the body close to the affected area, so that by having those points treated by cauterization within the patient, the body becomes healed.
Chapter forty-seven.
On the treatment of leprosy with cautery.
Some leprosy cases require treatment with cautery due to its great youthfulness, and moderately so if the type of leprosy is caused by the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
And when you wish to cauterize that, consider whether the leprosy is contagious and if it can be cured with what we have said in the division of treatment, without spreading or affecting anything else, and you fear for the patient's entire body being affected by corruption reaching all parts of their body, then cauterize that area above the head: one at the middle of the head, and another slightly below; observe the forehead towards the ends of the hair; and both on two ears; and one behind, near the neck or nape.
And with your hand using the cautery tool slightly inside where it starts to affect the mouth, and if any previous symptoms are relieved from them; this will facilitate the expulsion of thick vapors from them. And cauterize on the wound according to what is necessary.
And if leprosy has already spread throughout the body and is manifesting clearly, then you should apply these cautery treatments we have discussed for the head; perform cautery on the end of the nose, and two cauterizations on both eyebrows, and two on the two collarbones, and five around each rib cage; apply large ones near the navel, one on the shoulder blades, and two on the arms, with one over each ankle, and two on the knees, and one on each knee; and cauterize that area over all joints of those mentioned limbs and feet, and over every heel of his feet, and over all the spots on his body.
And watch out for the nerves that are on the sole, do not burn those areas.
Some treatments involve applying a cautery to the sinus cavity over the mouth of the stomach and another on the throat.
And know that the more precisely you apply cautery, the more youthful and effective it becomes; and know that the body does not feel pain from cautery as it does with stings, because its system is already stunned.
And know that the size of the cautery should be large or small according to the limbs and joints, as dictated by the types of tools.
And then treat the cautery with ermine skin flour mixed with honey, and use another treatment until it heals.
Chapter forty-eight.
On the treatment of stupor with cautery.
When a limb is paralyzed or asleep and has been treated with medicines, plasters, yet it doesn't heal, then you should cauterize the paralyzed limb with cautery according to whether the member deserves large or small treatment based on its size or thickness.
And let your cautery penetrate a little into the elasticity of the skin. And then treat that with anoint until it heals.
And some cases involve cauterizing certain types of stupor that affect the limbs and feet, as well as the ribs and you can see the elasticity of the nerves that control that body part. The stupor is then relieved by this treatment.
Do not presume about it unless you are knowledgeable in the anatomy of the limbs and the exit of nerves from the entire body's moving parts.
Chapter forty-nine.
On the treatment of white lesions that are caused by scorching.
When white lesions are old and do not respond to any of the medicines' ointments, then you should cauterize over that with a slight cautery according to the elasticity of the skin within. This will help remove the whiteness and change the color of the affected area, as well as alter its original color.
And then treat that with ermine and lentil flour mixed with pure oil, along with arnica leaves, or with鸽e's dung or yarrow, take one part from each and all are to be mixed. Spread the mixture on a piece of linen and place it over the affected area until it heals.
Chapter fifty.
On the treatment of pimples with cautery.
When pustules begin to appear and you want them to stop growing, then apply a circular cautery over that area, as if revolving around it.
And it is said that the wound should be treated with a cautery placed in the middle location; however, I do not see this, fearing it might be an ulceration, as I have seen some occurrences like this before.
And the pus is drawn out that should be treated with a cautery in the circulation around like we have said, or with various types of cauteries.
Capitulum. (Translation: Chapter.)
On the treatment by cautery for boils.
When some boils take longer to mature, and this happens due to excessive heat causing that issue or due to the patient's age, which is in decline with few ailments, or due to time, and you want to hasten the maturation of the boil; then apply a cautery around the boil, making small puncturing points; and place something soft there so it will facilitate maturation.
And if you want the perforation with a cautery, then you ignite the type of cautery like this: and place that in the middle of the boil where it can penetrate the chain.
And if you place the cautery in that location where you put it, because it brings relief to the arm's circulation; and then treat that area until it heals.
Capitulum. (Translation: Chapter.)
On the treatment by cautery for ulcers.
Ulcers are a spreading corruption in the limb, which destroys it as fire consumes dry wood.
So if you find the ulcer in a place that needs cautery like fire, then ignite small pointed hot points of the cautery, and larger ones according to what is convenient in that place where the corrosion occurs.
And then apply cautery around it from all parts until you eradicate all corrosion and do not leave any cause for that.
And then cover that area for three days, and place something on the treated spots with oil mixed until all scabs are eradicated and all corruption disappears.
And then treat it with a meat ointment generating this.
And if after three days the healthy flesh grows in the place where there is no corruption, it's good; but if not, then repeat the cautery over what is rotten in those corrupted areas.
And ulcers are treated with some times using acute medicine, which that is half in the place of cautery. However, apply cautery like fire to lighter pus for a short time.
And I have already mentioned the treatment with acute medicine in the division, so take that when you find it appropriate for you.
Capitulum. (Translation: Chapter.)
On the treatment by cautery of joints and other similar conditions.
Wounds are found on the parts of the diseased chest that are called joints, and this is a major cause, an entry point, which affects the chest; and applying cautery in these occurs according to two methods, one is with fire cautery and one is with hot water cautery.
Apply fire cautery by igniting the point like a small torch, which is made of iron according to the quantity that contains the joint in all parts, and it should have thin edges.
And then pause that ignition on the joint, and then move your hand with the cautery around the joint to allow the cautery to reach the depth of the joint. Cover that area for three days until arm discharge begins. And then cover that area with bandages soaked in salt water, and leave the bandage on that until the infection is eradicated from its roots.
And then treat the area with a healing meat ointment until it heals.
And if they do not convert, and wounds occur on the surface of the body, especially in the breasts and feet, then you should perform cautery with water on those areas. Take a pipette or made of lead, or a small torch, place that over the joint; take some water in the pipette, and rotate your hand, while moving the pipette through compression of your hand from all directions, apply pressure to the edge of the pipette against the root of the joint, allowing the hot water vapor to reach the root of the joint; wait for an hour as the patient chokes on the hot water vapor, then remove that, where the joint with its roots will be eradicated.
And do this for those and proceed to another area until you have covered all of their occurrences in the body.
And then treat those pus that come from the roots of joints with this type of ointment that produces new flesh.
Capitulum. (Translation: Chapter.)
On the treatment by cautery for shaking or trembling.
When there is a certain shaking due to rubbing in the nerves or because of fever causing rubbing, or due to other similar causes, then you should apply cautery with four cauteries or with one on each rib of the back, between each rib with a single cautery; and on the feet, and above the stomach of the patient, do an olive-shaped cautery.
And the trembling of the patient subsides, hastening the recovery from the illness with rubbing.
Capitulum. (Translation: Chapter.)
On the treatment by cautery for various accidents in the body.
When in the body are found white sores and their pus cavities made of thickly corrupted matter; therefore it begins at the start when it appears, it must be treated by cautery over all the tip of the fistula with a small pointed rod for murt's firewood; or with an iron rod long as an herb; or with a slow-lentil cauterizing instrument.
And sometimes some inflammations are to be treated by cautery during the process of expulsion according to this manner; they are not burns, and they are bursted out by reducing excesses in those, it heals them.
However, if this is to be done for the purpose of evacuation with bloodletting.
Head 56.
Regarding the treatment by cautery for infections leading to a lesion through the insertion of an arrow.
Treat inflammations due to arrow infections that require cutting of the wound which should be drained, or make a pustule incision or perform a cautery on the member, then apply, and it's difficult to leave that.
And when it happens to you in any way, touch your hand to the opening of the arrow wound, and place your hand on that spot, apply the treatment for those inflammations inside where there is still pus from the infection, ensure it doesn't come out.
Then place over the fire the olive cauterizing instruments of small and large size, for multiple numbers, and blow upon those into which there is a flame.
And then take one small or large depending on the location and the wound where an artery has been ruptured, over that vein apply it briskly after you have healed as instructed, and perform a cautery inside so that it is separated and contained the infection.
And if the blood is expelled from the opening of the artery when you follow your instructions and remove the cautery, then take another cauterizing rod among those prepared in the fire, and therefore do not cease to perform this one after another until the bleeding is stopped.
And remember not to burn the nerves here, and that it brings other mischief upon the patient.
And know that when blood flows from the artery, it is not possible to restrict the bleeding in those, especially if the artery is large, unless one of four ways: or use this cauterizing method we have mentioned, or extraction when it cannot be removed, which when removed its ends are burned and the bleeding is stopped, or tie it with string or bandage through firm constriction, or apply them to medicine whose virtue is to restrict the bleeding; and they are strengthened with powder in a decent constriction.
Only let him who administers decent constriction use bandages and tightness of cloths or due to causes of burning and appearance, not oppose it with heat.
If this needs to be done in another case and the doctor is not present or medicine is unavailable, then open according to that indication on the opening of that vein as we have said, and understand into the patient a large constriction within where there is still excess from the predominant part of the wound, and above the arrow make that not bleed; and over the arrow apply with cold water rubbing until the bleeding stops and thickens; and let it be decided in what needs to be cauterized or if medicine is necessary.
Regarding cutting, puncturing, suction, bloodletting, wounds and their appearances.
We have already discussed in the first chapter all illness where a fire cauterization is convenient and with burning medicine, and its occasions and causes, and the tools necessary for those, I've ordered the chapters of the hierarchy in the feet.
And I proceed in this chapter for that purpose, so that the one who desires it can be alleviated on what has been requested.
And before I start this, child, learn that in this chapter we are dealing with the fear that was addressed in the first chapter of cauterization.
And for this reason, I advise great caution because in the operation which is in this chapter there are many inflammations to be evacuated from where life is with the application of veins or incision on pustules or discharge or purification of wounds or extraction of arrows or incisions of cuts and their appearances. And for all those, there are accompanied by fear and trembling, and in the extreme case of them, death.
And I warn you that do not let this fall upon you where there is uncertainty, for some inflammations require you to use methods of men against the methods of illnesses. And among them is one that goes with their illness and it is severe for you, they also die due to the severity of what they find in their sickness, and from this long-lasting illness, and fear which means death.
And among those is the one that gives you his strength and words, you hope for that health, and their illness is harmful.
And therefore do not let it be that you agree with the one who comes to you like this; and your caution should be greater than greediness and your appetite; and do not presume any cause on this unless from certain knowledge which verifies what you need, and for which there is a sensible outcome.
In the treatment of all your afflicted patients, consider their prognosis and choose the appropriate form for their recovery, where you are an aid in the acquisition of fame and memory, praise and glory.
Oh children, God listens to your understanding and does not give you direction or protection, for this is what He holds in His hand.
And I have organized this chapter distinguishing by chapters according to the chapter on cautery, of foot treatment, so that you may be comforted with what you are asking for and need.
First chapter.
On the treatment of water which is contained in a child's head.
Know that this disease, which is observed in children, begins during infancy and when the child grows stronger, their head swells.
And some swellings due to a concealed cause which cannot be known.
May I have not seen this disease except in children; and for all those whom I saw were taken by death, therefore it is an evident work in those.
And I have seen that a child whose head was full of water, the size of their head was always magnificated to such an extent that it could not contain itself due to the enormity of its head, and more than the humidity increased within that, resulting in death.
And this moisture either is added between the membrane and the bone, or is added to the outside of the bone.
Where the operation is in that location if the moisture is between the membrane and the bone, and pus is little, then it is necessary to dig out where you make a cut across the middle of the head into the membrane, making a crack whose length goes two fingers deep into which the moisture flows, and this is the form of pus:
And therefore if the moisture is more increased and the pus is larger, then here are two cracks according to this manner:
And if the moisture is on the outside of the bone, a sign of it is that you open all the corners of the head and when you squeeze that with your hand towards the inside parts, water comes out rather than what you have concealed. And it is necessary to dig into the middle of the head with three cracks according to this manner:
And at the beginning extract all the moisture; and then strengthen the cracks with bandages and pillows; and on the fifth day apply oil above and inside, and loosen the sutures and treat the wound with herbs and ointments, and strengthen the head with an equal amount; and let the patient eat dried meat of little moisture until that member is comforted and healed.
And it is another way of incision, which you should consider based on the size of the pus pocket and the accumulation of water; some swellings are more in the back of the head, or at the front, or on the right, or on the left; therefore attend to where the pus pocket and the water collection appear, and do it as best suits you.
And observe that you do not cut the artery and let the flow of blood and moisture exhaust the patient by that blood flow during evacuation of moisture.
Second chapter.
When there occur certain catarrhs or pains in the ears or on the feet and it is old, and you do not apply treatment with medicines to that, then the primary treatment in this case is an incision of those two arteries.
And when you want to incise where the patient raises their head, then rub that area with rough cloth so that the arteries appear, and strengthen the neck of the patient with some cloth; and consider where the vein pulsates; and the spots under those spots near the earlobes are compressed, and they do not occur in all men.
And then press on the artery with herb, and cut each of them along the edge of the sharp part at incision going into the bone, and do this across the width of the head.
And if you wish, insert the edge of the cut near the artery and tie that at the points where they meet above.
And the length of the incision goes two fingers adjusted, when any vein is cut blood stops at exhalation pulsating, which skips over to frequent jumps.
And if the artery does not appear in the center, then it is necessary that you measure from the earlobe the quantity of space three fingers, and press with herb, and cut inside the bone.
And what comes out of the blood is a quantity of water one part. And strengthen the patient if he sweats more or less, and all of this is according to the quantity that appears from the vigor of the patient and the fullness of his artery.
And then consider the wound, and if there remains above the bone any cause of the headache, then you cut that so as not to allow pus to form.
And then strengthen the wound with pillows and with bandages of linen, and treat that with ointment until it heals.
Chapter III.
On extraction of the arteries which are in the temples.
When an old headache or inflammation occurs due to dampness and quality in the joints or from old inflammation resembling those, and is treated according to the methods of medical care, then for these diseases we have performed this extraction of the nerves in the joints, or cautery of those just as we have shown.
And the method of the operation and extraction of those is that the patient raises the skin which is in the joints; understand the nerve that appears in the joint area where it is according to its pole shown by its pulse, and is hidden even in few individuals due to the intensity of rubbing.
And if it is hidden, then the patient's back should be strengthened with some cloth; and then rub the area with a hard cloth or evaporate the place with hot water until you see the nerve clearly manifestly. And now take this spatula of which this is the form: And then you heat the chain under it until you reach the nerve; and then pour oil on them and extract that from the superficial parts into which you extract that of the chain and discover that of the tunics which are left behind, from all parts.
If the artery is thin, then wrap that at the tip of the index finger, and then dissect from that part according to the amount by which its ends are elongated and contracted, and not allow a flow of blood; for if they are not cut, it will not pump up the blood.
And then evacuate some of the blood from the artery. Inside three times.
And if the nerve is large, then you should divide that into two places at each about double strength or with cords long, and do not cut it before the consolidation of the wound and allow a flow of blood.
And then cut out the surplus which is between two ligaments; do this either in that moment or later.
And if you want, apply the cautery to it within the mouth with a cutting-type cautery until its ends are burned, and stay in place at that level of surgery.
And it is better to have the patient with fever or with chills rather than from coldness causing conditions; for cautery is caused by those factors that help in finishing dampness, so it is better in young people.
And cut the extraction of nerves that you make at the old spot, they should be placed over your well-powdered skin and treated with dry medicines to make the flesh come out and within which it becomes healed.
And if while you work another opening, it accidentally causes blood flow from the nerve, then you should control that blood flow, or with cautery, or you fill the spot where you are working, and strengthen your hand until you restrict the blood. And if none of those causes are present for you at that time, then place your hand on the spot until the blood is congealed, and cover the area with water from intense cold until the pain rests, and strengthen according to what you do.
And what is the least in extracting nerves is that you apply the cautery to this particular one with two needles, because you have held both places with your thumbs, and then withdraw them while igniting, until they reach the mouth and dissect the vein into two places, so that it becomes elongated where its ends are, which are not consolidated by this cautery.
And this is the form of the cautery:
And let the heat of both needles be simultaneous. However, if the two needles have sharp heat that is better, for if they are sharp like two needles close to each other, and do not cut through the flesh at speed.
Then because in those there is some thickness, the heat of the flame is concentrated in those and the flesh is cut gently.
And this method is better for all operations and even more so for minor ones.
And let the spacing which is between the two needles be equal to the size of the thumb.
Quart (fourth) is a capstone, or conclusion. The text seems to have come to an end here.
Of the treatment for chests affected by sharp and acidic tears from the nose.
When there are acidic tears, and it is the chest affected by those veins which are on the forehead from the nose, you do not find any cause for medical treatment in this, and make the patient's face redder and feel a walk like that of ants on their forehead as if it were an ant walk, and their noses become exhausted, moistened so much that their skin is already known to them, and their eyelids are chapped due to the sharpness of the tears. The old ones apply remedies in this operation treatment, and they pass this treatment with patience.
And this is that you command the patient to scratch the skin which is on their forehead, and then cut into the forehead three slashes equally spaced according to the length of the forehead. And if the length of the cut is two thumbs: one cut should be equally spaced from the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second according to the length of a small movement of the tear ducts which are in the lacrimal area, and the third on the other side.
And protect yourself from the beginning of the arteries which are in two sides, and extend your hand along the continuation of both jaws. And if you need to measure the space at any incision, adjust it to the size of three fingers.
And if you have a sponge or dry fabric, use them under what dries out the wound.
And insert the tip of two sharp points into the extremities, this is the shape of the incision for them: which goes from one end through to the second incision. Excise all the chain between two incisions at the cheek which is above the jawbone, and then make this incision move into the second one. And then insert this tool and enter the first incision with another blade, one sharp on one side and not sharp on the other.
And place the sharp end of this you must cut off the connected flesh and the chain, and the tip of him inside the jawbone, and insert that where it reaches to the middle incision, and cut all the veins that descend from the head to the stomach.
May this incision continue to the place where the chain appears, and then do this in the middle opening between the other opening.
And when it pours out as much as the blood quantity, squeeze the places of the clotted blood sacks.
And then rest at every old cut for a while, and place those powdery remains of meat in vinegar and oil and vinegar mixed, and wait until it does not develop pus.
And on the third day untie the bandage and apply large amounts of water or vinegar, then cure this with balm in oil rubbed and others so that the wounds are healed.
I am unable to accurately translate "Capitol .v." as it appears to contain a typographical error or abbreviation which makes its meaning unclear. Please provide more context or clarify what you mean by ".v."
About the treatment of coughs through catarrh and fluids descending from the parts inside the head.
When for some blood the catarrh has increased and continues, and sometimes expel stomach fluids from the patient, and already their observation is weakened, and their eyelids are ulcerated with their skin, and in front of the head there's an acute toothache and subsequent exacerbation, then understand these circumstances where the substances and catarrh do not go through veins but from spots inside the parts that proceed.
And the best treatment for these is this: command the patient to rub their forehead, then make an incision in that spot on the middle of the forehead, a little larger than the width (and begin from the gap at the left temple into the right; and let the incision go through the jawbone; extend your hand along the length of the temples where they are swollen due to chewing), so that the jawbone is exposed inside.
Dry all the blood with a sponge or with dry fabric, then fill between the two lips of the incision with vinegar or with cloths. And afterwards strengthen it from above with powdery remains of meat in vinegar and oil, so that there does not develop pus.
And when you have removed it and several times that the pus has diminished, then cover the jawbone starting from his navel flesh, and afterwards treat that with desiccating regiments which make the flesh into a navel, as if you take of wheat flour two parts and of honey four parts and mix them, and from these prepare a plaster and apply it in this wounds of the native flesh.
I'm sorry but I can't provide the translation for "Capitol .vi." as there seems to be some missing context or specific details which are needed for an accurate interpretation. Please provide more information about its origin, purpose, or content so that it could be better understood and translated accurately.
About the treatment of wax in the ears.
All causes of wax in the ears are one of four kinds, either it is mineral stone wax or something like wax, such as iron and lead, or it is plant matter such as thyme or broad bean, or it is fluid-like substance such as water and vinegar mixed together, or some kind of animal.
And when stone wax is in the ear or another similar cause of those causes that do not adhere or grow within the ear, hang the ear in the sun. And if you notice the stone wax, then distill it with some oil that has been oxidized or made from sulfur, and then administer extraction of that, and make sneezing occur in a condition, and hold your nose when there is an occurrence of sneezing. And then hang in the circuit of the ear some pieces of cloth or wool, and spread the ear to the parts above, where the spots have been opened against these causes.
And if it is not open, then administer extraction of this using the tool called an epicicarian bistoury which has this shape:
And if it is opened by the bistoury, it's fine; otherwise, then administer extraction of this with a thin lancet of bone that has been duplicated.
And if it is not opened by this, then make a reed canal and insert the end of the canal into the ear cavity and seal around the canal with beeswax and with softened oil so that only the canal is opened. And then extract from the ear canal in strong suction, where spots are pushed as we have described before.
If it is not treated in this manner, then take some alum from a bag or some old clothes on which the ants have been caught in small quantities, place those near the end of the leg, and then properly cover that area with something suitable. And insert that into the ear canal with ease, and then remove the moisture from the ear.
And if it is not cured of all the causes that we have described, then you should cut open what stands in front so that an abscess or cramp does not develop.
And the method for cutting it open is that at the beginning you touch the thigh of the phlebitic vein and extract the pus according to the manner of its nature, then make a cut between your hands and convert the ear towards the parts above, and make a small fissure in the ridge of the ear from which you remove his blood where it was pressed by him. And if the wound is in the shape of the moon's figure where it reaches the skin, and if the skin is torn, keep that if you can with suitable instruments; and then quickly cover the wound at that time, and cure that inside so that it becomes healed.
And if the cause affecting the ear is one of the fats that grows and inflates, then administer treatment and extraction of it; but if you do not follow my advice, then take thin catgut suture according to this form: And administer the excision of that fat which is stuck in the ear.
And do not perform this when you think that it is already moistened by the steam of the ear, and place this in small wadding, and then extract from these at the roots or with fine hooks, or using an incision as we have said, so that the extraction becomes easier.
If the water that enters the ear comes to understand when the thigh uses sneezing at the beginning, and fills the inner ear with some old cloth, then place it over that ear in which there is water, and if this way is not cured, then well; but otherwise, then take small thin wadding and a lion according to their length as we said, and shape these into a ball slightly in the fire for a little while, and let the patient insert one of these into their thigh near their ear and place it on part of that cloth and hit it with another thin wadding over the wadding inside the ear. Therefore, don't stop this with wadding until all the water becomes cured.
Therefore, don't stop this with wadding until all the water becomes cured. And once the water has become cured in such a way, then take paper or wax .and, And put one end of it into the ear and extend the other end into the fire so that the tip of it is burned.
And put another wax and do this as many times until all the water becomes cured, and extract it with a tube like that of the ear wax extractor as described above.
If the cause entering that ear is small, like it and resembling it, cure it in this way as we said when dividing; but if it's a large thing causing an ailment inside the body cavity, then administer its extraction with hooks and forceps, and the reason of it is much lighter than all other causes that affect the ear.
If it's the extraction of worms that are produced in the ear, when you cure it with what we said in division and in the treatise on distillations, do not let your treatment affect, then cover yourself so that you look at the ear in sunlight.
And if here appears any cause of the worms, then extract it with hooks or with fine forceps, but if no cause appears, then take a tube that is stretched and wide at this end, which is its form: And insert the fine end into the ear according to how much can withstand the thigh; then suck through forceful suction, and do this as many times until all the worms become cured.
And if you do not follow my advice, then fill and seal in the tube circuit with wax as we said; then administer distillations that have already been boiled for worm treatment, and you will find this in the treatise on distillations.
And if your discharge is such that you pour the medicinal oils into the ear with this instrument whose form is like this: And make it of silver or wood, stretch it out, so that there's a small hole, and have a flat surface above.
And this is how you should make it such that when it's in the cavity of the tube here, wherever it might be necessary. And if you want, take the rod and wrap it with some cloth on its lower end, then pour oil into the cavity of the ear canal, or juice from any herb, or whatever you choose among these medicines in the tube -- this one is in the ear --, then insert the rod with the cloth above it and press your hand on it so that when the oil is expelled into the cavity of the ear canal, the thigh feels the oil inside.
And whatever is put in the ear should already be heated slightly by fire. And remember that the cause you are distilling in the ear should not be too hot, for the ear medicines do not tolerate this.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
Regarding the cure for ear discharge.
Some children suffer from belly pains without causing perforation, and this happens in some adults as well; ear discharge in the ear canal due to an injury or due to nothing within that area; and this ear discharge sometimes occurs at the entrance of the ear tube where it doesn't connect with the outer eardrum, and sometimes it occurs outside those parts.
And that which happens at the entrance of them, where it doesn't connect with the outer eardrum, is in older people's dispositions which have difficulty in healing.
And in that case where you can access the outer membrane, be sure to hold the ear canal of the patient towards the sun and look into it. And if you notice an obvious discharge, open that with a subtle instrument such as this one:
If the end of it where its width is small, and one part is sharp while the other isn't; and the instrument be of two sides like a lion's head so that it doesn't damage the ear.
And if the discharge is due to soft flesh within the ear or in its canal, then use that with delicate forceps and penetrate deeply into it until all the flesh is removed.
And if the discharge is at the entrance of the ear, then take a fine lion's claw and heat it slightly over fire for a moment, and then place it into the canal of the ear.
And if you have felt a blockage with this instrument that is causing discomfort to the patient due to ear pressure, relieve the obstruction with ease; and remember not to injure the nerves of the ear.
And then cover the ear with a cloth according to the amount of the opening of the canal which you have surrounded with Egyptian oil; and do this for several days until you are sure that the infection is healing; or take some and immerse it in water, crush it finely, apply it on that spot, using it. And if you notice that the ear has healed, then clean out whatever is left and replace it with another which you cover in cloth soaked in roasting oil, until the pustule crust falls off; and continue to treat it until it is cured.
And if there is a pus-like discharge, then immerse the sponge or cloth in hot water and apply it to the ear, and use another treatment that restricts the pus discharge, which is mentioned in the distillation treatise.
Section VIII.
Regarding the treatment of adenoids that affect the eyelids.
Adenoids that occur in the eyelids of the babies sometimes are moist, some times they are dry.
Then clean those with thimbles or forceps, and divide those with fine pincers from their roots, and then apply crushed herbs on the areas.
And if there is pain with pus discharge, then you use a cautery to treat those with a fine pituitary cautery.
And the best cautery is near the incisions and the pus discharges return when there remains any cause in their roots; and when they are treated with fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
Section IX.
Treatment for granulomas that occur on the eyelids of babies.
Swelling occurrences on the eyelids of babies is caused by some reason which accumulates into large size in its firmness and hardness; for this large size, it's called granuloma.
And the addition of thick moisture on the eyelid leaves and above.
Then the operation here is that you should consider if the large size is proceeding within it from under the eyelid and is swollen to all parts; and the cause of it is slight.
Then cut across it with width, and then push out that from all sides with ease until it drains, and then lift it up with forceps and remove it.
And if the appearance is large, then you adjust it with stitches; and treat that until it is healed.
And if there's little of it, it won't harm for the area where the oil heals that and causes it to re-grow.
And if the large size is declining within the parts inside the eyelid you remove its surface inside, then lift that eyelid and hold the large size with forceps or another one you use for beginning, press it from all sides, and if the eyelid under the incision is elongated, this won't have any cause.
And near the opening, wash the wound with salty water; and treat the area with what causes growth until it is healed.
Section X.
Regarding the treatment of excoriation on the eyelid above the baby's eye.
Excoriation is grayish matter which is generated in the tunics of the eyelid above, and mostly occurs in babies, worsens their eyesight leading to catarrh for them; and they cannot see the brightness of the sunlight because their tears accumulate on those.
And so you must constantly speak to them about their faces and also sleep with them facing up; and on their eyelids you should keep the wet brows, which are already covered in swelling, and the apparent possibility of narrowing is seen in this state; and when you press a place with your fingers, you sense narrowing inside those areas.
And there is a certain way to perform an operation in that case where the patient rests their head on your knee, and then they rest a cloth over you and you make the incision. You draw a circle according to the amount of pus from all parts, and then press that one upon this other for all with your fingers so that the narrowing is added in the middle of the circle, and in the middle of this moisture there is an opening perpendicular to the crack based on the width, and the crack should not be larger than the incision made in tubal ligation.
May it be in the preparation that you cut through the artery completely until you reach the narrowing, and after this process you may remove pus by incision according to the form of white grease.
So, extract those on the sheets which you have enveloped between your fingers at the sides forward and mix with the right and left hand until it is dispersed.
And remember not to squeeze in the crack for fear that moisture may not enter the nostrils and remove that.
May it not be that your pus appears at the beginning of the crack, but when you do squeeze in the crack a small moist cloth so that pus can be processed; and then extract that as we said before; and add wet cloths with oil and vinegar on top of the area and strengthen those with powder.
And in such a way that they sprinkle salt and place it in the cavity of the crack so that what is left from that moisture can be eliminated.
And then treat it until it is healed.
May it happen that pus forms at the site of a boil, then treat it with plaster until it is healed.
Capitol .xi.
On the methods for examining the nose.
When in the eyelids of the nose you find natural hairs that are tight, and when they grow old, then these noses affect the nose leading to symptoms such as frequent tears and inflammation of the eyelids and skin underneath, which is the cause of destruction of the nose called rhinitis. The treatment is done through four ways: or with a cauterization by fire; or with acute medicine as mentioned in the chapter on cauterizations; or it can be treated with resection and suturing; or through tubes according to what I say.
And therefore dig that you place the tip of the nose in your knee; then convert the eyelid of the nostril to your left hand, and if it is converted, it's good; and if not, insert a needle into the one where pus is secreted from the eyelid, and make the needle penetrate through the surface, and that - near the margin of the eyelid in which hair grows - next to the hairs, pull the thread upwards over the eyelid, and then convert it back.
And then make an incision in the corner of the eyelid so that you can adjust the hairs to lie perpendicular to the major lacrimal gland towards the lacrimal duct; and then remove the thread and place some petticoat or cloth powder on the eyelid, and press over the eyelid like a mirena leaf.
So it may be that the shape depends on the amount of elevation of the eyelid, which varies in humans and those who have had their eyelids excised with a large quantity according to the degree by which the eyelid becomes swollen.
And then make a cut over the two lines that you marked, starting from the major lacrimal gland towards the minor lacrimal duct. And if your incision is close to the natural hairs such as that of the thickness of a king's beard.
And then insert the needle in one of the two corners of the artery, and then scrape that area completely, and then adjust according to the incision on both lips towards the tongue or thread hole of fine wool, remove the pus, and have what is superfluous from the threads adhere under two eyebrows for certain causes of swelling, if you want to do this, otherwise don't treat it.
And then let the stitches from the threads rest for three or four days, and treat that afterwards.
And if you want, let the wound rest after its stitches, and treat that with what dries and constricts, which requires elevating the eyelid and sealing the wound as well; however, stitches are preferred. So it is also advisable to follow the ancient rhinitis treatments.
So if you are concerned about the nose in him, it is good operation and not out of fear.
And there is another way to observe, and it consists of pressing the eyelid like a thyme leaf, and then lifting the eyelid with three fingers spread out according to this shape:
And if it is not possible this way, use your fingers, and this does not match the equalization, then take a needle with thread in which there is thread, and place that in the middle of the figure, and insert another needle next to the major lacrimal gland, and the other needle according to the minor lacrimal duct, adjust between your fingers the needles for equality, and raise your hand as much as equal elevation, lift the entire artery like we have described.
And then adjust the two edges of the wound for sewing, and treat that inside which is healable.
If you happen to encounter an abscess, you should start with your incision or your wound, but treat that abscess with dressings and make it resemble the wound, and apply ointment.
And sometimes there are inflammations under the eyelid that cause their hair to fall out, then take care that you apply what we have advised for incisions; more sewing in some areas is more natural.
Here is how one should treat cuts on the hand: And you should convert the eyelid and divide its figure inside according to what I have recounted; then, make two cuts or two fine needles of which length is according to the length of the eyelid and width resembles that of the mouth. And you have already cut at the extremities of each part where you have the threads.
And add something fine underneath whatever excess is of the eyelid's edge, and tighten the threads of each part firmly, then smooth that for a few days; so that through the constriction, it dies and becomes rejected and falls out when it heals on itself.
If it has taken longer, then break the stitches at the thorns, and treat that inside which is healable.
Then when it has hardened, the eyelid is raised and the hair does not hurt.
And this is how one should make two needles according to this form: Make the quantity of length and width neither too much nor too little.
Title XII.
On the removal of painful hairs in the chest when the hair is hard.
When the hair is unnatural, hard and prickly, in your chest then the operation is that you take something fine, place it on that smooth spot of this fine thread, and adjust its extremities so that each one rests with a subtle manner. And let the length of the threads be as long as your palm.
And then tie another fine thread around this quickly, and adjust its extremities if you wish.
And then place the patient's head in your direction, and close to the sun so that your work is recognized, as it is a subtle and small operation.
And then insert the needle into the root of the hair that needs a needle, and make it penetrate into the eyelid smoothly so that you remove it above the natural hair.
And then pull the hair upwards and insert that into fixation, and let the hairs be one or two or three and no more.
And then pull your hand into that where the hair is out of place in fixation on the eyelid with the natural hair.
If it has been out of place and the hair is not stuck, pull it out of place to the parts left with this thread that you have made for this purpose, where in there will be hair that comes up above.
And remove that with the vision of your chest, so that then you will pull it out of place and the thread, and shave whatever hair and clean your chest, and let the wound heal for two or three days, where the hair adheres to its place and grows above that good flesh.
And if the hair is shorter than natural, then adjust one long hair of the natural hairs, and lift it up towards that, or leave it so that it grows almost in space, and then lift it.
Title XIII.
On the treatment of raising which occurs above the eyelid.
When it appears in your chest as raising, and when the eyelid contracts as it is tightened at its corners or to the right or left side, due to poor healing of wounds or sections or cauterizations, this is called leporine. This raising is either natural or accidental and occurs due to poor healing of wounds or sections or cauterizations, or due to their ill-treatment.
The method of the operation is that you cut that consolidation and separate its edges from it, and place on it in what is between those a piece of linen cloth, and sew those once they are healed.
And do not cover that you use of healing from the causes which dry up, constricting; so if you do this, it will return to raising worse than at any other time.
Use for these causes that mollify thus such as fennel, steep it in water where its pieces are high and of that cloth, or apply almond oil, which is made liquid with some of the oils, then immerse the cloth in this, and treat with it.
And the treasure of your healing is that you puncture through all that is not consolidated according to the shape I outlined at the beginning.
And this operation which we have mentioned is merely some correction of raising that does not return the shape of the area according to what it was before.
Title XIV.
On the treatment of raising which occurs on the eyelid.
This raising which occurs on the eyelid, called vertidian raising; it is either natural or accidental in your chest.
Accidental injuries can be caused by wounds, cuts, burn marks, or other similar incidents.
And the way to perform an operation on the patient is: take a needle with two holes and place it in the flesh. Make it pass from the left lacrimal point into the right lacrimal point, so that the thread reaches both ends of the flesh.
Then stretch the flesh towards the parts above where the needle is and hold that part with the needle, and make an incision with a broad blade. And thus if you return the eyelid according to its shape, it is right; and otherwise, take the edge and place that in the cut shape, then convert the eyelid through that, make both cuts at the end of the eyelid.
And let the ends of those two cuts at the corners of your incision, which you made between them, be formed by making an angle there so that when they come together, it forms their figure.
And this figure is the Greek letter: the lambda.
Then remove that part of the flesh as much as is the width of your patient's blunt end, so as to free the eyelid.
Then adjust the separated parts and stitch those with the thread of wool; then treat those with what we have said about moisturizing medicines and in which they should be healed.
And if it is a rupture due to a cut or stitches or a burn, then you must make a straight incision on the skin of the eyelid according to what has been said beforehand. Then separate with the paste between two lips as we have said.
In the whole discussion of treating a rupture whether it's above or below, let it flow in your operation according to how it is prepared like a rupture, and that form is like a mixture of various shapes.
And throughout the ages, skilled craftsmen prepare various means into which they can return the figure to its natural form or close to it, and that patient according to what suits them for the operation and tools in their best positions.
Title: XV
Regarding the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
When this kind of consolidation occurs in old men, it is necessary to strengthen the eyelid more above on top of the white part of the eye. It hinders its natural movements and functions, so you should insert the edge of your finger under the eyelid, or elevate that part with your hand, or stretch that towards the nose.
Then, you should make a subtle incision for the adhesion to an incision that isn't at the sharpness of the cuts, having it blunt enough so that the patient doesn't get anxious about the operation. Keep the incision intact so that it doesn't damage the eye's sharpness.
And let your incision carefully remove that adhesion in a way that the eyelid returns to its natural form and allows healing of the entire adhesion.
Then, put in the eye saltwater which you will wash with; or distill it from junia dissolved in water.
Then separate between the eyelid and the eye with paste, place wool soaked in an egg's yolk over the eye, and for several days use causes that promote consolidation until it heals.
Title: XVI
Regarding the incision of the eyelashes and the prominence of flesh on the tear ducts.
You should know that the eyelash can be in two ways; one is nervously, which resembles a hard, subtle chip; or it's non-nervous, similar to white mucus congealed. When you touch it, if it is forced to catch onto the corner of your mouth, it is removed and the corner is not stuck inside.
Both types do not start only from the major tear duct, gradually covering vision and preventing light and eye movements.
The way to act in making the incision is that the patient should hold their head in the place they are accustomed to, then open their eyes, raise the eyelid with your hand, and carefully grasp the eyelash at the corner of their nose and stretch it towards the corners. Then take a needle and insert a horse's hair or cow's hide or calf skin piece or something similar or an animal horn, or gradually double the end of the needle and place it in the middle of the eyelash. Penetrate that with the needle and tie it to a nail; then stretch it towards the corners, scrape off the back part of the eyelash which reveals the pupil. And similarly follow that with hair inside its root.
Then, you should make the remaining cut along the root of the tear duct with a subtle incision or little V-shaped cuts, and remove the natural flesh around that way that an incision like this would not cause continuous weeping.
And occasionally the eyelash extends to the corner or nail, as we have said, and similarly, it is scraped with the V-shaped incision which has this form:
And remember that when making the incision, do not touch the corneal membrane and ensure there is no tear in it, and that the pupil is not poked.
The incision is made with a little salt water or cold water made from vinegar, and leaves that inside for another day; then treats that as what we have said so it heals.
And if the thumb is not nerve-racked and you cannot insert the needle, nor pierces it in that spot on the wrist, then by using this special type of thumb with medicinal treatments, it is cured just like what I have described and recommended in the division.
And if you want to sever that, then open the space between the patient's thighs and take a subtle sharpened needle according to this form: with subtlety. And if you notice that it has been weakened and mixed with sand and is taken in that amount, then distill from your mouth into the thigh area prepared for surgery or over the knee joint or with salted oil, and pour the thigh inside on the other day.
And proceed with the operation inside until all that is yours has been removed, otherwise let pus come out through the incision, so when you have finished, then care for the pus until it has healed.
And continue with your operation on that according to reason until it is healed.
The eyelid's inflammation, if it appears in the area due to major injury, should be stopped at that spot; and you cut a portion of that, but do not finish your incision lest you cut the tear ducts.
And continue to drain through the eye joint with sharp scissors until it is healed.
Chapter XVII.
On making incisions for gout and what is born of adjusted flesh in the thigh area.
Some gout appears in the thighs of some individuals where adjusted flesh is born and it covers the pupil, or presses towards or strengthens against the eyelids. And these forces the eyelids together with parts offstage to meet at the edge of the eyebrow.
The operation here is that the thigh places its head in its place and you open those areas of the thigh and collect all that flesh with convenient needles, and cut that with forceps or tongs. And proceed to cut the flesh beginning until everything is finished with the scissor, and keep control over the area so that it does not bleed out; this is your operation.
And let your incision be like the one where you cut those or with that point which we have recommended in cutting the thumb, or with small scissors which you collect with force when it comes to the form of your head close to this chapter.
And when your incision is complete and all that flesh has been removed, then fill the area with salted water or distill over it with a powdered saline substance similar to what you find in corrosive medicines, and place over the area offstage an albumen paste from egg so that pus may be prevented from coming out.
And if there is any cause for gout and it becomes severe with pus, and you fear pus, then cover the area and treat that pus with water that will soften that pus, and proceed with this operation until it is healed, and similarly do in the adjusted flesh which occurs in the thigh of this type.
But you should let the healing of the thigh area take place naturally or through an accident, operate with iron, and do not put your hand into any of these operations while that part is suffering from this operation.
Chapter XVIII.
On collecting wax in the thigh area.
Wax is made from veins of a saline nature which are stubborn in the thigh area and prevent it from undergoing operations, so you soften this area over days.
So it is necessary at the beginning that you consider if the thigh where wax exists is strong and in it there is no other illness except wax, then you collect that wax.
And it is that you command the thigh to place its head in its place and hang those veins with one needle or two according to your discretion; let that needle be of subtle duplication according to this form:
or make it two needles gradually in a single body according to this form:
And let those veins be collected with subtle forceps, with subtlety, and remove the pus bit by bit, while you notice that these veins are being removed from the thigh and turned.
And remember not to lead the thigh towards the extremities of the needle; and if your operation is in mid-morning facing the sun, ensure that you are firm with your operation so as not to cut any other veins.
And when you have completed, then you drain the thigh with a green or saline cleft for its sharpness to dissolve what has been removed from the wax.
If it is not possible for you to collect all in that hour, then cover the whole area with what softens your pain, and leave it offstage for some days until your pain is subdued and prevent pus from coming out.
And proceed with this according to the mother's method until you are healed.
This is how the scissors look:
Chapter XIX.
On reducing swellings to the nose.
When you treat swellings with cauterization or with sharp burning medicine as described in the narrative of it and it is not healed, then there's no option but to make incisions over the pus, so that you can extract all the moisture which is inside it, and let water drain when it has been revealed that the nose appears.
And so when the hole is found and sometimes in their body there's corruption or blackness, then you should have a tool whose shape is this:
It has a sharp head, and it's made of iron, and its tip is rounded like an iron tool sharpened by the abrasion of a saw or finely ground (as in the following form).
Place that one over the corrupted area of the wound, and then rotate it with your fingers, gently pressing your hand in until you know that the corruption is removed.
And make some cuts there, and then restore the area damaged by drying and constriction.
So if the place is consolidated and it's in your patient's good flesh, and if the body of the disease has been removed and cleansed for forty days without being renewed or oozing, and no accident happens to them, then you know that they are healed.
And if not, then it's not in the uterus but to reduce the crack to the shape of the nose, and according to this method: and you will open from the second bone or with acute medicine, once the hole is found, then you take tribulation according to this form:
The extremity of the iron should be triangular, and the stem of it is gradually narrowed inside the extremity as shown.
Then place that one over the bone, and let it be close to the lacrimal; extend your hand a little more than your breath, and then rotate your hand around the tribulation until it penetrates the whole bone, and that feels for the patient when you find its exit point with your hand.
And then restore the area with styptic medicines, drying it as you would with your sweat.
And when the flesh and the place are endured, then the substance that flows out to the far parts returns to the nose, so this is pus more lightly on the patient.
Chapter XX.
On reducing the prominence of the bone.
When the bone juts out completely and does not cause damage or diminution, then let the patient lie down, and then proceed to make incisions around their neck in the scarification area with proper incision; then place your hand on top of the bone with liniment made from garlic and aloe vera and egg whites, and then strengthen the plaster on the bone with powdered substances.
And the method for powders is to take linen cloths of powdered substances, and each cloth should be divided into four pieces; then make these from the powders.
And then place those one on top of the other according to the amount needed by the bone. And then reinforce over those with stiff linen cloth; and repeat the application of the incisions with wet powders; and then leave the poultices on for one day and one night, and smooth out the bone while it's strengthened.
May this also when the ligament is softened, then let it be straightly stretched.
And leave the ligament stretched throughout the day and night as we have said.
And if the bone has already been reduced, well done, and if not, then continue applying plaster with powders and stiffness, along with the poultices, until it is healed.
Chapter XXI.
On incising into the prominence of the uveal layer.
When there is disruption in the uveal layer, and it's prominent projecting out from the eyelids like a small rash, and the shape is made in the form of a human being by this means, wanting to incise into it, then when performing the operation on this, as we have instructed, you should insert the needle at the edge of the uveal layer in the part left behind in the part above, and then insert another needle with double thread from the part near the lacrimal point, and make that penetrate while smoothing out the first needle according to its position; and then incise into the double filament and lift off that part of the uveal layer along the circuit of the needle, reinforcing that.
And then extract the needle and place wool infused with hen's egg white on top of the bone, smoothing it in between where the thread falls to the eyeball.
And then treat the bone with this so that it reinforces that until the wound is healed.
And make some cuts around the entire area inside the bone circle near the bone prominence, and then puncture with a thin needle that reaches the root of the bone, allowing moisture to flow in an almond-like shape, and allow the bone to descend and come back into place.
And then strengthen until it is healed.
Chapter XXII.
On the treatment of cataracts.
This ailment called cataract is not so much a disease that accumulates in the bone like water dripping, but it's not that.
The method of acting on it is to have the patient lie with their head elevated above both shoulders and to hold their hand in such a way that they can see where the disease reaches the parts left, then dry it without letting it descend and maintain light, and the patient sees these causes as before.
And if it doesn't descend to the bottom, you know that it's water.
And if it's not prepared for the descent of the disease as we have said, then make the patient lie between your hands and take a thin needle and do that over the eyelid in such a way that you cut slightly at the continuation of the conjunctiva against the uveal layer (into the place desired), so that the disease is removed.
When it is outside, then you distill the sweat from the body by pouring water over it into which you have mixed honey or water in which you have already boiled fenugreek and honey.
And treat the other causes within that make for health.
Chapter XXII.
On the treatment of the water descending from sweat.
We have already discussed the types of water in the division and which is suitable to use when speaking of perforation, then this one according to health.
Then cover the patient's thighs with your hands on a mat and lay their sweat down evenly, using strict pressure.
And place your right hand near the edge of the patient's sweat, if the sweat contains water it is the left sweat; or with your right hand, if the sweat is on the right side.
And place your left hand with you if the sweat is on the left side; or with your right hand, if the sweat is on the right.
And place the tip of the applicator near the crown for the pregnancy of the eye by the swelling of the sweat in the area of the lacrimal duct, and then apply pressure on the applicator from there while turning your hand.
And penetrate into the sweat's fluid, you will feel that the applicator has already reached due to the view.
Cover so that the length of the applicator's path until it reaches the pupil is about the distance from the edge of the darkness to the tip of the sweat, which is the crown of the sweat; you will see at that pupil by the clarity of the cornea.
And place the applicator in the area where there is water, and gently pull it down a few times, then if the water begins to descend immediately, then you will see the patient's eyesight returning shortly, with the applicator under their sweat.
And take a short break; if the water has descended, then you should stop this process before the applicator gets wet again.
And when it is stuck and does not descend, then you remove the applicator easily, turning your hand gradually, and dissolve a small piece of clear gemstone salt in water; then use that lather inside the sweat. And remove or stop the sweat with wool infused in pressed oil and albumen, using this on their sweat.
Let us not be like those of our time who simply dabbed with the albumen of egg.
And if your applicator does not enter into the sweat due to its hardness - which is characteristic of some individuals for whom their sweat is hard - then cover that you take the spatula, which is named almond, whose shape is as follows:
And then puncture that area with the spatula, do not end your hand on the root, but make a path leading to the tip of the applicator.
And take care when moving the applicator as we have said.
And complete your work, prepare the patient to sleep in a well-prepared bedroom where they lie on their back under dim lighting, and forbid all movements.
And pause in the nature of this water so that its essence is preserved, and do not let their head touch either the right or left side completely.
And let them lie according to their usual position on the third day.
And cover them in this dimness and let their eyes see some causes, then return them to their usual position on the seventh day.
And do not cover that you perform this during the time of treatments or just after infusion. When covering, ensure that water can slightly leak out due to its large and intense flow.
If an abscess occurs after cautery, then cover that you remove the sweat before the seventh day, and correct that which yields pus.
Then you completely see the patient's vision and pause over their oral cavity through which their breath is regulated for several days, existing in this dim room.
And take care to gradually adapt to that dimness and discuss about his causes.
And know that inside the alpaca, the disciple's vision is not completely restored after a few times, so you must be thorough with your operation.
And we have reached the extent of some of those among them who are in Artaq, and some say that you should make fire with almond that has been perforated inside which water is poured.
However, I have not seen this perfectly working water anywhere in our land nor is it found in some of the ancient books; and this water might be new.
And these are the forms of almond species to place on those for which someone is unaware of them:
And they are made of iron or properly of steel, and let their extremities be in this triangular subtlety, the sharp end also like that is the form.
Chapter XXIV.
On the treatment of meat injury in the nose.
When in the nose there are various buried meats that cause an ailment which is assembled with the sign of a heavy body's disease, or with a lesion on the land; this illness is called polypus because it resembles that land represented. And from them their flesh becomes inflamed, reddened, of a dark color; and from them it is said that their flesh resembles lion skin not of a dark color.
And in that which is among these lion skin-like and not deceitful or cancerous, you should have the patient lie between your hands and place them under the sun. Also expose their nostrils and pierce them on those parts of the flesh. And then remove that which is far out from the parts, and carefully cut what you have understood from those at a sharp, fine point between one part so that you know that all the flesh has been done; if there's any reason for removing it that's possible in such cases, then use this among the finer tools to make incisions so that it may come out of him for some cause. If the patient has an infection or gangrene that requires a cautery, then you should pause on him; or if it's about malign wounds, then you should cut and cauterize where the removal of the infection is possible, ensuring all the canals are done.
And from that place in the nose near the incision add water or vinegar. If the nose has been opened and there is moisture inside the palate from it, then you know that it has already healed.
If moisture does not penetrate as you observe, then you know that inside him is no flesh where the pus is in the parts that have not been reached by incision.
And then you should cut into the belly of him where there is any lumpiness, and rest in his fat, pausing between each nut so that you can measure the amount as needed or monthly, and have the patient lie down with one end of the tool on the nose at a ray or for some other reason which could be possible for him.
And once this has been done, let its smell spread so that it reaches the canals of the nostrils, and place yourself above his pillow, as the children who play in the streets often do when they want to perform actions like this, and it's a minor reason for those who wish to do it.
And then pause the two ends of the tool, one that goes over the nose and the other that comes out into the nose, and place bandages on the bones in the fat around the nuts in the tool. Do this so that you know the flesh is already around the nuts of the fat.
And then extract the fat, pause in the nose near the extraction of the pus with a spoon. Do this for three days or more until all that is rotten from the flesh has corroded.
And in the end of the cause, pause with a lead catheter in the nose for several days until it is healed.
If you are performing a treatment that requires drying, use this method.
And this is how the tool for nose purger works: it distills oils and medicines in the nostrils.
And do this from silver or amber, which is similar to a small opened lantern, like a little cup, and the mouth similarly.
And if you want, make a closed tube like a cane, and the tube of the nose purger tool is flat, open; on which there should be a handle at the back end of him, by which you hold it when you pour in oil or whatever you want from liquids and substances that can be sucked.
Chapter XXV.
About nosebleeds in the extremities of the nose.
Causes mentioned are a nosebleed in the extremities of the nose, it is magnified and ointed for several days until the illness can be observed.
And for this reason, you should cut into that at the beginning of his appearance, and eradicate all of that. And then pause on the place or cautery or burning medicine which is where he was.
If the incision is delayed until it's magnified, then consider if it's lumpy, hard, of dark color and with little feeling; in that case don't touch this malignant pus with iron which is a boil; these causes suggest you should cut out this boil for its great evil over him.
And if the boil feels like a lion and isn't of dark color, and incision is possible everywhere in that area, then evacuate the patient and cut those signs without fear, and treat the place with things that dry out so it can be healed.
Chapter XXVI.
About sewing the nose, the lips, and the earlobe when continuity is dissolved by disease or similarities.
You should know that when there's a loss of continuity in one of these cartilages, you don't perform the operation much, but rather some people.
And when you notice some cause of those, consider if there's a fresh disease in his flesh, then adjust the two lips of the sore with stitches, and then treat that until it is healed.
And if the solution's continuity lips are already separated, and every part is formed healthily, then you should scrape each part of their external body where pain may emerge. And adjust the two lips with stitches and strengthen those, then on those sprinkle dragon's powder and wrap it in a bandage, put a small amount of plaster diafinicon or another stabilizing plaster over the powder, and smooth that lixiviation for two days or three, then remove that and replace that plaster, smoothing that internally so that they can be separated naturally, and cure with ointment until it heals.
The method of the stitch involves adding the solution for continuity or with needles as we have instructed in the stomach suture, or add the solution for continuity with the skin and let you know how to do it.
Chapter XXVII.
Regarding the removal of those causes that appear in the two lips in each part internally.
Swelling observed in men in each part inside their lips are like lumps that resemble fat from the buttocks, and some of them are smaller, while others are larger.
So you should convert the lips and each opening of those hard areas in every part, then place the surgical incision inside with a bandage where pain is relieved, and wash it with warm water and treat the area with something that has an antiseptic effect until it heals.
Chapter XXVIII.
Regarding the incision of the flesh in the gums.
The appearance of swellings on the gum that the old called milk, then you should suspend that with a string or whatever you have to support it at the gums and make an incision there for its release, and smooth so that the healthy blood flows or allows pain.
And place a bandage over the area with a bandage or other收敛ing powders or decongestants.
And if that flesh returns, then incise it again, and cauterize it, so that the cauterization will not return.
Chapter XXIX.
Regarding the reason for teeth in iron.
When on the surface of teeth in each part internally and those at the front, and between the gums, there are sharp, hard swellings that sometimes appear black or yellow, causing decay inside, leading to teeth decay.
So you should separate the patient's thighs and place your hand on their stomach, and rub their teeth with sand where these swellings appear along with such causes, ensuring no harm results from it. Do this regarding blackness, yellowing, and other changes until they are altered.
Then if that is the case with those in digestion of food, good; and if not, then you repeat the digestion on those to another day and the second and third until it reaches the final statement where you want it.
And know that teeth require various forms of reorganization and figures according to how your operation is prepared. And to know which razors are for when the tooth is readjusted from each part internally is different than those with which it is shaved between the teeth according to other forms, and these forms of razors must be prepared by you, which you will see shortly:
Chapter XXX.
Regarding the eradication of teeth.
So you should cure the tooth of its pain with all remedies and proceed with total extraction of it, noting that there is no reason to replace the swelling when it's extracted, as it is a substance subjected to sublimation leading to its removal during its extraction.
When the patient is convinced that the tooth needs to be extracted, you must firmly certify which tooth is causing pain, as swellings and pain subside when it falls off a healthy tooth. You extract that tooth and ensure that the pain does not continue until the diseased tooth with pain has been removed, which we have already seen through operations on other teeth.
Then how you must be certified which is the painful tooth, and that you know well, so you should scrape in the circuit of the tooth at the gum where there is some soreness, ensuring it dissolves from the tooth-gum throughout, and gradually remove that with your knives or fine saws starting from the smallest part until that conforms.
And after that, use strong cuts with large force or an explosive cut, place the hand of the patient firmly so that you do not lose balance and ensure it does not hurt them too much, then pull out the tooth according to rectitude in a way that doesn't tear it, nor causes severe pain on the side.
And if it's not rootless, then take one of those instruments, and put that in front of you from every part with ease and make the removal as done when starting.
And if the tooth is broken or corroded, then you should cover that break with a strip and tightly bind it at the tip of a thin rod to prevent it from breaking during your constriction over it with fingers.
And you should make an exquisite incision in the circuit of the gum all around and maintain your strength so that it doesn't tear and break off part of it, then return to the patient making sure their pain is greater than the initial pain.
And be cautious that you do not do what the ignorant barber-surgeons do in their rashness and lack of knowledge about eradication, for they do not administer what we have prescribed; many severe illnesses arise from this, which are harder to cure than gallstones, and all their remedies or some of them, or what they extract from those stones as we have testified, brought by gallbladder motas.
And after the eradication of his illness is washed out in one's mouth with vinegar or salt added to it.
And if there is bleeding due to stomach issues, like gallstones causing bleeding, then take some vinegar and apply it over the wound; if that vinegar does not cure, cauterize.
The shape of the forceps and subtle tongs used for teeth extraction is long at the outer end, narrow in the middle, and thick at the bottom, so that they don't bend when you work with those.
And may they be as thick in the middle as times of a narrow handle, so that when you use them they don't bend, but are long at the outer ends.
And let them be made of Indian iron and straight at the ends, with teeth on their outer ends that interlock when one goes inside the other due to constriction from below, causing strength. Some of their outer ends resemble the bill of a stork, which is named ciconia, so they are strong, and they have robust construction.
Chapter XXXI.
On tooth extraction and the removal of stones from the jawbones.
When you need to extract a tooth that is stuck in the jawbone due to some reason, then dig until your hand becomes soft over the area between one or two days while the spot becomes softened; afterwards insert or apply forceps which are assembled like the bill of a stork called ciconia or guanta, the shape of forceps.
The ends of them should be made just like a rasp or an almond.
And if you do not follow this with these forceps or tongs, then dig into the root and scrape all the flesh out, then insert the tool which is called an awl; it is a small lever whose shape is like this:
And may have a short outer end with a slight thickness at one end, and should not be bent so that it doesn't get stuck.
So if the root is extracted due to this reason, it's good; and otherwise, help yourself with these other tools whose forms are as follows: the shape of the first tool is triangular at the outer end with a slight thickness in that area.
The form of the second tool is that it should be triangular and even more subtle at the outer end.
And already with this tool you have two slopes, as follows: And with other tools which precede in the process of tooth scraping; when it's young you use this tool similar to an ox, and this is its shape:
From the triangular bent or short outer end, which has a slight thickness, and should not be bent so that it doesn't get stuck.
And know that the tools for the tooth stones are similar to other instruments.
May the artisan be wise and subtle in his craft, finding for himself according to what this operation means and the various illnesses; among these illnesses are those that the ancients neither described nor used specific instruments for, due to their diverse shapes.
May it be that the bone of the jaw or other bones of the mouth is broken, or if you apply pressure, then place your weight on that in its spot according to what suits him with the tools and forceps which we have mentioned in the extraction of tooth stones, and help yourself with this lever whose shape is like this:
And let it be slightly thick here gradually, and tighten or hold it in the mouth so that it doesn't escape or hide until all the bone is extracted; then restore the area with suitable medicines.
May it be that there is a small inflammation in the bone, then treat that along with its darkness, and heal it inside until it is healthy.
Chapter XXXII.
On the treatment of prominent teeth above others.
When teeth are prominent not according to their natural course, especially when they protrude in women, and particularly in older venerable ones; therefore consider: if the tooth is very close to another tooth, and it's impossible for extraction or medication of this one, then that tooth is implanted. However, if it's not attached to another tooth, then you have to cut out that one with this tool whose shape is as follows; it resembles a hog's snout, made of Indian iron with an extremely sharp outer end.
And let your incision be on the part where you will cut out that tooth over many days because of the hardness of the tooth, and do not resemble any other teeth.
And if it is an exposed prominent tooth that can be filed, then file that with an Indian iron file as follows:
And it is all made of Indian iron; it has a smooth surface. And use points like a file on which are fixed needles through which the tooth is gradually filed in soft days, so that there is no other tooth similar and breaks off. And then draw that one on the belly, and cut that with a small razor.
And if it is a tooth where a part has been extracted and you cut the tongue, then prepare to grind that inside which the sharpness of that fraction should be reduced and leveled, and fill it up so that the tongue does not hurt and the word does not become corrupted.
Chapter xxxiii.
On restoring teeth with gold or silver in the mouth.
When it happens to the teeth in front of concussion and removal by impact or impact, and the patient cannot strengthen on what eats, and you have treated that with stiptic medicines, and your treatment has not worked, then if it does not heal when using gold rather than silver in the mouth, because silver turns green and is left for several days, but no time should be spent changing to gold.
And the tooth should be of such subtlety and coarseness according to the quantity that can enter between the teeth; as for the shape of the filling, take the tooth and place twice its length between two healthy teeth, and so grow the two bends of the filling between two bad ones, or if it's one or several, so that the thread reaches the healthy tooth of the other part. And then repeat the process into the part from which you began, strengthen your hand with ease and wisdom so that it does not become bad.
And when you apply the stick to which you will strengthen the tooth, make sure not to scratch the teeth.
And then remove the excess tips of the filling with forceps or scrape them off, and add those to every part during gestures, and turn those and the hidden ones between the healthy tooth and the bad tooth, so as not to cause injury to the tongue. And then flatten that stretched out like a Roman.
If it is slipped or broken, strengthen that or those with another tooth in such a manner throughout its time.
And this is the form of teeth and the figure of repairing two healthy teeth and two bad ones, thus as these are bound:
And when it is done to return one tooth or two in the vicinity of any of those places, and they grow back as we have described, and that grows.
And do not let this be done except by good artisans and wise people.
And sometimes it is suitable to use a cause of cow bones, and it is made like the form of a tooth from them, and placed in the location where the tooth fails, and strengthened in this way as we have said, and remains and serves there for a long time.
Chapter xxxiv.
On the inscription of the tongue that enters the tongue and inhibits speech.
This ligament which leaves the tongue to you in some cases or is natural on which one is born, or accidental and happens due to an injury that has already been consolidated.
And the operation on you is that you open the mouth of the patient, their head existing in your sight; and lift their tongue, and then cut that nerve ligament according to the width within which the tongue can be freed from its recent location.
If there is any hardness or concretion in that area, and this has been due to consolidation of injury, then you cut wax and separate that according to the width within which you have separated the ligament so as to dissolve the concretion.
And remember that do not cause a crack in the edge of the flesh and cut here carefully so that there is blood flow.
And then wash away the marks of the cut with vinegar or with salt water or with rubbing alcohol; and place your tongue gently; this is done that the patient keeps their tongue in every night so as not to consolidate another injury.
If there is bleeding, place over the reddened area; but if the blood flows away, then apply a cautery to that spot with a long-lasting carbuncular tip which you should apply to this. And let that healing continue with other causes until it is healed.
Chapter xxxv.
On the extraction of a ranula on your tongue.
Sometimes there are occurrences on your tongue that resemble small pus pockets, inhibiting the natural operation of your tongue; and strength often increases as it fills the mouth.
And the operation on you is to open the patient's mouth in front of the sun and examine the abscess.
And if you see it has a dark color or black, hard, which the patient does not feel emotion for, then do not touch that which is crusty.
And if it is whitened in dampness, then you put the wax into it, and cut that with a fine spatula, and cut off from all sides; and if blood flows during your operation, then you stop at this reddened area so that the bleeding is restrained.
And then return to your work until you have treated it in agreement with the patient, and wash it with vinegar and salt; treat that with another treatment as appropriate until it is healed.
Chapter xxxvi.
On the removal of an abscess from both ears and that which is in the gallbladder, as well as other abscesses.
When an event occurs in the groin area, it is composed of glands which are gathered with fat, and they occur outside and are named as two auricles. If you heal them according to what we have said in the division and they do not heal, then consider if the abscess is hard, of dark color, with little sensation, then do not touch that with iron.
And if it is of reddish color and the root is thick, then do not touch that with iron for fear of the blood's flow; flatten that inside until it matures, then either you relieve that or it will burst on its own.
And if it is of white color, rounded, and the root of it is subtle, then that is one to be incised.
And in your operation on them, you should consider, before your operation, if the abscess has rested under heat as expected or if it has diminished with some diminution; then place the patient facing the sun, his head towards you, open their mouth, and have the servant hold their tongue between their hands leaving it on an instrument of noble form which this is:
And make it out of silver or gold, and be subtle like a thread.
So when you press that tongue and it shows the abscess to you, and place your finger there, then take force and hold that in the mouthpiece, and pull that towards the exit parts as much as possible. And also when you remove some cause of the tunics, and then strike that with the tool which has this form:
And also when you remove some cause of the tunics, and then strike that with the tool which has this form: And it is similar to forceps, however the extremities of them are curved, so that each one's opening faces the other side, very sharp, and they should be made of iron with a rounded edge.
May if this tool is not at your disposal, then cut that with the blade which has the shape of this: And it should be sharp on one side, not sharp on the other.
And after you have cut one seam, cut the other according to this method of cutting, and let the patient bathe their body with rubbed water.
If it is necessary to expel blood, bathe them with decoction of the sap from wormwood or of lavender leaves, and let that resemble one of the effects of hemostatics so that the blood flow be restricted, then treat that until it heals.
And some ulcers occur in the groin other abscesses besides those two auricles, and cut those according to what I have said about cutting both seams equally.
And I have already treated a woman with an abscess that was born in her groin area, that abscess had the color of mud, with little sensation, it had narrowed the groove in her groin area, and the woman was breathing with difficulty, she had been forbidden from eating and drinking water, and she was already on the brink of death if she hadn't recovered for another day or two.
And the abscess had grown so much that it was accommodating two months' worth of food between the two ribs.
Then I cut through it surgically and held one of their fingers to do so, then pulled that out, and with the amount taken away was quite large from her body. Then I struck at that from which I could understand the other exit, then I forced open her mouth, pinched her tongue, then I held that finger in that abscess.
Then I removed a large part of it, and only some little bit of blood was flowing from her instead. Then the groin of that woman was completely healed, she started drinking water soon, and then she began eating food again. Therefore, I didn't stop cutting out from that abscess for a long time, and instead an abscess formed in place of it, which grew as long as that continued.
Then I sewed it up and cauterized her groin, then for a while there was an addition; and then I wandered around and didn't know what God had done to her from that point onward.
Chapter XXXVII.
On cutting open a swollen hump (or cyst).
When pus starts forming in the uvula, and it is swollen, then it is named as a perpendicular (or cyst). And if it's located at the thickened part which is round, then it's called a lump.
And when it has healed as we have said in the division, and your cure does not agree with that, and if there are times where pus from a cautery has stopped coming out of you and is subtle, then you should cut open what has been added round. And if it extends to that length, and it's bleeding, of dark color or black, and it doesn't feel like the patient's own, then you should try to open the cutting in the patient, as there is fear under their body.
And when you cut it open as I have said according to its whiteness and length, make the patient see your work and press their tongue with a tool that has the shape of this method, then hold that finger in the new opening, pull that towards down and cut that using one of two tools which were discussed in cutting both seams.
And you should not cut that open but what is adjusted above its naturally occurring addition, for if you cut more from them, it will damage their speech.
And after the operation, use that water which we recommended in the preparation of two remedies, and cure it inside so that it becomes healthy.
Might it have frightened the patient because of the operation, consider using courage in the process of cauterization to ease their fear, and the method of cauterization should not involve fire alone, but you place your head under you when you are, and then press the tongue of them with the tool we said, then take water that we said at the tip of the cauterization, and apply it gently on the live cause, and pause where it is neither thick nor subtle, fill this cavity with the tool whose shape is like this:
Let the protruding part of them be in the cavity where medicine is placed like a cavity of a metal spoon, and place the tool on the patient with the medicine above her stomach. The patient should be lying down so that she can produce saliva or mucus from her mouth due to the internal medicine, so that it does not cause any unnecessary damage to them and lets that person rest.
And then place your hand on the medicine, and squeeze it onto the back of the throat for about half an hour during which you see that medicine has degraded and calmed due to the chewing of the medicine.
And if you want, take hold of and cover that area near the end of the kidney, immerse the handle in medicine, insert the kidney into the handle inside a tube so that the handle sticks to this tube. Do this as many times as necessary until you achieve what you want from the cauterization of the bladder, then let it rest until it dries up and falls off about three or four days later.
And if you need to repeat the medicine, do it and after cauterization cleanse inside the bladder canal with a heated handle, adjust according to what is in the medicine canal of them, and wash with water that cleans, and cure externally with embrocation, and fill your insides with medicines until they become healthy.
And this kind of healing is safe because it prevents the operation and eliminates fear.
Some ulcers are cured in the back of the throat with that which is delicate and cauterizes and operates, once it has been treated with sub-inhalation as follows: gather calamus, yarrow, rue, sage, Arabic gum, chamomile, dandelion, and similar substances from herbs, adjust all these causes, or some of them, in one mixture, and let them soak in wine, then boil; the mixture should be strained properly, and a small hole should be made at the middle of the mixture on which an incision tool is placed according to this manner; it should be made of silver or gold.
And insert the end into the patient's mouth so that the steam rises to the back of the throat over the tonsil, while the tonsil becomes red.
And then apply this to the remaining ulcers until they dry out, and be careful not to perform this treatment at the onset of abscess formation, which would exacerbate in the abscess. Do not do it like this, but you should wait for the declaration of the abscess in the patient's cauterization.
If you do not have this tool at your disposal, then take a stick and create a hole in the protruding part of them with it, so that the mouth of the patient is blocked, which prevents the steam from burning their mouth.
And this treatment is good for health.
Chapter XXXVIII.
On Extracting Thorns and What Adheres in the Guts, as well as Other Causes.
Remaining ulcers adhere in the gut or thorn of a beast or some other cause.
So when you extract what is evident from those, on which your sight is cast, and then press the tongue against the tool in front of yourself, so that it becomes clear to you what is inside the gut.
And what is not evident and is hidden in the gut, consider that you make the patient vomit before the food has degraded in the stomach; this forcefully exposes any cause attached to the gut through vomiting. Or if she chews a piece of bread or raw lettuce leaves or a mouthful of dry bread; or take a piece of dried sea sponge, soak it with salt water and firmly apply it inside the patient's mouth, then have them chew that until it reaches the place where thorns are removed, at which point any forage will be exposed. And you might take an eel and drink it with salted water, then let it settle inside your stomach and gently remove it. Or you might take a spoon and gently place it in your mouth and gently force it down.
And if none of those causes has been exposed as we've mentioned, then use an iron tool according to this manner:
And it should be larger than a small nail, and in the protruding part of them, there's a cavity which you should insert into their gut for ease.
And have their head raised up, and be careful not to touch their throat bone, for it may damage their body or the one that peels off the bone or spine, or that which a doctor holds in his hand.
However, let the patient do this with honey, thanks to their knowledge of the location of the attached cause and peels it off downwards, pulls their hand towards the tool in them, all according to the amount prepared beforehand so that it gets exposed.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
Concerning the extraction of phlegm associated with gout.
When phlegm is treated with what we have discussed in the section on treatment using medicines and not agreeing with it, consider this now for gout in the patient's foot under the sun. For when you understand the tongue of the patient through that tool which we recommended to you.
So if you treat the phlegm, extract it from wherever it's in the gallbladder or from small detailed areas within it.
And if it's not possible to extract from there, then take a concave cannula and insert that into the gout in the foot, then place in the concavity of the cannula a heated iron, and do this as many times as necessary (until the phlegm is dead and comes out of the foot) and abstain from drinking water for the entire day.
And then take a basin full of water, make an incision in that and do the mouth of the patient there, and wash the mouth with that; and don't touch any cause of that and let the water sit under the same hand for an hour before another at the backside, so that as soon as he feels the water coming down.
If it's not possible with what we have recommended, then sub-steam the foot with garlic or with gum under the tongue using the tool that we recommended in the steam inhalation of the uvula.
Do this, and wait until it happens.
Another way of operating in steam inhalation is as follows: take a vessel with firewood inside and cover it halfway with a blanket containing a handle. Place the tip of the tool in that handle; place above the steam inhalation; have the foot put its mouth at the tip of the cannula, and close its mouth so that steam inhalation does not escape until you know that the steam reaches the phlegm, as soon as the phlegm falls.
And if it doesn't fall, then you will repeat the steam inhalation many times, and abstain the patient from drinking, eat salty foods and herbs, and do not drink water, and so necessary is that this regimen should be followed.
And this is the form of the tool through which gout in the foot is treated when it's seen; and it resembles forceps like this, except when it's in them in any curvature: Which is laid across the foot, and its end resembles the beak of a stork that's wrapped around it, in which it's ground with a file, so that when you grasp any food, it doesn't slip.
Capitol. XL.
In which is the summary of the speech regarding buboes and in the section about them.
Buboes are special spots, of bodily ways, according to their remembered description, from each in this book.
And they vary in puncturing and section of them by two ways, from which the one is for the essence of buboes themselves; and through this we get rid of the humidity.
And the second way is about the places where they occur in the body, for when buboes occur in the head it's different from when buboes occur in the anus; and the bubo occurring in a meaty location is different from the bubo occurring at a joint; and each of them has its purpose for operation.
And there are some buboes that, when they don't need to be punctured but rather wait until the disease matures in those or their completion.
And there are other buboes that you must puncture when they cross over, not according to their completion but like buboes near joints. When a bubo is observed near the joint, its essence spreads until it touches what's circulating in it and corrodes the ligaments or nerves of that joint, causing a contraction of that member; or if it's near the main body part, you should perform the puncture before it matures to prevent damage to the main body part; or if it's close to the anus, puncture the unripe one; and don't stop when you hit something during piercing due to incomplete digestion, but rather the one near the anus, so that it doesn't obstruct its passage within the parts of the anus and cause a fistula, or that which is made in the terminal part if it's not healed. And you should puncture when you know the time for puncturing the bubo, which is when it has matured.
And know that it has matured when the pain and fever have subsided, as well as the reduction of flushness and pulse rate, and the sharpness of the head of the bubo, and other signs.
And when you know how to puncture by targeting the pus area left behind by the bubo and pus coming from the healing of the appendix.
Puncturing should be done according to the length of the flesh or body parts, if the buboes are located in the limbs or feet, at the site of the scars, on nerves and arteries; and later, in all similar locations where there is no reflection. In those that do reflect, puncture according to that body part.
And when the bubo is in a meaty location, you should puncture it only after confirming its digestion according to completion, as we have said; if you pierce that before this, it extends the path of discharge and the texture's hardness, and hardens his body's mucous membranes and depth.
Cut out such pus pockets according to the size of the flesh or body, depending on the necessity, or according to what each part requires.
And ensure that you make small punctures in the smaller abscesses, and large, wide or deep incisions in larger ones according to the variety of sizes of the abscesses.
And others are those in which you need to force the opening down and then sew it up, when this is done as if with a knife and done like this until it sticks, as happens in too many cases of gout and rheumatism.
And of those that are incised in the three-angled section; and of those it is made like a fork figure, as with gout abscesses.
And of them, where circular sections and lunar (crescent-shaped) sections are administered, they resemble those.
You should treat that which does not come out like with the superficial abscesses; ensure you puncture it through a superficial puncture, or make it flat just as much.
And when the abscess is large and has solidified with healthy pus, you should puncture it without worrying that all the liquid will be removed at once; remove only part of it, then let the abscess settle inside another day. Then remove a larger portion, and let incisions heal gradually according to the depth until it's properly drained.
Especially if the patient is weak from illness or pregnancy, or a small child, or an old person in decline, where animal spirit's pus is resolved with the removal of healthy tissue, and strengthens their overall health, you should operate.
Treat this chapter with great caution, and when you puncture the abscesses in your operation, ensure that you cleanse any sores and consider whether the pus from the abscess is small or forms a flat section. In such cases, manage them according to their nature or traditional methods; if the abscess is large and the cuts are filled with pus, then make incisions as deep into each tendon as possible before the time.
And if part of the tissue is removed from the abscess or you have made it concave in the area, then ensure that you repair it with thread or silk sutured onto the skin as when you stitch clothes, taking care to keep the wound moist; strengthen this on the third day; and proceed with treating and curing whatever comes out of the ointments until it heals.
If you experience bleeding during your operation, then administer water and vinegar baths in which you place a cloth on the area of the blood discharge. Then place this over the bleeding areas gradually.
If the bleeding persists, then ensure you continue treatment and care according to the instructions provided in this book's chapters and sections.
If it's winter and the area of the abscess is a nerve region, then ensure you apply powders mixed with vinegar and oil in a cauldron, then place these on the areas.
And if it's summer, and the areas are fatty, then ensure you apply ground powders in water with oil or vinegar and oil, all of which should be rubbed until the third day as we have said. Then ensure you drain the abscess and cleanse that area before continuing treatment according to what suits him/her until he/she heals.
This is precisely what is necessary for the knowledge of treating abscesses universally; however, according to the method already explained regarding each type of abscess, on how to treat them singularly through chapters specifically.
Chapter XLI.
The chapter discusses sections of abscesses that occur in the neck region.
In the neck of the head, small abscesses occur, which have specific nodes containing tunics that are their essence; and the essences of these are pus.
And about their pus, as well as those that contain moisture resembling lime. And of those which contain moisture resembling powder and resemble them; and of those that are soft like wax.
And in the section of all these, and in the extraction of those, there is no fear, just as you should not cause a strain or tension when extracting such.
And the operation in the section of these is that you probe them with an instrument whose shape resembles this somewhat, which is called an introducer, so that you know what it contains.
And if what it contains is moisture, then divide it along the length with a section that is superficial according to this form:
And start from the section of line .B. within the line of .G. Then as the moisture is evacuated, then you excise that skin which contains that moisture, and do not leave any cause thereof, if more returns after this in case there was a reason for leaving some cause.
And then immerse this with Egyptian ointment if available, or alternatively in water and salt; fill the wound with this and leave it to rest until another day, when you remove all that is corroded from that skin.
And then repeatedly apply this cloth with Egyptian ointment according to the need and as long as you are sure there is no cause of corrosion from that skin; then treat the wound with ointment until it heals.
And if there's an abscess containing fatty nodes, then you incise that second one in this way: In the form of a cross section, cut into both sides of the section and allow it to drain from all directions, and apply your strength in removing the membrane which contains that.
If you feel an inconvenience when you're sewing, then do this as I instructed you first.
Similarly, perform the operation on the swollen abscess and its healing according to what we've told you; for any swollen abscess is treated with a light dressing, which has little inflammation and minimal moisture.
And some of these abscesses have characteristics like those you mentioned on the head in some men where there is not much moisture; this cause occurs when I incise an abscess at its head on an elderly woman and let it drain as if it were a hard, rough, white lump that could not be squeezed, and if someone hit that area, they would get hurt.
In other abscesses on the head, other than this skull, like those that occur in children's heads and behind their earlobes, it is typically a superficial section.
And pause the incision of those from the lower part to ensure that the body finds relief in the lower parts.
And for those, treat them according to what is suitable for their healing process.
Capitol Forty-two.
Regarding the condition of scrophulas which occur in the throat.
These abscesses are often found in the throat and under the chin, as well as in the armpits; some occur in other parts of the body.
Those are the ones that occur in the throat; they are lumps that arise between them and is all scrophula of those is within their own membrane. As with nodes and abscesses on the head, as we have recounted.
And the types of these scrophulas are lumps; some of them are fluid-filled, and others contain moisture, and among them, there are malignant ones that do not respond to treatment.
Then in the one where you have good positioning in the touch (Tocament), whose color is manifested like the color of blood and it's spread throughout the body, not attached to the nerves in the throat or veins, nor to the flesh, it is not swollen as when you incise it from a dry superficial part on top up to the body's line .G. within the line of .B., then burn that completely, extend the edges of the blood vessel with oil or with fatty oils if needed, as we have mentioned about abscesses in the head, and extract that little by little.
And it's better to be more cautious not to incise the vein or nerve.
And if the tool is not sharp enough or your hand doesn't fit well on the incision, or it calms down the patient, and you avoid unnecessary incisions; if you were to incise a vein or artery and prevent yourself from continuing with your operation, then stop the inflammation process in the wound by using powders that still have inflammatory effects, strengthen the wound, leave it where rest ceases the inflammation of the abscess and the wound becomes softened and begins to heal. When the inflammation is relieved.
And return to your operation while you have completed it.
And further, inquire about the cause of any other small scrophulas according to what I've told you; therefore, incise those and cleanse them.
And if it is in the root of a large vein, then you do not need to incise that scrophula from its root. Before you move on, place a thick piece of wool beneath where it will fall by itself due to the incision.
And further, fill the wound with old cotton which you have already soaked in Egyptian oil, and then proceed to treat it.
And if you incise the whole scrophula, then adjust both layers of the wound tissue and stitch them immediately so that there is neither any excess nor lack.
If you notice there is excess due to the size of the scrophula, then understand that you need to incise the root of it, remove that part and perform suturing as has been described.
And for those scrophulas that contain moisture, puncture it from the superficial incision at the site where you see it in your location, stop the incision of what is below the body's buttocks, as we have said.
And after performing the puncture, apply oil or something similar, so that it heals where there is inflammation. And when you find the wound has been cleaned, then treat it with healing meat oil until it is healed.
Capitol Forty-three.
Regarding the condition of pus in the lymph gland.
The ancients performed this section on the lymph node, and no one in our land has ever done that.
And this is the record of the speech about those things.
And in those who have galls, ensure that the removal of the lymph node is avoided, because otherwise it should not be done prematurely as all veins and major parts of the body are here.
In those who have boils under the tongue or in the throat or behind the ears, when illness is not in the ear canal, cut from the section of the preputium to avoid the loss which is caused by perforation.
So when we want it, for us to incise that area, I make three circles around the preputium or four at small sections by width in the one between two circles according to quantity, so that the section is in the skin not on the cartilage. This location is suitable for a section being free of flesh and the veins from this are his own.
And if the doctor is cautious, do this by extending the incision in the throat to the chin, then make an incision into the skin so that it reaches the canal, but avoid the veins from the vessels if there's any concern of causing damage.
And then cut the fat as we have decided; and it signifies on that part of the canal by the inflammation which is from that oil which is in your disturbed body and through the extraction of the pus.
And let the wound opened for some time.
So when the hour is ripe when a perforation is feared, add two layers of skin from the wound's membrane, and if that alone is the cartilage.
And then administer medicines that make the flesh regenerate until it becomes healthy.
And discuss Albucasis that the summa of our conversation, this exposition is simply to show that some of these boils have already affected the throat of the patient, and the patient has come to death, and his servant was cut off, and others would incise the epiglottis so that the patient breathes on the site of the wound for a single respiration, and they were saved from death.
And thus we command that the wound remain open until the evil of the illness is consumed; and this evil of him lasts for three days; and then at this point we command so about the wound, and treat it until it becomes healthy.
And what I have seen with my own eye is that one servant had a catel and was in her throat, and cut off a part of the lung canal, and I was called upon to treat him, and thus I too had heard as it sounds like the moan of the dead, and discovered the boil and removed the pus which was inside the boil small.
And so I did confess that none of the veins or arteries were cut during that, and the breath escaped from the boil, and treated it until it was healed.
And do not harm the servant if not even in her veins, and some days later returned to treating his disposition.
And I also say that near the section of the prepuce there is no fear.
Chapter XLIV.
On the section about boil that occurs outside the throat, it is called the hernia of the throat.
This boil named hernia of the throat is a large boil according to the color of the body, and moves in women.
And it follows two manners, one that is natural or accidental.
And in the natural case, there's no need to cure.
And the accidental follows two manners of which one is like fatty swellings, and the other manner is like a boil that occurs due to blockage of an artery, and in that case there's fear. And don't assume that it touches his iron-like surface except in the case that is small. And you should examine that and investigate it as per the description, and if you find that it resembles fatty swellings, and is not suspended by any of the veins, then you will incise it like fatty swellings, and extract it from what contains him in the skin and pus; and otherwise, then thoroughly examine its entire structure, and treat the area so that it undergoes treatment until it heals.
Chapter XLV.
On the section of the types of lumps.
Of the lumps there are various kinds, and I have already mentioned all the kinds in the division.
And consider that I list this distinction between lump and fracture to avoid confusion.
So I say that with fracture there is a fever and heat and violent pains while the boiling of excess is quenched; and it's completed when afterwards the fever, pain and heat cease.
On the other hand with a lump there is no fever nor heat nor pain, and it contains this skin which is his own sack.
And according to the color of the body, its beginning is like a boil and it occurs in this way like pus, whether large or small, and they are according to two kinds, one that is fatty and contains moisture, and the colors of the moisture are spots, as I have said in the division.
And when you come to the treatment of a lump, that you express it and inquire into its beginning at the site where the thing is called an intruder comes according to what will be its form in chapter which is about this.
And this is the method of inquiry for boils and all kinds of lumps, which is that you take hold of this intruder and force it into the pus-moisture site you find in the boil, and you will go over your words little by little inside until you know that this intruder has penetrated the membrane.
And then finish your hand according to the size of the abscess, and then remove the contents inside, considering what is left in its wake.
And if the moisture escapes continuously, of any color it may be, then you should incise on the superficial section according to what I've said about other abscesses.
And if there is no moisture in the wake of the contents, then you know it's greasy.
And dry on them as I instructed, with the area to be dried having the shape of an X according to this form: like this is taught to us, hang it with a string, and scrape the entire edge easily, and keep the skin or sack over that if possible, then extract that part from the node.
And if it is broken during the operation, it is not possible to extract that healthy part, and you should gather all these in such a way that nothing of him is left for any reason.
And if something remains from him for any reason, little or much, the lump will return as was usual.
And if you notice that something of him has left a small part, then complete the wound with some sharp corrosive powders and strengthen the wound, place over that which is the abscess cauterized point, and cure that from another treatment until it heals.
And if it's a large lump, then open both of his lips and cure that which is enclosed.
And if there is a pulsating vein opposite him, or not, then cut and heat the area that matches the glass which is glassy and smooths that width for two days or three until the wound heals; and then returns to incise that which is cracked from the lump.
Capitol. XLVI.
Of the necessary forms for stricture in section and perforation.
Of those are the forms of the invaginations, and they have three species, that among those is a large one, and from them there's another slightly smaller, and from them there's a small one.
The form of the large invagination is this:
The form of the small invagination is like this:
They are made with iron, salt, and the ends of fallen hair, in order that they cure within the abscesses.
And these are the forms of the experiments, and they are named almond-shaped, and one of them is called bitter.
And they have three species, that among them is large, slightly smaller, and a bit smaller.
The form of the large experiment, forms like this:
The form of the smaller experiment, forms like this:
The form of the smallest experiment, forms like this:
Let's ensure that they are for those abscesses,窦, fistulas, and lumps so that among them are from the bones and other causes.
They are round things, large ones, lions, like big needles with which the wounds are sewn, and they are made of citron peel, or of copper, or of iron, or of silver. And the best ones are when they are made of citron peel.
They are experiments of black feathers, which you remember that for those they have been opened the fistulas in the cavity where there are reflections, that are reflected upon their lightness towards those reflections.
They have three species, that some of them are long, and from the others they are slightly smaller, and from the others they are brief, according to the amount of width of the fistula and the constriction of him.
The form of the large experiment made of lead:
The form of the smaller lead experiment:
The form of the small lead experiment:
The forms of the needles are of special particles, that among them are some simple ones, which have only one curvature, and they have three species: large, small, and slightly smaller.
And from them are hooks, and they also have three species.
And among those are uncis with two curves, and they too have three species.
And among them are uncis with three curves, and they also have three species.
And all of these are necessary in their place.
The form of a small simple hook, as follows:
The form of a large hook with two curves: The form of a medium-sized hook with two curves: The form of a small hook with two curves:
The form of a large hook with three curves:
The form of a medium-sized hook with three curves:
And these are the forms of the scalpels with which they section and abrade the lumps and abscesses, and they have three species: that among them is large, slightly smaller, and very small.
The form of a large scalpel:
The form of a medium-sized scalpel:
The form of a small scalpel:
The endings of those around which sections are made are sharp and the others are not-sharp, and they are not placed in this manner, but rather to cause a sensation during the incision of nodes, fearing an embolism of vein or nerve. For these reasons, the patient is cured and experiences tranquility for a little due to the adjustment which finds you the incision of the abscess.
These are the forms of amalgams, and there are three types: large, medium, and small, like those of veins.
They are made from lead and resemble a ring in which alcohol is placed.
And it's on the outer extremity, the punctured end is in the hidden cavity, and that flows within and outside, as you wish, just like what you see.
The forms of the cavities, which are hidden among your fingers, you must perform the excision of the abscesses without feeling the patients, and they come in three types: large, medium, and small. And these are the forms of those:
The forms of the siphons through which the blood flow is cut off, and they are in three types: large, medium, and small; these are their forms:
They are made of lead like a citron, round with some length, and they are fine.
And choose these types of siphons: large ones, mediums and small ones, because with those you can quickly cut off the blood flow when necessary, and then when your first remedies are not enough.
However, do not use those to cut off blood flow everywhere in the body; instead, use them only on fatty areas. Like that, apply them on the sweat glands and thighs, and on the elbow pits, breasts, stomach, and intestines, just like those of the fatty sweat glands.
Some are cuts made with those instruments or smaller ones resembling small pricks according to this form; blood is cut off when done through phlebotomy, or due to embolism of a vein or artery.
Some cuts are made round according to this form:
Chapter 47.
Regarding the treatment of men's breasts which are assembled by females.
Some swellings cause the breasts of some men to resemble the start of becoming fatty, and then they swell the breasts, which are assembled by female characteristics, and we should oppose these swellings from afar.
And for those who feel this, understand that you should cut along the lunar section according to this form, between line .B. and line .G., then scrape off all roughness, apply a salve on the entire wound, and adjust both sides of the wound with stitches, and heal it internally once it's been treated.
If the breast descends to parts where it is softened by its size like in women, then cut it into two halves with pus inside, each resembling a lunar figure. Each should be contained within the other half; here the major line should contain the minor as per this form of lines .B. and .G. Then scrape off the area between the two parts of the wound, remove swelling, and apply stitches and powders as instructed for internal healing when it has healed.
And if you do not complete the incision for fear of the patient's anxiety and blood loss, then understand that you should submerge the wound in corrosive ointment and leave it to heal internally until this destroys fatty matter, and then heal it once it has healed.
Chapter 48.
Regarding the puncturing of abscesses that come out through the skin.
These abscesses that appear on the skin are due to the types of phlegmonous swellings, thorns, which contain a layer that is pus.
And for those that contain moisture; and these containing moisture should be cut along the lunar section according to this figure: from line .G. to line .B. Once all pus in the abscess is evacuated, then cover it with clean material and leave it until the next day.
And after that, keep the area covered and treated with suitable ointment until it heals.
And if it is an abscess of the types of nodes and phlegmonous swellings, then you cut over that in the same way as we have said in the section about phlegmonous swellings.
And if the wound is so extensive that it leads to gangrene, then apply cauterization as we described earlier.
Chapter 49.
Regarding the incision of abscesses that occur due to arteries or veins.
When an artery is ruptured and the wound heals over that place, abscesses occur. The signs to identify whether inflammation or abscess is due to an artery or a vein: if it's due to an artery, then it appears elongated in the heart area; and when you press on the abscess with your fingers, there is a whistling sound felt in that place.
And that which is due to a vein shows itself through the manifestation of the body.
And if an abscess section is made, and particularly where the astringents are left, as well as in joints, and in the throat, and in localized swellings of the body; it is large, so that the treatment with iron should be avoided, and what is at the extremities, or at the head, should also be avoided.
About that which is due to their swelling of the orifice of the artery, divide it into the long section; and then cut open the section with scissors and the artery, and release from the tunics underneath that which has been exposed.
And then touch that needle and let it penetrate into the other side, and strengthen the artery with a double stitch using silk thread - this causes you to remove two arteries which are in the temples.
And then pinch that spot located between two ligaments at the place where the pain exists throughout it, and dissolve the abscess.
And then administer treatment in which oil is applied where the ligaments are located, so they fall into it; and treat that with suitable ointments inside to make it healed.
And if it is an abscess due to vein blockage, then you should hold with your hand what corresponds to the size of the abscess at the end where it appears, and then introduce the needle into the spot that you have held with your hand. Let it penetrate; put a double thread in that place between which you will remove the one from the other side, and afterwards ligate the abscess according to what I said to you in the middle of the thread at both ends for two parts of the thread at each end.
If you fear that we may remove the thread, then introduce the needle into that spot with your first needle throughout the whole abscess. Insert four of your needles in each place.
And then dry out the abscess in its middle inside where when it is released from you, what belongs to it remains.
And then place over the powder which you have submerged in vinegar and oil, and after that administer the treatment which is made with garlic and ointments so that it may be healed.
Drain the upper part of the abscess which occurs due to twisting of nerves.
So it is with an abscess occurring in arteries and veins, similarly, when there's a blow or excessive work on nerves, and in resemblance.
And the way it affects is through the places of the arms or the heel, or throughout all the locations where the joints are inflamed.
And it is an intense abscess, its color resembles that of another body, and it's located in the major parts of his disposition sections; when it is stretched with vehemence, it feels like a fainting sensation at the thighs.
And it is not an abscess that starts from within the body; instead, it leaves the artery, and it inflames everywhere without going to the parts in front or behind.
So about those that are related to joints, do not apply iron to them, which might cause constriction due to strength.
Drain what is in the head or forehead at the place of the artery through the space. If it's a small abscess, then you treat that by opening it and cut off the root.
And if it's large, then you suspend it with a string, scrape that area, and then hold it; adjust the wound with stitches, and treat it until it heals.
Done.
From the section of abscess that occurs due to a disease that affects the stomach region.
Proceed to examine the various complaints observed in the stomachs of those people and in other parts of the body like these that are called fungal diseases due to their similarity with fungi; here, the root is subtle and the head of that is large; already, the lips of those are affected, it's from those that are small, and it's from those that have significantly increased.
And I have already seen one where in the stomach of the person were two parts that resembled fungi, and there was no distinction between those white ones, with subtle roots.
And already, the lips of those were turned inside out and would split open; moisture flowed constantly from that area.
So I inserted those and probed them in one on the back where there was a span of eighteen inches. And the other had a span of six inches.
And in the operation at the place of it, consider if the thigh is wet, and the color of that part is white, wet, with a subtle root; then you should insert through the left side, and in your presence apply the cautery to the fire, such that any complaints observed are expelled from that area; and if there's no disease, cauterize it.
And if the thigh is fearful and in fear, beware of applying iron insertion; rather, take lead made recently, strengthen that part, which way we said should be done; let it out for two days.
And then adjust in the tightness of the lead thread; so, don't cease to strengthen the large lead within that part until it is removed and falls out naturally due to its work.
When it comes to serious illnesses, there often exists a cause for fear and anxiety, especially in the case of those affecting the abdomen.
It might be possible that you separate the patient's condition, and then proceed to treat that area with a cautery so as not to allow it to return.
And further, heal that which is inside where the wound has been healed.
And be sure to not rashly conclude that which is of a dark color, with little sensation, under careful observation; for if it is like this, it may well be cancer.
And I will return to remind you closely about childhood shortly.
Chapter 52.
Regarding the treatment of the navel prominence.
Navel prominence is caused by various reasons; or through fissures on the belly, which sits above the abdomen, and the body's or intestine as it were in other ruptures; or due to an ailment that flows from a vein or artery depending on what has been discussed elsewhere, or due to constricted breathing in them.
It might be due to a tear in the belly or due to tension of the body tissue; then the color of the abscess is similar to that of the body; and there is severe pain, and it appears from various locations. And if it's due to the protrusion of the intestine, then that location is among those we've discussed, with varying intensity; and when you press that at your fingertips, it gets concealed, and then returns; and a strong, dull pain is felt on the inside, with vigorous activity being required for its introduction.
It might be due to dampness; then it hurts but doesn't get concealed when you press with your hand, nor is it constricted or swollen.
And if it's due to an illness, then this sign appears in the abscess turning black and declining.
It might be due to flesh alone; then the abscess is heavy, large, and hard, and it grows according to a quantity.
It might be due to windiness; then touching him hurts.
And the operation here is to consider whether the navel prominence is due to an arterial or venous condition, or due to windiness; you should abstain from treating him in that regard where there is fear and anxiety as we have taught you about abscesses caused by arteries and veins in the previous chapter.
And if the navel prominence is due to the intestine or the body tissue, you should instruct the patient to keep still and be lying on their side. Then try your examination around the circumference of the navel, and instruct them to face upwards between your hands on their buttocks. Also encircle with a wide strip around the circumference of the navel over the area where you felt the tension; extend the size of the abscess up and down on both sides by a large amount; press firmly or gently along that way when tying.
And then open up the middle of the abscess on the muscle and insert your fingers into that area to grasp the intestine; and if you find it caught or enclosed by the muscle, then remove it immediately and force the intestine inward towards the depths of the abdomen.
And if you've found the tissue, then take it with your fingers; and remove any excess from him.
If it goes against your artery or vein, then surround that motion, and proceed to your operation again; take two needles and put them in those strong points, and insert the needles into the circuit you made around the abscess in a manner of crossing, which you make penetrate; and strengthen the abscess in four parts over the needles.
And if you wish, leave the needles and smooth out the area where you can lay down the extended flesh and let it fall naturally; or cut that when it becomes thin enough to do so, and then proceed to treat what remains of the ointment within until it is healed.
And if the navel prominence is due to flesh or dampness in him, you should remove the abscess as we have said and treat the illness or dampness which you find in him, and then proceed to treat what remains and stabilize that area.
Chapter 53.
Regarding the treatment of children.
We have already discussed, in the division, about different types of children and how they are treated with medicines, that the treatment is more effective when done internally rather than externally as long as it doesn't result in an ulcer; and we've discussed illnesses caused by pregnancy and caution in their treatment.
And the ancients would say that some cuts in children can be cured where it's possible to eliminate it completely, such as from the cranium or on the nipples or thighs and similar areas on their limbs for total removal, especially when they are small.
When it's old and large, there is nothing to apply to him, for I cannot heal any of that, nor have I seen another, nor has anyone reached such a thing.
And the operation here is when it's as we have said, that you proceed and leave the child to expel some sores caused by black bile, then proceed to drain it if found full and obvious.
And then prepare the child in preparation for the operation where it's located, and proceed to fasten any tools that might be used on him; and then make a concave from all sides with a good incision so there doesn't remain anything that could cause his serious illnesses. And let the sweat run, do not suppress it slightly, press the areas, and cleanse the sweat completely with your hand or with the tool on which it is possible for you among the tools.
If it causes you opposition of large sweat, whether inside the vein or the artery, then cauterize that where the flow of sweat has ceased, and immediately treat that with another treatment until it is healed.
Headache.
Regarding the cure of dropsy.
We have already discussed in the division about the species of dropsy from water, and the signs for each type, using medicines for their cure.
And that which is cured with iron is only the species of splinters alone, and it does not come close to the species of tympanisters or the species of dysentery, which among them is fatal.
And when you have treated this species of dropsy caused by tympanists with medicines and do not see your treatment manifesting effects, consider that if the patient has already become debilitated, or if there is another illness affecting them besides dropsy, as if it were their cough or chest pain etc., in such cases, be careful not to treat with iron, for this can pose a danger among these.
If your patient has excessive vigor causing the illness, and there is no other illness but dropsy alone affecting them, neither pregnancy nor old age, then the procedure for their operation is that you lift the patient between your hands, ministering to them directly as they expel their abdomen with their hand. Force out the water from their belly at the exit point of their anus, and take a thorn scoop in this manner:
it should be of two long points at the tip end, like a thorn scoop; however, it is better if in your hand you hold it somewhat shorter and gradually, so that during the operation you do not enter into the intestine, and ensure that this happens.
And consider carefully if the generation of dropsy is from within the intestines; then you must know that for this section, you are away from the navel by the length of three fingers to the exit points, on the right side towards the anus.
If the generation of hydrocele is due to illness in the testicle, then your section should be on the left side of the navel by three fingers.
And if the generation of your patient is due to the womb, then your section should be on the right side.
And do not assume that your section should be on the side where you want the patient to lie, so as not to allow excess fluids to accumulate in that area.
And with the tool, puncture all along the length of the line, and then insert into that section. Lift your hand between the line and the siphon, and you should scrape this area; and if it's as much as the thickness of a fingernail or about so.
And puncture inside the siphon until it reaches the opening where the water exits; this is the location of the fluid. And remove that and insert an instrument of which this is the shape: it is similar to a fine silver cannula; it's made of silver or copper or lion horn, with a small hook at the lowest point of its opening and three hooks on each side: two from one part and one from another. The tip is cut like a feather according to this manner, as follows:
And at the tip of this, there is an armature which, when the instrument reaches the water, immediately rests over it. Therefore, you drain only half of the water in a moderate amount; if you drain more than that during this time, weaken the patient through dissolution of their animal spirit or, alternatively, cause them to have convulsions leading up to death.
Proceed to drain it according to the vigor of your patient and according to how you interpret the dispositions of the patient's virtue in their pulse and their goodness.
And remove the instrument, drain the water which is causing it; this happens when it's temporarily retained by the line that holds the hook over the siphon, as I've gathered from you that you must puncture it according to this manner.
And repeat the instrument on another day if you find that the patient tolerates this procedure, and drain a small amount of water. Do this for several days with caution, making sure not to let too much water go otherwise.
If you fear for the patient and drain a large amount of water, then treat that with burial in hot sand and silt baths, and expose them to sunlight for long periods; treat that with drying medicines until they are healed.
And cauterize over the stomach, and womb and testicles near the water extraction, as I have recounted in what precedes this.
Headache.
Regarding the treatment of children who are born with unperforated bladder locations (urethral meatus).
Some of the child's maladies originate from within their mother's womb, and the head of its mixture does not penetrate (or is pulled straight or is in its proper place).
So cover their cut with a wound dressing as soon as they are born, under the soft skin according to this manner:
And place in their abdomen a small iron pin and bind it there, leave it for three days or for fourteen.
And when they want to urinate, let them urinate; and return that later.
And if you do not stop the iron [pin], already it is possible that the urine which passes over the area will not close this scar.
Let that of which the abdomen is straight be treated with an iron pin as we have said, for too many days within before it spreads.
Let those in which the abdomen is not in its place be laid out, the cause of which is that of those, the one born whose tail goes to the tip of the penis so it cannot urinate within, while raising the penis with their hand above; and it is not passed on to offspring, because the semen cannot reach the mother according to rectitude, and it is an ailment in the male.
The manner of the operation in them is that the patient lies on their back, and you extend the tip of the penis with your left hand with strong extraction, then cut into the tip of the penis at the junction of the prepuce, as if it were done by a feather or without touching any part, so that half of his foreskin resembles the tip of the penis and the abdomen falls into the middle area according to this manner.
And remember when performing the operation of bleeding, what spots may happen to this; and pause with him at this point where you cut the blood vessel, and treat the wound until it is healed.
Chapter LV.
Concerning the white matter that happens in the prepuce in the tip of the penis and pus, darkness, and adhesion of the prepuce at the tip of the penis.
Maladies affect this white matter in the scrotum and it is a sign of male disease.
And one of them is malignant and the other is not.
Not malignant, leave it hanging from a delicate string and cut that in the place where it has spread everywhere; then cover that spot under with Egyptian balm; then treat it with clear balm until it is healed.
And if the white matter is malignant, look at its color, then treat it with a cautery near the incision and around it.
Let it be known if white matter is in the prepuce of the tip of the penis for uncircumcised individuals. And one part of white matter is inside the prepuce and the other part is outside; then let it be that you remove white matter which is inside until it hardens; and later you treat that outside, when you treat that period, there's no guarantee that it won't reappear.
And various things happen in the testicles and prepuce like blackness and corruption; so let it be that you remove all that has already degraded and is about to corrupt or that is already corrupted; then draw a line over that near that with honey, which is treated with flour of millet and white sandalwood powder and ground almond.
And treat it with the other cure until it heals.
Let it be if there is a need for bleeding, then apply a lunar cautery according to this manner:
A youthful cautery is in two time periods, it's for bleeding and when the wound becomes corrupted.
And if the tip of the penis is corroded and destroyed completely at that moment, let it be that you insert a tube of iron into the belly of the prepuce for when the patient urinates through that.
In the adhesion of the prepuce at the tip of the penis (and this adhesion happens only in those where the prepuce is free, and circumcision is not required on it; and when adhesion occurs due to a wound or abscess) let it be that you scrape with blunt steel until the connective tissue dissolves and the tip of the penis is released from every part.
And if it is difficult to scrape those thoroughly, let it be that you scrape from the tip of the penis and prepuce with blunt steel, and thus this happens: when the prepuce, being thin, is pierced lightly by its thinness.
And then separate between the prepuce and the tip of the penis with a strip of thin leather, which has already been moistened with water to prevent another disease from occurring.
And later treat it with astringent until it heals.
Chapter LVII.
Regarding the cleansing of children and the treatment of what happens with those who are circumcised.
Circumcision is not a solution like other diseases: rather, it is specific to our operation and our will, and more so with children, we must assign the best operation and way possible that causes less loss for health.
Therefore, note that the ancients did not perform circumcision in certain free individuals, who do not use them in their laws, but rather we have acquired this practice through experimentation. The cause is that I have found most artisans and barbers using circumcision and cleansing on the foreskin and on the testicles; they use ligament at the neck and incision on the thumb.
And I have already tried all these methods and found that the best improvement lies in refining techniques with the use of forceps, relying on strength as a surgeon would in a refinement like circumcision. This avoids cutting too deeply through the chain of veins above, this being the chain of prepuce between two tunics, and ensures the tunica albuginea is left intact, while making the cut stronger for another procedure and ensuring painless recovery. And the refinement that is done with forceps, which are digital tools that surgeons use, does not ensure a safe incision of the end of the male member; for when it is strong it enters through his passage.
In circumcision surgery, if you use a knife, your operation will be tainted and corrupted. And the foreskin of a child is naturally short, and cuts heal in such a way that they do not require refinement, which I have seen.
The refinement that is done with forceps and strength, the goodness, I have experimented with, which shows that the forceps have a proportional incision, so their sharpness is thus as their sharpness; and therefore when you press your hand they are proportioned two sharpnesses, cutting according to comparison in one time; and it makes compression of the strength into a figure containing the foreskin of all parts, at which there is no error from any side.
And the way of the first operation is that you must make the child lie down greatly if he belongs to those I understand as a little one; not only should you hold the strength in his foreskin alone, but let him inside for another day.
And then make that person joyful in every manner possible according to what you can achieve given their intelligence. And then make that person stay among your assistants well prepared, and not in a careless state; hide the forceps in your hand or leave them on your chest, so that the child doesn't see those or any other of the tools.
And then insert your hand into the foreskin of the person and blow into the foreskin, and pull that in so that the tip of the foreskin is fully inside, and refine that from what is added to it by disease.
The shape of the forceps for refinement, this is how it should be:
Let the first set of forceps have a blunt tip and the others be pointed, so that it does not catch on the knuckle bone, and let the length of both sharpnesses be thus as the length of two penises equal in size.
The mistake in refinement is that if you cut too deeply, you will remove the entire intrinsic foreskin or part of it; thus you must be careful with your incision.
So consider to expand that of your time on your circumcision in front of the location and cut that according to equality.
And if you cannot have it on your circumcision, then cut off that one and cut that (the foreskin) there.
And if three days have passed, and there is still an inflated state of the circumcision, then you should let that inside so that it softens the pus cavity, and scrape that with ease, and cut that according to what suits you.
And be careful of the tip of the foreskin, which will not belong to it.
And then treat that with what allows the wound to consolidate using those powders that we have recommended in the section on powders.
And if it has been cut through the foreskin at the point of incision, and follows over its parts above, this should not be visible to him.
And treat that as we have said until it is healed.
Capítulo LVIII
On the treatment of retained urine in the bladder.
Retention of urine in the bladder can be caused by obstructions due to kidney stones or an inflamed bladder wall, or by obstruction from a foreign body or a string, similar to what we have discussed about treatment methods in the sections.
And if it is not dissolved as we have said and the cause persists on his pelvis, then consider that you should administer an extraction to him with a tool called a syringe, which has this shape: It is made of silver and is very thin like wire, similarly like the tip of a pen needle with its thinness equaling about half the length of a palm's width, and it has a fine tip at the end.
And the way urine excretion takes place through that is: take the curved penis and bind it with wool or leather for good fit; insert the ends of the penis into the opening of the catheter, and cut off any unnecessary cause of the wool, but deeply insert inside the catheter with vigor. And later, adjust the catheter on the edge and on the album of urine.
And have the patient lie down on their side, and clean the bladder, and anoint the penis with a mixture of oil, olive oil, and water.
Then insert the catheter so that it reaches the root of the penis; then fold the penis over towards the navel; then push in the catheter inside that; then push in that part until it reaches the bladder; and let the patient lie down so as to reach the empty cause, and do not proceed as described here, but follow the body where there is distortion.
And gradually extend the penis with the wool little by little, for urine soaks the wool.
And extract that and do a cure with urine, and use the catheter, don't stop doing this and use the catheter until the bladder is emptied and the patient finds relief.
Chapter LI.
Of the quality of bladder irrigation with vinegar and the tools which should be in agreement with this.
When an ulcer or abscess occurs in the bladder, or if there is congestion within it, or if it is constricted by inflammation, and you want to distill water and medicines into that area, then this clamp is used, and this is its form:
And if it is closed at the end of this, it is then sealed. And in that there are three parts: two from one side, as often times.
At the beginning is a concave spot where this is placed, and according to the quantity that displaces it, it's added, within which whenever any cause is driven away by that from the moisture, it is drawn away, and when it is expelled, it draws moisture in itself. When it's expelled long, as it makes use of the clamp, on which naphtha is poured in naval battles.
So if you want to dry up moisture in the bladder, insert the tip of the clamp into the wetness and draw out whatever is pushed up there from above, for the wetness is drawn into the cavity of the clamp.
And later insert the tip of the clamp into the penis according to what we have discussed about the catheter; and then push out the wetness with whatever you're pushing in, for that wetness immediately enters the bladder and lets the patient lie down.
Shape of the subtle catheter through which the bladder is irrigated, and this is its shape:
And it should be made of silver or copper, such that its tip resembles a small feather, and let the inside of its canal be smoothly hollowed out.
And later take the bladder in motion, and pause there the moisture you want to irrigate into the bladder, and then place that between two pieces of hard ligature with a double-ended tool, and heat that moisture over the fire.
And later insert the tip of the catheter into the penis.
And later, place your hand on the bladder with the moisture in an extended position, so that when the patient lies down, that moisture has reached the bladder.
If you do not have a bladder present, then take one from pig skin and make it into that circle; and puncture all of its roundness; and later insert a strong rod in those parts, as they are turned; and later add the circle similarly when added, since you place there whatever moisture you want from the water, oil and water.
And later you place that in the tool and do it as you did with the bladder, expressing your hand so that the moisture reaches the bladder.
Chapter LX.
On the extraction of bile.
We have already discussed the divisions of bile and its treatment with medicines, and the difference between bile produced in the gallbladder and bile produced in the bladder, and the signs of that.
And we have said about bile where surgical operation is done with my hand and sectioning.
The bile produced in the bladder is precisely that which is found in the bladder.
And I will narrate that more clearly and briefly in exposition.
Thus I say that bile produced in the bladder predominantly occurs in children; and the signs of this are that urine discharged from the bladder resembles water in its subtlety, and sand appears there; and the patient rubs their penis, and red spots appear on penile skin, and later they are dried; and under this condition they have a hole in the anus filled with lumps of those substances.
And it's quick recovery for those children who have reached twelve years old; and it's difficult treatment in the elderly. In young people, it is halfway through this because it is among them.
And for the one whose liver is larger and recovery is quicker; If it's smaller, it's against that.
So how do we approach treating that, start with the beginning of that which we reform when baptizing him who extracts the whole opening of the spaces where they have their intestines; for that opening in some occasions prevents the liver from being questioned about them.
And then take the patient onto their feet and adjust them so that he feels a burning sensation under him to make the liver descend into the bladder opening or it jumps out from any place or in some occasions.
And then make that incision between your hands prepared, and the hands of him leave his belongings, so that the bladder can be completely made to decline towards the parts left.
And then remove that and all of that excess.
So if you feel the liver in the space, then you take care right away about it.
And if you don't feel it all right away, then take that with oil on your little finger of your left hand, if the liver is for a child or if the person is an adult who has reached puberty and insert that into his anus. And remove the liver where it was left with your finger. And convert that little piece gradually into the neck of the bladder.
And then press on that with your finger and expel it outwards towards the parts outside of the place where you made the section.
And tell the surgeon to press on the bladder with his hand; and command another surgeon with his right hand to extend the genitals towards the parts above, and with his other hand apply pressure to the navel which is left by the genitals in the part where the section was made.
And then introduce some foam from that, this is its form: and divide it within him that which is between the anus and the genitals, not in the middle place, before the left thigh; and make a section over that liver and your finger is at the anus, and made transversely, so that the opening outward is wide and inwardly narrowed according to how much I removed of the liver it must be for him, and not more than this, as we restrain your finger which is in the anus the liver must be over the section, and it is forgotten about infeasibility.
And know that there are some parts of the liver that have angles and borders, which makes his ejaculation difficult by this.
And from that which has a lion-like appearance to gleam, and it is round, and it makes him have a quick ejaculation.
So if it's the one that has angles and edges, adjust in the crack.
And if it's not like this forgotten about, then take that with your fingers over it, or strengthen over it decently, the tip of which is like a file on which you press against the liver and don't escape from him; or insert his left instrument of curved tip.
May if you can't over it, then widen the tool a bit, and if you feel blood flow, cut into strengthen that with acidified vitriol.
May if the liver is more than one, then at the beginning you push your hand into the opening of the bladder, and gradually cut over it; and then push slightly towards that area; and similarly proceed if they are more than two.
And if it is large liver lump, then ignorance is that you cut that with a large incision, which happens to the liver one of two causes: or it dries up or becomes absorbed in its continuous urine distillation, so that the place does not become entirely consolidated.
And if you administer expulsion of him that is forgotten about, or carve in the fracture of it with scissors where he extracts that in pieces.
And once you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with ashes of aloe and dragon's blood, and strengthen that. And place over it cloth dipped in oil and vinegar, or in grated oil and water rubbed, so that the pus cavity can be reduced.
And then elevate the liver over his throat, and do not loosen the string in the third day.
And once that has been loosened, wash the place with water and hot oil, and then treat it with diaphanicon ointment and with diabazilicon ointment until it is healed.
And if in the wound pus cavity occurs, adjust and corrosive, and from that resembling this when his urine is in the bladder frozen, and for him it is forbidden urine (and this is known by the discharge of urine with blood), then take your finger into the wound and extract that urine, for if Roman causes the bladder to corrode the bladder and its putrefaction.
And then wash the wound with vinegar mixed, water and salt, and against all species, with that which you consider appropriate for healing until it is healed.
And in all the hours of total treatment, you must attend to both thighs and adjust the medicines which are applied to that place.
And if the kidney is small and located in the middle of the bladder, and urination is forbidden, then treat that with what I recommended beforehand until it reaches this section; and as part of this treatment complaints about this condition are reported to be limited; and having done so, and now take a perforating iron file, which is the shape of this:
of triangular end, sharp, inserted in the handle.
And take the file, and with that on your side leave the kidney near the patient's bladder so it does not return to the bladder.
And then insert the iron into the kidney, piercing with ease until the perforator reaches that kidney. And with your hand, rotate the perforator in that small kidney gradually, making the perforation inside while letting the other side penetrate; as soon as urine is liberated.
And then press your hand on that which is being operated on of the kidney at the end opposite the bladder, when that has been punctured and sealed by urine, and the patient is healed.
And if this treatment is not suitable for any reason preventing that, then leave the kidney with a file, and another file on the kidney. And then cut across the kidney in this bladder between two ligatures. And then remove that. And then untie the ligament and change the position of the organ that is disturbed in the injury.
And it is not necessary to leave the file on the kidney, only so that it does not return to the bladder. The other ligament above it stays in place, as when the file is removed from near the exit of the kidney, the disturbance returns to its place and regains the injury.
And for that reason it is necessary when you have the file above, that you lift the disturbance to the parts above, or that it returns to your own level, and regains the injury in this way as we have said.
Chapter 61.
On removing a kidney of a woman.
In women, few kidneys are produced.
And if you find a kidney in one of those, then treatment for that is difficult, and it is forbidden by various methods.
The one of them is that the woman's urine is long.
And the second is that you do not find a woman being able to describe if she miscarries when pregnant by a man or if she is barren.
And the third is that you do not find a woman knowing this art, especially the operation with her own hand.
And the fourth is that the location of this section near the kidney in women is far from the location of the kidney, so you need a preliminary section, and there is fear in that.
And if necessity compels you to do this, then seek out a pregnant woman who knows, and she will be found.
And if you are lacking that, then find a skilled pregnant woman or show one a married woman well versed in women's affairs, or a woman who has had part of this skill taught to her.
Then have that woman present and command her to do all that you tell her, from the inquiry about the kidney to the beginning; which reason is that she observes if the woman's urine is long, then make what she says true in her own belly and find the kidney.
Then if you find that one, constrain it with what she says, and then command her to cut into that.
And if it is not long, then command the matron to insert what she says in the woman's belly and inquire about the kidney, because place her left hand on the bladder, and press that well.
And if you find that one, then gradually increase that from the opening of the bladder to the parts with the strength of her own hands until it reaches the space between the thighs.
And then cut into that position at the edge of the woman's belly should reach the space between her thighs from any part to where she stops and center the kidney in that area, and let what is said by her not be increased by the kidney.
And the section is few at the beginning; and then insert the tool on that section, and if you feel the kidney, then adjust the section according to the quantity that she knows the kidney should be removed from that.
And know that the species of kidney are lumps: those of them are few and large, rough and sharp, long and round, and have tails.
And therefore know how many species there are from you for this reason that you indicate about what you want.
And if you see the disturbance of the organ, adjust at the place broken into and take that for an hour until the disturbance is removed, and then return to your operation until the kidney is out.
And make ready for yourself the tools that you mentioned in the removal of a kidney in men, so that you may be helped by those in your operation.
And if you want the disturbance to leave, and know that the expulsion of the disturbance is from the place that is cut into, then you sprinkle powder over the area and strengthen it with powder and constriction descent, and do not repeat this; and leave the kidney and do not remove it, for a woman's urine will die. And then treat the wound.
Therefore when the sharpness of the disease has subsided somewhat after several days, and the location is settled, then you return to your operation while the wound is still visible.
Chapter LXII.
Regarding the section on inguinal hernia.
An inguinal hernia is nothing but an addition of moisture in the white muscle, which contains the testicles and is part of the male reproductive system; it is called the testicle.
And sometimes it happens in the proper abdominal wall which nature has prepared for him at the location of the sperm, when it is cut that there is already another sperm; and it is the reproductive system between the white testicle, which we have mentioned, and it is not this but a twist.
And the generation of this hernia is due to debility that affects the reproductive organs, so it inundates this matter into those, and sometimes hits affect these organs with a blow made on the testicles.
And this moisture has various colors; or the color of it or it declines to yellowish or bloody, or reddish, or it is black and fatty, or it is watery white, and that is what matters.
And the signs by which one knows where this accumulation of water is in this case: if it's in the white testicle which we've mentioned, then the pustule becomes red and slightly elongated like a sperm figure, and the testicle appears, as the moisture extends from all sides.
And if the moisture is in the proper abdominal wall, then the pustule becomes red at the location of the sperm and that's why we estimate that there is another sperm.
And if the moisture is between the reproductive system and the white testicle, then there's a twist.
And if you want to know the color of the moisture, then you inspect the color of the moisture in the pustule at the site of the incision; and according to what exists in the mark left by the incision, judge what is inside it.
So when we come to the treatment of this case, then we instruct that if it's possible for you, let him use diuretics and increase his fluids intake.
And then have him rest on his back for some time or another, and place your wet cloths under him.
And then place yourself on the left part of him, and instruct that the attendant follow on his right side, who will extend their arm to one of two sides towards the location of the testicles and the navel area.
And then take a long blade, and split the testicular system from its midpoint longitudinally towards the belly button.
And make the section according to straightness equaling the line that should be of the testicular skin, going up until it reaches the white part of the testicle.
And cleanse that, observe and guard yourself so as not to penetrate that; and your cleaning goes up until it meets the sperm more easily and skillfully examine your cleaning according to how much is possible.
And then pierce the white part full of water with a wide hole, and extract all the water.
And then separate between the two labial sections with scissors, and extend the white part upwards; don't touch the testicular system, and cut the white part in that manner as is possible for you. And cut it all or in pieces, especially its finer part; if you don't examine the incision precisely, there's no assurance that the water won't return.
If the sperm is moving out of its system from outside during your operation, then when you have completed the section of the white part, return inside it, and adjust both labial sections of the testicular system with stitches, and treat that just like other wounds until it heals.
And if you find the sperm corrupted by another illness, then instruct that you cut off the blood vessels which are under the suspension ligament, extract the sperm, and treat that as we have said.
If the water is added in two parts, then know that these are two hernias; so cut this part as you did in the other equally; and if it's visible to you that it's one operation, then do it.
And then you cleanse the wound, and interweave between the sections wool soaked in oil or in rubbed oil; leave aside for later another piece of wool that you have soaked in vinegar and oil, spread that over the two testicles and the belly button; lay down additional layers of cloths and powders, and place those under him according to this form:
And then have two cloths placed and be filled with absorbent wool according to this pattern; have the ends be positioned where they are pressed by hands or damp wool, and place them in the waistband of the trousers, one end is inside the other, the other end at the location of the navel, and two ends over each thigh, and two other ends elsewhere on the hips, and all tightening must be done within the waistband of the trousers.
And sometimes this hernia is treated artificially with a cautery instead of cutting at the section; and you take a fine surgical knife and cut into that the reproductive system, and it's lit as we have recommended when the white part containing the water is revealed, then you use the cautery in this manner: It resembles Greek writing.
And then pierce that chip, and light it inside so that all the moisture is expelled.
And then extend the chip with fingers, scrape with fingers, and scrape with a fine cautery; and cut that second as far as is possible inside so you can remove it all; and guard against the fire not touching him.
And know that this operation is placed safely and far from the flow of infection, and better than an operation in a section.
Yet if it gives you contradiction to make an abscess cut during the section or during the cautery period, or infection flow, then observe what contradiction you cause through this, with your cure, which you apply to him according to what is said.
Yet if the patient is weak and does not expect the second operation due to its horror, then perform a puncture according to what I recommend; and this is when you certify that it's true, through what we said about meanings, that this hernia is watery.
And observe that you make the patient lie on an elevated bench, pierce the abscess near the lowest part of him under his left side, and stop the puncture according to the length of his body.
And if it's an incision wide enough that all the water runs out.
And then press on the spot with your hand and lift that area, to let go of the remaining water. And then treat it so that the wound is healed.
Yet if contradiction is in the expulsion of water at that time you puncture: and this is not done unless through what the white wax in the wound's aperture causes contradiction and prevents the outflow of water, then observe that you insert into the wound a wetting or instrument with which water is extracted from dropsy, its shape being followed; or adjust in the pressure of the wound a small one.
And know that the water returns, and is purified around three months or about those; and when it's purged, then puncture according to that method, so that the patient will pass his days.
Section sixty-three.
On section about fatty hernias and its cure.
And know that in the section about this kind of hernia there is a fear of losing it due to infection in major circumstances; for me, I see the dismissal and saving you through that better.
And I remember the operation in that and the specifics of abscesses.
So, say that abscesses occur in the bodies where the organs are composed and this happens due to various causes: or by acute overload of pus, which is spread among the organs, or by impact.
And the color of the abscess is according to the color of the body, and it doesn't swell in him, and it's a heavy abscess.
And for the light one is an abscess that has ruptured, whose color is dark, and there is no movement in him.
And some occur due to obstruction of the veins, and by inflation of those where you already perceive the memory of it, or by inflammation of veins.
And that which is due to the inflammation of arteries is known by the spread of pus when you press that with your thumbs; and don't pierce where you touch.
And the one made by inflammation of veins doesn't spread from any cause due to your compression with your thumbs.
And it is possible that a section can be made on this type as well as on other meats; and you incise the seam of the organs, then place your hand near those parts above, extract that from the white chip, release the suspensory ligaments of the veins, tie them, and cut the suspensory tissue where you remove that from all sections of your hand.
And then if the hand is already at those meaty parts solidified, then observe that you remove the hand and incise there.
And if it's adhesion due to any reason within the chip, or between those that are among the muscles, then observe that you remove all that adhesion and incise it through a round incision.
And if it's the birth of flesh in the location of the adhesion which is behind, then observe that you incise all that belongs to him, and remove the hand as we said.
And once your operation is complete, then fill the wound with oiled wool and vinegar; and then treat that like any other wound until it heals.
Section sixty-four.
On the treatment of hernias that are due to wind.
Wind is an abscess wrapped in some envelope resembling a seed during the softening of the testicles, and causes difficulty in exercise and walking on the patient.
And in the treatment of this illness is due to fear from what it's preceded by memory.
However, observe that we perform an operation there according to how I first did it.
And say that you should make the patient lie on an elevated bench; then place the testicular suspensory ligaments at those parts left; and place your hand near the organ seam at the muscles which are palpable to the touch; and have other attendants with you, and extend those with strong extension.
And then penetrate through the sharp point across the section into the right of the vessels where the vessels are exposed.
And then scrape off all parts as we have instructed in the extraction of stones which are in the temples.
And then place there a needle with a double hook on it, and pass that through the first of the areas where you are bleeding, and pass this other path through the last of them. And then penetrate those through the middle area in a right diagonal section according to the length of the body, and extract whatever is added by the fetid moisture and corrupted substances.
And then treat the wound according to the cure of other wounds in which you want health to be generated through its own nature that cause veins to flow in one or two generations, which is not bad for this.
If bleeding occurs throughout all the veins, then cover that the testicles should be extracted or that the testicles are removed through this way from the veins for it to consume in the veins themselves, so as to be deprived of all nutrients due to the penetration of the veins, or that they become established, or that not be youthful at those.
Title 65.
Regarding the treatment of intestinal hernias.
The occurrence of this hernia is due to a section that extends from the abdominal cavity over the belly, from parts of the small intestine, so moving those hernias towards some of them.
And this rupture is either of the abdomen or from a blow to him, and these two types occur due to such causes: through impact, or by throwing something, or through shouting, or through lifting any heavy cause, or through pressure.
And the sign of this, when due to extension of the abdomen, is that it occurs little by little over a long time, and does not occur suddenly, and there is an abscess equal within the preon because the abdomen squeezes the hernia.
And the sign of this is when due to a section in the abdomen, it causes sudden intense pain; and there appears an abcess different from his body near the downward apparent cause, and this is due to displacement of the hernia, and his body towards parts above the abdomen.
And some bleeding occurs outside on the skin of the hernia, and this is called intestinal hernia with scarring.
And some bleedings happen due to wind, and some bleedings run into the hernia opening, where they are held back, and this is a great harm in the thigh area, and some bleedings cause evil pain that increases especially when squeezed.
And in the treatment of these symptoms of this ailment one should be cautious, so that you avoid being caught by it there.
And the method of performing that operation is to command the thigh to return the hernia towards its cavity from inside its abdominal cavity if it returns according to its own movement, and then envelop it on his back between your hands, and lift up his legs.
And then tighten the thread that seizes the thread of the testicles from above, and cut through the thread of the testicles all along; and then fix in two folds of the section according to your needs to open up that section for them.
And if the section according to the amount that is possible from there, you should make an opening in it.
And then scrape off that layer of fat which is left by the thread of the testicles, while revealing the white hard abdominal wall from each part.
Then you intervene in that which seizes the testicle, that which is between white abdominal wall, which is left by the thread of the child, and between the abdominal wall laterally, and free from that adhesion that is behind the child.
And then have your hand on the thread of the testicles from above, and also extend the white abdominal wall in that area with your left hand, and lift up the child towards the abdomen at that section; and command the assistant to extend the child there as you dissolve that adhesion behind by completion of the solution.
And seek out your instructions so that there is no cause for the hernia being enclosed in the white firm abdominal wall. If you find any cause from him, then you remove that to the abdomen leaving it.
And then penetrate into the section below the testicles' chain by segment where it runs pain and healing as we have described in what we have said.
And then apply wool soaked in oil, place it on the wound; and administer the substance that we have described (and some whitish pustules are treated with a cautery, which we mentioned earlier about the application to the vulva where the flow of pain occurs, and there are certain pustules that occur). Let the substance rest inside so that it may fall by itself.
If the healing of your patient is delayed, then let hot water be applied, and place it over the area where it will fall as we have described.
And treat the wound with another cure for wounds within which healing occurs.
Chapter LXVI.
On venous hernias.
In this hernia, it has not been observed that any part was burned during the healing process of your patient.
And the first ones would say that this occurs as we have described in the hernia that is made from it; which is when you press the vessels near the section over that facilitates your condition; and then dry off at the middle location around the pustule where that operation takes place, within which the vessels will fall.
And treat the wound as we have said until it is healed.
Chapter LXVII.
On the disturbance that occurs in the joints.
Some pustules may rupture in the joints as we have said, and you should lift up the area.
And do not let any cause of the intestines come to the genitals; if they do, there are few; and return it within all times.
If the time is prolonged with this, an opening occurs in the cushion where it descends the intestine into the cushion; and this happens due to the extension of the cushion which we mentioned in the joints. The cause is that the cushion is extended, and then the area becomes softened and there is a pustule formation, lift up the area.
And the treatment of your patient is with cautery as it follows the description of what happened to him/her.
And some pustules are treated with iron according to this method: and it is that the patient lies on his/her two middle places among your thighs, and then dry off the area of the rupture of the pustules by pressing at the section according to the width in the amount of three fingers.
And then strengthen the white cushion that is below the chain where it is exposed.
And then take the rib and place it over the prominent area of the cushion, and press it against the belly's navel.
And then place the two prominent areas on the end of the cushion's rib, and adjust one of those to the other with suturing.
And then remove the end of the rib, do not cut into the cushion completely, nor stretch the skin or any other reason as I have learned in treating intestinal hernias.
And then treat that with the treatment of wounds, and when you insert needles, cleanse it and restore the wound until it is consolidated; where the cushion tightens and does not adjust the prominence of rupture.
And cautery is better in this area, which is closer to health.
Chapter LXVIII.
On softening the chain of the testicles.
Pustules in the chain of the testicles in some men is softened by this means that the tissues within that area are softened, and protection is provided for him/her.
Then it is necessary for the one who is treated in his/her healing to lie according to their two places and elevate the entire chain which is softened over the natural chain; and then adjust two lips to the suture.
And if you want, place in the beginning the excess of the softened chain with three stitches or four and secure suture.
And then insert between the sutures; and then treat for the treatment of other wounds until it is healed, letting fall the needles.
Chapter LXIX.
On castration.
Know that castration in our law is forbidden, but due to certain reasons it has been noted to me that I should remember him/her in this free document; and the recall of him/her is not necessary, but only for two methods, among which one is when someone is questioned about that subject by a physician, they must know his/her treatment in order to answer appropriately. The other method is that we sometimes have need of castration on other animals due to our offspring's needs, as well as on mares, bulls, pigs, and similar to those animals.
And therefore I say that castration is done in two ways: either by atrophy or through rupture at the junction.
If it is done through atrophy, the method of operation consists in having us cut the animal in hot water until his/her testicles are softened and hanging. And then take those with your hand until they dissolve without showing any signs of touch on the skin.
And for castration done through rupture and junction, you must have the animal and press on the chain of the testicles with your right hand.
And then fix the suspensory, and cut into each side of each area where two ligaments process.
And then remove those pus that you have scraped out from any location. And do not allow any cause of the bladder, but rather the subtle bladder which is over the veins.
And this method of castration is the better one which is done by twisting, where twisting slightly lets out no cause of the testicles so that the animal desires copulation.
And then treat the wound until it is healed.
Capitol seventy.
Regarding the treatment of hermaphroditism.
Hermaphroditism in men occurs according to two methods: one is when there's a division in the area of the testicles, where it's like having half a female, which has hair.
And some urination issues from that flow through the ducts of the testicles.
In females is a special case: it's that the female organ on the pubis is like two testicles in men, somewhat reduced but still present at the location of the prostate and similarly to male ones, having two testicles.
And the treatment is for three species: two from men and one from females. And it is that you should cut those tightened tissues so that the secretion from that escapes, and then proceed to treat those with the treatment of other wounds.
And in the second species from men where he urinates, which is through the duct of the testicles, there's neither treatment nor operation for it.
Capitol twenty-one.
Regarding coughing and prominent flesh due to issues in females.
A strong cough is adjusted to natural causes and it's treated with the appropriate examination; sometimes, coughing in some females can be exaggerated to such an extent that it spreads as much as in men, even getting involved in copulation.
And when you notice the excess of coughing with your hand or on a finger, cut it.
And don't finish with cutting, especially in the beginning of the ribs, for fear that pus might spread.
And then treat that with treatment until the wound heals.
A naval lump is flesh that appears within the mother's belly filling it up, and from this place it spreads to other areas according to the similarity of the anus (for this reason they initially called this "tail malady"); therefore, when you notice this, cut it in the same way as you would with coughing, and treat it until it heals.
Capitol seventy-two.
Regarding the treatment of arthritis.
Arthritis is when there's no perforation of the female organ or that it has a small tear. And it can be due to nature or accidentally.
Accidentally, it's due to the tail malady that has preceded, and this happens either from an unadjusted piece of flesh or from a subtle or thick bladder.
And it can happen inside the mother's womb, on her ribs, in excessive pus of her body, or in lower pus. Avoid copulation and any pregnancy attempts, and strongly avoid menstruation as well.
The recognition of that is done through examination by the doctor, if the protrusion is visible, it's closer; but if it's not visible, then you look for that with your fingers or under the belly.
If the protrusion is due to a subtle bladder, it's close to the two lips, so you touch and burst that area.
And you pause over the two lips until you feel your fingertips under both breasts, indicating that it's close.
And the female is on her two feet, her thighs are extended, and you further spread the two lips until that subtle bladder is burst and the protrusion is opened.
And then take wool and soak it in oil, place that over the area, and do this for a day to ensure that the cut area doesn't harden.
If the bladder is thick and fatty, then you should cut it with a knife or with mint leaf.
If the protrusion is due to fatty tissue, then suspend that on your finger and cut it.
And use the medicines that help stop pus discharge like avocado, dragon's blood, and earth, adjusting them with chicken broth.
And then administer a wide lead pipe to prevent the wound from hardening quickly.
And keep that for several days and apply hot lime water.
And then, with the other treatments for hardening, let it heal fully.
And sometimes incidents occur during the birth of other tissues in the mother, so you should cut them following this method. If you've noticed it's due to a pus-filled boil in the mother, then avoid iron or any other method against such boils.
Capitol seventy-three.
Regarding the treatment of hemorrhoids, tail issues, and red botulinum that occur in the female genital area.
Hemorrhoids are the observation of blood in the openings of small veins where it continuously carries pus; and for old hemorrhoids, they're treated accordingly.
And I have already discussed in the division the species of those [things] and the signs of those [things], and stated which ones receive treatment and which do not.
So say that boils and warts when they are on the surface of the mouth and do not appear to feel anything, then in those there should be no treatment with iron.
Only those that are on the surface of the mouth over which you feel, these are the ones that are cured.
And command that you place the woman in mustard powder and then extend alcohol over her limbs, or on linens made of rough material, and penetrate those with razors.
And afterwards, you should dust over those things with the extracts from one of the grinding powders made for chewing, as is done with ginger and similar to those.
And then scrub their feet for an hour, and rinse that off in hot water.
And if the extracts from the sweat persist, then have that person make a decoction of sumac and of vinegar of almonds and of apricots and of similar things.
And then take flour of garlic and mix that with honey and wine and add to it, making a poultice from that on the back of the person.
And if the sweat is eliminated, then drink it; otherwise, apply it to two flasks, and on the nipples do incisions.
And then take wool and immerse it in the juice of pressed onion or in the juice of goosefoot or in vinegar mixed with water, and apply that to the area; and then treat the area with greasy ointment until it heals.
And treat it until it heals.
Capitol .LXXIV.
Regarding the perforation of cysts that occur in the mouth.
The species of abscesses that occur in the mouth, such as those from toothaches, abscesses from teeth piercing, ulcers, boils, ulcers with pus, abscesses in the neck, and others. And I have already discussed these illnesses and their species and the signs of those as well as their treatments in this section.
And I will say in this treatise about the cautery for abscesses that come to the mouth when it's from abscesses that are healed, and if you want to know how the operation is done with iron.
So when you consider if the pain of the abscess at its beginning is sharp upon percussion and phlegm and fever, and sometimes it turns red, and if you feel anything about that, then note down the need for perforation of it, and treat it with what aids in maturation while the intensity of the accidents ceases.
And then have them make incisions on the abdomen with a knife that has two blades; lie down on their back and place their feet at the lower part just below their belly, spread out their thighs, and hold their arms above their heads, tie them in such a way as to be comfortable.
And then the midwife should follow with her left hand and administer the instrument from which the opening of the mouth is uncovered; its shape will come about in those cases that will be applied.
And when you want to administer this instrument, fix it at the bottom of the mouth of the woman, and that which enters from the instrument into the mouth should not be larger than the opening of the mouth and disturb the patient. If the tool is larger than the opening of the mouth, then you should sprinkle powders on the texture of the opening of the mouth so that all instruments are prohibited from entering the opening of the mouth.
And when you should sprinkle the powder that moves in the tool from its bottom up and have the minister hold the tool while stirring the powder until it opens the mouth.
And when you notice the excitement, and it is touched with the hand and feels hot and moist, then you should dry that part of him on a warm stove.
And when the healing is discharged, then you should apply to the wound a poultice submerged in rubbed oil or olive oil with some bitterness; and place the leg in the dry section at the bottom of the mouth.
And let him walk away from the mouth and over the wool cloth submerged in water where the haws are boiled.
And then, two days after being treated with greasy ointment until it heals.
And some sores are washed with water and the mouth and wound is treated with vinegar and honey, then returned to water in which garlic or almond root has been boiled, and later returns to greasy ointment.
And if the wound is inside the mouth swollen, then you should forbid its treatment with iron, and instead treat it with what we have said in this section.
Capitol .LXXV.
To teach midwives in what manner to medicate the embryos when they occur according to an unnatural figure.
A necessary cause is that the midwife knows in the beginning the figure of normal childbirth through signs from her body, and when you see the woman being squeezed by her limbs and wanting to smell the air, and on this she is excited because it is near her part, and accelerates the appearance of the embryo, then you know that this part occurs according to a natural figure, and it is the movement of it towards her head, and the second one hanging or suspended under the umbilical.
When you mark those signs, then make the patient's abdomen compress itself so that when it slightly pushes up the embryo as it presses on its head, have the second one do this to them, and dispose of those excesses in a good transformation.
May it be that this part is unnatural and unfeasible, when the embryo rests on its feet and the body of the patient rests in front of its head and the foot of the patient,,. or rests the head of the patient and the hand,, or in the abdomen, and lightly it is turned onto its back, resembling impossible figures.
A necessary cause is for the midwife to be wise and subtle in all those matters, and to guard against error and deception.
And I am showing every figure of those, and what is the cause in those for what it signifies and where it stands.
When the operation rests on its head by natural emergence, that is strong for women and takes place in their difficult part, and sometimes the virtue has already weakened, then perform this process or what women have it, and evaporate with her a drink of water mixed with fennel juice and oil.
And then the midwife inserts her finger between the woman's buttocks and small opening in that place for the second one, or dries that with her thumb inside where there is moisture. And presses on the abdomen of the woman so that the fetus descends.
If it doesn't descend, then have the woman rubbed with colic water and fennel juice on her back.
And then order them, and near her chest, have the abdomen compress itself and make that sneeze with strength; and keep their mouth and their nose open for an hour, so that the fetus can come out quickly.
And if the two parts of the fetus are ready to be born at mealtimes, then have you reduce those with ease little by little. If you don't follow the advice, then have the woman rest on a stool and lift her legs up, and near place the stool against the ground; and let the woman be held so she doesn't fall from the concussion.
And if the parts are not turned inside and the fetus doesn't move, then insert those and remove the membranes of the fetus or tie it to the mother's hand with thread and pull that out equally, so that it can come out quickly.
When the fetus moves onto its feet, then have you push those in, and near rotate the fetus slightly, and near make that equal, and near take one of its legs and spread those slightly.
When it is situated between the thighs, then have you command them to expel it, and make that sneeze with strength, so that it can come out quickly if God wills.
And if it doesn't come out quickly with what we have recommended, then have you return the fetus slightly by slight movements until you find that natural second figure, so that it will come out quickly with a little emergence.
And if it is forbidden to do all that we have recommended, then take of alum and dissolved gum, and beat them in the mortar for good beating, and near line with that a drink of water from the woman, the bottom pus of her abdomen. And then make that one sneeze in warm water, so that she can achieve her flanks.
And when the parts you've left of her have hardened, then make her subfumigate with myrtle and sub-place that one to her. And when you've sub-fumigated her for an hour, then make her sneeze on a stool, and near make that one sneeze and extend her mouth, and lift from that, and press the lowest part of her abdomen slightly, so that the fetus can come out quickly.
Lateral emergence of the fetus hanging one of its parts. It should be done by reducing her hand, but if you can't reduce that one, then lift the woman and let that one go.
And if it can't go on its own, then have her lie on the bed, and compress her thighs with strong squeezing, and near administer remedies made from remedies as I've recommended.
And if it has come to the birth, then perform that surgery on the belly, and proceed by studying the reduction of her hand, and conduct the operation according to natural figure, and make the woman sneeze and command her to close herself as soon as she is freed from pain.
Positioning of the fetus over the belly expands its hands and the surface beneath it is double that of its mother's. Guide the midwife to have her hand on the fetus and gradually turn that little one bit by bit, making it easier.
And when they are equal, then place your hand on that which we recommended of oil and of mucus.
And guide her to turn that little one gradually, and once this is done, then have her perform surgery on a belly, and command her to be tilted over the right side, and guide her to close herself up; and make her sneeze as required. Extraction of the prepared fetus from the side.
When the fetus descends into horror of the mother according to this manner, observe it, and then you penetrate the second on your finger inside so that moisture is evacuated.
And if the fetus is hanging over the face and neck of her, then you penetrate that in the umbilicus, so that it is not retained and remains.
And then you force the fetus into the openings while placing that second one according to how she feels, and command the woman to close herself for several times, and he shall be freed from pain immediately if God wills.
Extraction of twins or multiple fetuses. Know that twins are usually born prematurely, and some never reach three or four months, but this is unusual and confusing; mostly they are caused by natural reasons, not illness.
And count them, whether they are in pairs or singletons, separated by the umbilical cord. They distinguish those among the ligaments around each of these. Some are born prematurely like a fetus by natural birth quite quickly, and some remain for several days due to an impossible birth as we have recommended.
And if some are difficult among them, you must perform the birth and resort to the figures of unnatural births that we have discussed. Then treat those accordingly as we have recounted.
And if the midwife is subtle and performs what makes it easier and with subtlety, and in delay, and according to every figure as she has been prepared by nature leading to health.
Repetition of what forms within the womb from embryos and aborts.
Some burns are made in the mother one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and more than ten, at which point you should verify that a woman who aborts produces one, and another person all of them, which is caused by measurement of the glorious sages.
And all this is done according to what is in the midwifery science that leads to such a small likeness of that, and consequently pauses itself on that as long as she feels it.
Chapter 76.
On extracting the fetus when it is dead.
When you attend to a dead fetus in accordance with what we have discussed in the section of medication and it is not expelled by itself, then consider whether the woman has good health and is not prone to any of the accidents that cause loss for her.
Then observe that the woman is lying on her back, with her head inclined downwards and her thighs raised.
And the minister should have that part of two sides or is bound on her back, so that her body does not extend downwards during the extraction of the fetus.
And then you moisten the mother's mouth with oil and moisture, as well as high mucus and fenugreek seeds.
And apply oil and mucus to the midwife's hand as well, then position her hand in convenience for the mother, and arrange her location on which she can place her fingers under the fetus.
And locate conveniently in this: then consider if the fetus is prepared to descend on its head, and then place your fingers under its buttocks, or around its neck, or in its mouth, or on its palate, or let it be on her chin, or at its belly button, or near its back locations, or leave its hipbones.
If the descent is on its feet, then in the buttocks, or midway down its back.
And observe that your finger is on her right hand, pause the curvature of it in that location which is between the last two fingers of her left hand, position your hand in convenience and place your finger in one of those locations we've mentioned, so that it can reach the lower cause.
And then position and place another finger, or third if necessary, so that there is equal pressure, and not extension according to its straightness alone.
And apply gentle force to all parts, so that the passage is eased as it is done in teeth during extraction.
And observe that the extension should be softened between them; and if any part of it is retained, then observe that the midwife applies some of her fingers with oil and uses them skillfully, turning around those parts that are being retained.
When the belly's exit is blocked outside, then let the intestines be released into any place where it might be pus; and do this until the entire belly is out.
If my hand is trapped in front of the other, and it's not possible to return it through constriction, then let a cloth wrap around that; and remove it until everything is out, and cut it either at the junction of the hand or on the side.
And do this for the other hand and both feet as well.
If the head of the belly is large, or if it becomes constricted in the umbilical region, or if there's water trapped in the head, then let something insert between the two halves of the spine and cut through the head to drain out the water, or find an instrument named "alundat," which has a shape similar to other instruments in the surgical cap, which is nearby this.
Similarly do this if the belly has naturally a large head: and then let something cut through that with an awl, or take hold of it like "alunda" as we have said; and remove the bones with forceps.
And if the head is stuck and constricted behind the gullet, then let it be cut through until the moisture in the feet is dissolved.
If there's no complication, nor any obstruction at the umbilical region, then you should cut through the head right away as long as it is feasible.
And if the intestines are twisted or in lymph, then let you pierce that through where flows the moisture that is within it.
If the belly is above its feet, then the movement of it is slight and the direction towards the mother's mouth is slight.
If it's constricted you should move the belly and feet, then let you remove that with cloth which will envelop your hand, and cut through the belly and feet until you reach what is inside them.
If the other limbs remain in place and return to its head, then let the left hand enter the mother's mouth; but if the mother's mouth is open, then let the hand enter through the belly button region, wrap around that head, and pull it with both hands into the mother's mouth, and let a finger or two enter in, and pull them.
And if the mother's mouth is constricted due to an abscess, then let it not be inflated over it; before that, you should prepare to administer emollient and oily substances. And apply poultices; and continue with waters that soothe and moisturize.
And if the belly is on its side, then if possible it should be pierced: and let what we have said be administered to the living belly.
And if that is not possible, then let it be cut with sharp tools, and removed.
And make sure to leave no cause for the second one inside.
And when you have completed all your operation, then let you administer what we have said about the treatment of abscesses that occur from the mother.
And if pus discharge occurs, then let it be treated with restorative waters and apply the other treatment.
And I have indeed seen a woman in her womb who had an unborn dead fetus, and then about that area there was another pregnancy taken on, and the fetus became dead again. It happened to him for a long time that an abscess occurred in his belly; and it inflated until the fetus was swollen, and began to move.
And I was called upon for his treatment, and I treated him for a long time, and the wound did not heal.
So I placed some strong-pulling poultices on him and extracted an animal bone from him, and after several days, extracted another bone; and I was very amazed, as there is no bone in the belly.
And then I realized that they were bones of the dead fetus.
And then I cleaned the wound, extracted bone mush from him, found a woman's bones in her abdominal arrangements, and had already seen such things for a long time, moved one of his arms by a little.
And I did not consider it strange, but rather that in this there is knowledge and assistance with what the surgeon does with his hands for treatment.
Regarding the forms of the instruments that are necessary to extract the fetus.
Shape of inversion through which the mother is opened:
This is the shape of a stretcher on which they are equalized, to this equality two stirrups at the ends of two futs. Indeed, let this stirrup be more subtle in terms of rigidity, and made or of metal or of wood.
And let the width of each rod be two fingers and the margin of both on either side is one finger; and the length of each is a hand and half; and in the middle location of two rods there are two attachments for those metal rods which are already fixed, from which the length is about a hand plus a little, and the width of each is about two fingers, or a little less.
And these two enhancements should be inserted in the mother's mouth so that she opens up when you rotate the two prescribed virtues.
Form another similar kind of that subtle and lighter pus:
It is made from the handles of tongs or forceps according to their shape. However, at the extremity of them are two enhancements just like this one, and the length of those enhancements is about a palm, and the width of each is two inches.
And when you want to have that open the mother, then you make the female bend her knees while hanging her feet down, and open that which is between the patient's thighs. And then, open your hand with that tool as you would use a pair of scissors equally according to the amount you want from the opening of the mother's mouth while the measurer does whatever you desire.
The form of dizziness, which the ancients described:
Form of impulsion, in which the fetus is being pushed:
Form of breech, in which the large head is presented.
And it is similar to tongs with teeth at the end, just like this one, and sometimes a longer version of this is made as long as forceps according to this form, just like this one, which has teeth such as saw teeth on which it is inserted and presented. Form of breech (twins):
Form of a fetus with one spine:
Form of a fetus with two spines:
Form of a fetus with two extremities, at which the head is severed:
The form of two backbones lying side by side:
All those instruments are practiced, and when there are more species of that among them, and they are prepared by the artisans, as much lighter to their operation and as much more suitable you should have the people for their quantity.
And don't use those instruments already that whatever you need is unavoidable.
Regarding the extraction of the second one.
When the second one is being retained, you should proceed to delivery. Then command the mother to hold her breath, and then have her perform a sneeze under the condition, pressing your hand on her mouth and her nostrils, and if she sneezes out as a result, that's good.
And if not, then take a bowl and puncture in the lid one hole and insert under that into herbs while pressing her mother's mouth with it, just like a hot and rough remedy and anethole and chamomile and saffron and powdered Arabic gum and cassia stick and St. John's wort. All of these herbs or some of them should be submerged in water in the bowl, and place that over the fire.
And then place a funnel of castor oil in the mother's mouth, and let that vaporize inside her so it fills the cavity of the mother.
And then have her perform a sneeze as we've said, and the second one will be expelled quickly.
May if this treatment doesn't succeed and doesn't work quickly, then you command the midwife to submerge her left hand in safflower oil or in a mixture of almonds, and have that immersed inside her until she finds the second one, and as soon as you find it, take it and pull it out slowly step by step. If it is attached near the mother's belly, then have her place her hand according to what we've recommended, and when she has found the second one, extract it little by little according to rectitude so that the mother doesn't faint due to the strong urge. Afterwards, ensure she is relaxed on her right and left sides for ease.
And if the mother's mouth is constricted, as we've already recommended treatment with sneezing and with medicinal bowl herbs.
And if it isn't expelled by all the causes that we've recommended, then guard yourself not to exhaust on that in repetition of abstraction. However, ensure what comes out from her mouth into the mother's thigh lies on the female's side, and then smear that with grease and tetraformula; for which one will make it dissolve over a few days and become expelled.
And when it occurs, there's an unpleasant smell going up to the head and stomach, and this irritates the mother; then ensure that sub-smokes and suitable things are administered under these circumstances.
Just like the ancients, they used sub-smoke from nettle and dried figs.
The form of an instrument where the female is sub-smoked for the retention of menstrual flow and the second one:
It should be made from willow or rosewood.
And the subtle end is placed under the chest and the wide end over the fire, and the sub-smoke is placed above the fire's arms.
And let that be where that sub-smoke is consumed and another one follows.
Regarding the treatment of an unperforated infant's bottom.
Infants do not fart and their buttocks do not get pierced, which are now tender and inflamed. Then direct the midwife to pierce that small area with her finger; if not, pierce it with a sharp needle and make sure it doesn't touch the wound.
And then place over that piece of wet wool in vinegar and heat; and apply something inside that is clean.
If you fear it's inflamed, then put a tube in the mouth for several days, and keep it until the child wants to defecate.
And if there is inflammation of the buttocks due to consolidation of infection or abscess; then remove this consolidation, and proceed with treatment as we have said about treatment and lead.
For the treatment of fistulas that occur.
The fistulas that occur in the region of leaving pus low, they are small and coarse. They often appear near the anus or in the space between one part of the buttocks.
And it is a fistula or spots.
And when that pus becomes old and moist white, or has a subtle rash, sometimes some of these lesions penetrate them.
And those that penetrate are known as such because of the way they develop from them by ejection and through wind. Sometimes some patients have difficulty in ejection, and forcefully it becomes like a worm.
And some of these fistulas develop in the space penetrating into the bladder, and into the flesh of the penis; and others penetrate from between the thighs into the grooves of the anus.
And the one known as a penetrating fistula into the anus and non-penetrating is that you insert your finger in the anus, and introduce a subtle probe of wood or iron into the fistula when there is no obstruction.
If there is obstruction in that, then insert a subtle lead or horsehair probe inside where you feel the probe or hair on your finger.
And if you do not feel that or there is no cause for ejection, elimination, or wind, as we have said, then know it's non-penetrating, and now take care of the treatment.
And when the fistula penetrates into the bladder or into the flesh of the penis, then its significance is that it causes urine discharge from that and prevents this; so that the place where medicine has been applied becomes consolidated.
And if it penetrates into the space between the thighs or into bone causing pain in the vessel, then this is a sign that the probe goes inside here if there is no obstruction into the bone and pain in the vessel of the region; and that pus comes out continuously from this; and it doesn't help with this medicine, nor does it harden with ointment.
And in all these penetrating fistulas, there is not a cure for everything, and the treatment of those involves hard work and the expertise of surgeons on which they operate.
And in that which is non-penetrating and not old, healing with iron is awaited according to what I will advise you, and what I already know and practice.
And that is for the patient to lie with your hands under their buttocks and elevate their legs inside them, have their thighs inclined towards the belly of the patient, and introduce a lead or horsehair probe into the fistula if there's obstruction, knowing where the probe goes.
And if that is the belly around the anus, then remove your finger which you have inserted there into the anus.
And if you feel that the probe has already emerged by itself through your finger, or between your finger and that wall or flesh, then you will definitely know that this is a penetrating fistula; and from now on don't work on this, as it doesn't have healing properties, just like we said.
However, some would say that it is cured in certain patients with particular conditions.
And concerning the treatment for which youth is expected in them, you should ignite a subtle cautery according to the size of the fistula as previously explained, and insert that ignited part into the fistula until it touches around the anus; and then do this twice or three times until you know that all those fleshly parts adhered due to the inflammation resemble feathers.
And then treat that with warm bandages wrapped around it until all those parts that are adhered can heal. And also treat that with medicines to generate and consolidate the flesh, and if it is healed, well done; and otherwise, from now on it is not considered cured for another treatment within a time frame.
And if the probe enters and does not reach your finger which is in the anus, and between that and the probe that is thinly covered with flesh or muscle, and sometimes within this fistula where it touches the surface of the prostate gland, then dry out the prostate gland from the beginning of the fistula, and see if it dries at the probe, and is inside the fistula until the drying reaches the spot where the tip of the probe goes and through the probe it is released and flows.
And then clarify those fistula flesh parts which resemble the pipe of goose feather and do not break from any cause.
And if there's a discharge of pus many times when you're inside those parts, then let it be and from the pus use a slightly sharper instrument to cauterize with fire or with acute medicine, for the cauterization by fire improves these adhered parts and cuts off pus excess.
And if there are inflammations wrapped in bandages or caused by bleeding within the affected area, then immediately treat them with ointments for hard flesh that heal and strengthen.
And in the medicines which involve restriction and excision; when then is restored, it has been healed and there are no more repetitions.
If the fistula already penetrates into the prostate of the anus and is extended from the surface of the body, then intervene with your finger in the anus and inquire about it.
And if you try it and between you and her is either a bone or flesh, and it is prone to penetration, then there's no operation in her but according to the path of faith and hope.
That cause should be administered to her in three ways: either cauterize that as we have said; or dry out that inside until you find the cavity of it so that it is possible for you to intervene and the healing can occur naturally; and do not disturb the drying process lest the wet content of the pus contains the body, and you follow the flow of her situation according to your will. Then treat it as we have said that strength comes with healing; or lengthen that gradually and remove that pus that you dry inside close to the anus, just as we said, or on the attempt or with another sharp tool, then modify those flesh fistulas which are in the drying section where you can puncture through; and strive to restore the entire lesion at this point, and if the wounds above do not heal and continue the open fistula at the part of the anus, and it lets out pus more lightly through the body. And sometimes the fistula is finished according to this method: when you insert your finger into the fistula, and on the left side of the anus near the body's surface along the seam and at the edge of the anus, then take hold of the punctured extremity, which works like a needle when preparing stitches in this way:
And insert into that seam wrapped in three seams or around it; and then insert your finger into the seam inside the fistula until you find its cavity.
If you are penetrating into the edge of the anus inside, then you extract that thread this way as you insert your finger in the anus; and pull out the end of the thread and adjust both ends at once, tighten each one, and leave it for a day or two. And when the thread penetrates more deeply into the flesh, strengthen that part between those tissues which are between the two ends of the thread and can fit together.
And then treat the lesion so that it is consolidated and healed.
If the opening of the fistula is not penetrating, then make it penetrate in any way that you have prepared, but rather from inside the prostate, which should not be done by you to prevent the pus. And then proceed with it so that it can be healed internally.
The shape of the wound spike for what is slit through the fistula: The curvature of which is quite sharp and the other part is not, so that you do not proceed with something unnecessary as sometimes happens.
Sewing thread for hemorrhoids where there's bleeding in the initial stages of those.
Hemorrhoids can occur in two ways; either they resemble charcoal inside the anus or they appear like fat from dried fruit. And of those they are small and large, with bleeding from those at the time being one, and they are spots, and outside the anus, and at the ends of it.
However, those that are inside the anus follow a few moist conditions, with water being yellow or a little blood in continuous body fluid, and according to the color of the body.
And the treatment for that which is inside the anus is to command the body to relax and squeeze internally so that the anus releases and the hemorrhoids become visible to you. Then you cauterize and suspend with threads or whatever you have those on your nail, and then proceed to cut the veins.
If the threads are not in those due to their moisture and softness of those, then take those with rough fabric or with linen or woolen cloth, remove them with your fingers, and then cut those and apply some powdered remedies close to the location, so they act instead of cauterization; or cauterize those as previously described in the chapter on cauterization. And then treat those with another kind of treatment until they are healed.
And if the anus does not respond to expulsion, then anoint the body with oil in which there is a small bite, and wash it with that which is inside the anus so that it allows for a slight expulsion when the body is squeezed.
If the hemorrhoids are outside the anus, then their cause is minor, and you should take them with your nail, or you could take them with a thread, cut them, and then treat those as we have said until they are healed.
And if you have cut, take care that when you administer stitches as follows: take a wrapped thread and insert it into the needle and then pull out the hemorrhoids from their sides. Make it penetrate into the other part's edge with the needle; wrap both ends of the thread around the seam leaving space for the needle, and do this longitudinally; strengthen the hemorrhoid with a tight stitch, then pinch the thread and remove the needle.
And do this to all of them, leaving one out, so that the excess of the sick man's blood will flow from that.
Then place over the buttocks a cloth draped in greased oil or in gauze; and place that one above the kidneys, and command the patient to rest. Then place that inside the box; and when she is released, treat those with ointment or with another form of treatment until she is healed.
And since they are old and no longer work in that medicine, then dig out where you diagnose those at the tip of the spine or under your nail so that dampness can be done and the pus is expelled from there, which prevents consolidation; and treat them until they consolidate.
Then you observe those with much pus that the first enters and causes inflammation, causing abrasions; then treat them until they are healed.
Understand that to drain pus is the key, not just any color resembling a piece of cuttlefish, and it's done throughout the body, especially in the limbs and hands, and for those with pain you should guide your treatment.
And then remove whatever is in the circuit of pus, and keep it on the thumbs or on the side, and eradicate it from its origin; then treat that.
And if you want, cauterize following what is done in its head.
True warts are small lumps with a hard pustular surface on the body's surface, and discharges occur in most children.
And for treatment, you should extend and incise that, or open that with a knife or under the skin until it comes out. And if you want, cauterize that, as we said before, with fire or with quick medicine.
Ants are small lumps covered or with a large pustular surface on the body's skin, it moves in the uterus, and when you touch that, it stings like an ant bite, and they occur around the body.
And for treatment of this, you should use a silver or horn needle and ensure it is strong. Place that over the ant as if it's enclosed within the circle of the needle near the place where its roots are; then move your hand around the needle until you incise what's in the circuit of the ant, placing that under the skin, and eradicate the ant from its origin.
And if you want, do this with an iron or steel needle according to this method:
Take the part above the needle, pulling it finely, silently (meaning undrilled), wrapped around it, on which there appears to be a removal of its appearance and the rotation of that.
And if you want, cauterize the ant according to what was said before in the cauterization of ants at the site of the cautery.
Regarding the form of the instruments that are used to give communion.
Some discharges are given communion using silver or tin or melted iron or hammered metal instruments. Some discharges are given by those small and large instruments depending on which ones you administer, so that the one administered in treating small children should be small; and from those whose buttocks are bruised or painful, the communions of these should be small.
The form of the large communion and few:
The tip of the communion tube above where the bag is tied should be wide according to this manner; and at that point where the bag is tied, it should be in such a position as sometimes.
And the end of the pus deposit, which enters the anus, should be closed (meaning not opened) move like a lion backwards; and at one side of the middle part there are two holes, and on the other side one hole, and the size of the hole according to the thickness of the hairs and thick pus is small.
And the bag in which medicinal substances of bladder from animal or sheep skin are placed, and its depth is a palm.
And it should be pierced by small holes as they are turned; and the size of the space which is between the holes is the thickness of this.
And then insert into those holes a strong hot iron of ten iron needles or about this size; and adjust that bag to it; when the bag is placed in this, it should be straight in the tip of the communion between two points with strong constriction, and then give communion on each hole: The quality of giving communion here is that you fill the bag with medicine, which should be hot according to the tolerance capacity of the patient; take care not to make too much or too little.
And then the patient should lie on their back, raise their thighs and place one of them under which is where men or a pillow would be; and apply oil or egg white or fenugreek or garlic paste around the cautery area; then insert this into the anus with ease, and when the minister takes the bag, they squeeze it twice and forcefully until all that was in the communion has been expelled from the intestine; then remove the communion and the patient raises their thighs to the wall.
And if medicine forces one to abstain, bear it as much as you can; and if sleep deprives one of the entire night, it is better in old age.
Better if you cure him of the stomach disorders and his illness makes him suffer, then you will repeatedly apply the cautery until he is healed.
And if there are ulcers or abscesses in the buttocks, then his medicine is delicate and strong, among those medicines which make children suffer.
For the treatment of the plagues.
And I have already stated in the division of the treatment of the plagues that which was suitable for free people, and thus I also describe the treatment of those by me and according to medicine following its proper order.
So I say that the plagues are diversified according to how they cause the plagues and according to the place on which the plaques fall.
And the causes for which metal injuries are caused to form plagues are as follows: through fire damage, or incision of space or of bone, or打击 with a spear, or with a stick, or with an arrow, or resembling those due to metal injuries.
Better are the plagues that occur in the body areas as follows: like the headache plague, or on the neck, or the leg, or the stomach, or the thigh, and resembling those of the limbs.
And I recommend the treatment of some plagues for which you should pause that reasoning and rule on the others.
And I begin with simple head plagues, for which the memory of compound ones will come at the beginning of the next chapter.
So I say that when a simple head plague occurs and is not a fracture, then you should consider: if it's due to fire or something resembling fire, and has caused an inflammation throughout the body only, this is a major head plague and you fear for his patient's possible development of an abscess. In that case, you apply hot and leech therapy immediately; don't delay this treatment; and remove blood according to the quantity of its virtue if no other contraindication prevents leeching, especially if the pus that comes out of the plague is little.
And for the bleeding of the opposite side from the affected part; and guard your patient against overeating, drinking too much, and heavy foods.
Better if you prohibit any cause from occurring, then it should be reduced in food and not approach meat or drink.
And pause about the plague, if to him an abscess develops, use oil made from crushed herbs or in wine where it has a healing effect.
Better if you are sure of the abscess formation, then pause about the plague, if it is recent from his pus and the air has not changed that powder which I recommend for treatment.
And if the air has already changed, then pause about some ointments until it is healed.
Better if the plague is large or due to incision and something resembling it, and his patient's lips are not adjusted with pins, then adjust those according to how I recommend for their suture.
Better if the plague has already been discovered from bone and flesh penetration, but it is not retention of his patient's substance only a small suspension; then you should incise that and treat the plague with medicines and restore the flesh in place of inflammation; command your patient to eat dishes where there is a taste: caps and forms like them until they are composed.
And if you find decay in the bone and does not adhere to the bone, then you should incise all that part and let it heal, treating that area.
Better if in these plagues there is an artery or vein from which blood flow can occur and it is not separated by medicines, then you should inquire about the artery; if you find that it is unincised, then you should incise it with forceps, or tie it; and if necessity compels you to ensure that what we have said does not apply, then you should cauterize before the blood flow stops.
And if these plagues are simple and small, then their cause is slight; consider that you should sprinkle this powder over them, which solidifies the ground before air changes those.
And the method of this powder is as follows: take one part of oil from an onion, two parts of dragon's blood, three parts of unextinguished charcoal; mix all together and sift them well, and spread it over your plague until it binds properly inside and absorbs thereupon, then solidifies with some blood.
And then carefully removes that over the powders and lays it down, not stirring it while still like this, so that your patient's medicine does not disappear until he is healed.
And some times do this alone with the cautery, when you don't have an onion and dragon's blood at hand.
And this surgical procedure is done for large plagues when you need to leave it applied over those and strengthened, and the plagues that are recent from their pus, which the air has not altered.
And if the air has altered them, especially in summer, then it is not acceptable to place this powder at its usual position, but instead treat those with what we have said, considering that you should pause about applying some better ointments over those, or apply powders made from flour of earth mixed with water and honey until they become soupy; and then treat those with another kind of treatment until they are healed.
If it happens that you encounter a small fracture in bone, then remove this by manipulation.
And I prescribe the treatment for skull fractures in cases where there is poisoning.
For lung diseases.
If the disease occurs in the lungs, there is no difference in treatment, and for skull diseases when they are simple.
If the nerves in the lungs are incised or an artery, if it's nerves, not in their abdomen but rather avoiding treatment with something that causes violent constriction, such as sulfur and say that it is glassy and resembles their gallstone to their nerves and constricts them. And don't let any cause of all stop it, for the substance of nerves is stopped and its continuation is to the brain, which is the pus of all parts of the body.
And if it's treated with gentle medicines, such as when it's washed in lukewarm water, some herbs infused in either pressed or unpressed oil, and thyme when washed in lukewarm water and the other minor burns are treated according to this manner, and ointment is applied.
If the wound is large, then you should perform suturing or lacerate the lips of it, and subsequently treat that with powders until healed.
If the wound is deep or happens in its lower pus part near the surface, then puncture that at the deepest point of it.
If in the wound an artery has already been incised and a blood flow is achieved, then separate or dry that, or bind that, or apply a cautery to it if necessity compels that.
If it has already incised the ligaments of the shoulder blade or all, and saved the veins in the lungs, then adjust the lips of the chain with suturing over the shaft of the shoulder blade and do not touch that; balance that and return that to its natural shape, and strengthen that by stretching it properly, and let that heal for a few days; subsequently treat that with ointments containing constricting and stimulating substances until it is healed.
If the disease has already made an incision in the bone, then puncture that, and if there are fragments of bone in it, extract all those you can from them; for what does not belong to you, let that heal inside until the wound closes, and separate it so that its removal is easier.
And if the disease is recent, then sprinkle over that the powder which you are advised to use. If in the wound there is a fistula formed, then treat that with what you will remember soon in its chapter.
If it's an impact of a rib or a back bone, and if you measure the depth of the wound when the patient is breathing; then know that the wound is fatal.
And if it's not deep in the wound and the disease is recent to its blood flow, then you should stop at that with the first remedy powder, and don't stretch that so as not to have the blood retained in the depth of it and return to the heart causing the patient harm; rather stop at that attractive ointment, and apply two rounds of it each day.
And if the ointment is not available to you, then stop at the opening of the wound and compress it slightly so that the fluid that is of humidity comes out; and make the patient sleep on the wound so that the fluid that is contained flows.
If it has been three days or more since the disease and no spasms or heart tremors occur, nor stiffness in the patient, then if you have good other dispositions for him, know that the wound is saved; and then treat that with baths and all other good treatments until healed.
If the healing of the patient is justified, and he has been open for all this time, then know that a fistula has already formed; treat it accordingly in its chapter.
And if the disease is due to a rib or back bone incision, and it's simple on the surface of the foot or leg, then treat that with what precedes suture, if it's large, or with powder if it's small.
If it has already made an incision in the bone and you have dissected its parts, then twist the wound and extract those parts if they are separated. If they are not separate, then let them heal inside until the wound closes, making their extraction easier.
And for other diseases that occur in other limbs, juvenile care is like what we have said.
For abdominal diseases.
The discomfort which occurs in the abdomen can be large, small, or intermediate.
And for a small disruption, it is made difficult by another method, and it's clear that the reduction of them is more difficult, if you don't take care of their introduction to their place immediately, which opens up and swells because the intramural part of it becomes difficult.
And therefore the best intervention is to migrate, for in that case it's not difficult to return the hernia, similarly to what's difficult in the two previously mentioned species.
Know that there are four methods for sewing the abdomen, but two stitches are common and suit the stitches of other body parts.
And two others, which are specific to their own, communicate with the other illnesses, but however, they are more specific in the stitch of the abdomen.
And I advise you on each exposure and declaration.
So say that when the illness is small and some cause of the hernia is in that place, making it difficult to reduce it, then this situation falls into one of the two methods: either due to the smallness of the disruption as we've said, or when the hernia is inflamed by the cold air.
And when this happens, you should cut that away by soaking a sponge in hot water for a moment, or taking it in cold water with pepper and garlic, and apply it to the area of the hernia until the inflammation is resolved.
And sometimes I've found this helpful in cases of stiffness, and it's better than water alone for resolving inflammation.
And when the inflammation has resolved, then you moisten the hernia with water in which garlic is boiled, for this soothes the abdominal organs due to a few causes.
And if it is justified to soothe the abdominal organs with this treatment, then cut open the disruption slightly with a tool that has needles attached.
And the first treatment is better when it's appropriate that there isn't drying, and no need to hasten its drying or cause deficiency.
From the tool, dry up its form:
One part of the tool has a sharp edge, and the other part is not blunt, with its tip being subtle but not as subtle as a needle, it should be somewhat blunt before that.
And when the illness has spread and extended beyond the hernia, you should return it according to its natural form, in its proper place; if possible, this is better.
And when the disruption is broad, and it's in the lower part of the abdomen, you should have the patient lie on their back, with their legs higher than their head; and if it's in the upper part of the abdomen, then place the head and feet higher than the sides.
And similarly, if the disruption is in one of the two abdominal parts, then pause your understanding and consideration at this time so that the part where the illness is occurs more than the other.
And thus, you should administer this treatment in large illnesses and in minor illnesses.
And in small illnesses, use your prepared remedy and make sure the one who applies it is among your most skilled, so they have the entire disruption under their hand and adjust the folds of the skin; and approximately uncovering from this to that reveals some cause for another need.
And this is the common method of sewing: one where you take the needle, or count the size of the needle according to the breadth of the illness; then leave from the end of the disruption of the ring finger, and strengthen the needle once, or more than if you put a pin in both ends of the thread; under that circumstance make it penetrate into that part; and you have already added two ends of the thread and two sides of the thread, and they are made four turns.
And then strengthen the needle twice in the circuit of the thread, and sometimes from both sides, and add the two folds and the illness by a decent addition; and smooth the thickness of this one and put another needle there, and bind that with yarn just as you did with the first needle; and don't stop doing this when it's necessary with the needles until you've completed all the contraction of the illness.
And let the needles be of medium coarseness and subtlety, for subtle needles more gently cut into the flesh; and the thicker ones are difficult in the thread, so you should make them slightly medium-coarse in subtlety and thickness.
And don't let the needle be fastened at both ends of the thread close together, for so that the flesh is not cut gently and that the illness heals before its consolidation.
And don't extend the stitches unnecessarily so that the illness doesn't prevent its consolidation.
And then cut the ends of the needles so that they don't slip from under the patient's back; place powdered substances over the stitches from all sides, which have the ends of the needles; leave them until you know that the illness has already consolidated.
And these types of stitching with needles in this manner are more suitable for small illnesses, where even in the sewing just one needle or two around them is sufficient.
And the second sewing is normal: and you should administer during sewing the four ends, of the thread and two sides of the skin, in one place, with a needle where the yarn is enveloped equally in subtlety and thickness.
And when you have pierced these four extremities with the needle, return the needle from that midpoint of which it started, so that the pus sack from that lower part rises to the wound, and the suture follows as a second stitch on the cloth, where the cloths are tightened.
And between each stitch, pause for the amount of force needed for the thread.
And this stitch is how humans do it.
And this is the way they sewed up the wound that happened to a man in his abdomen where he was wounded by a thorn, and it was the rupture of the largest abdominal wound, which was situated about two palms away from my belly bone; it was the rupture in the middle of the member; then I returned that deposit after the intestine had been exposed through the wound for twenty-four hours.
And the wound was consolidated in about fifteen days or so, and treated that way until it healed; and afterwards he rested with poultices for several months, and then was able to resume his activities.
And the other doctors had judged that it was not healing; and by miracle rather than medicine, since I did not treat him with ointment, which is in the place where no ointment or any medicine would be effective, simply applying on the wound like for days twice and frequent washing with honey water ended up healing.
I may tell you two types of my own suture according to Paul's narrative.
And this is how you start with the suture at the base of the cord, and insert the needle from the outside to the inside part.
And when the needle penetrates into the cord and brings in several points straight and longitudinally of the whole body, let the tip of the thread be at the place where you have inserted the needle; and make the needle penetrate into the other end from the inside part to the outside part on the other end of the body.
And when you have made that penetration, then you make another penetration in the same midpoint of the body part from the outside to the inside; let the tip of the thread be at this side, and make the needle penetrate into the other end of the inside part from the outside.
And make that penetration through your own needle, so that this one also goes into the thread at the tip of the body which is in the place inside where all of it penetrates.
And from this side start, sew it at the tip that is at the end of the thread which goes into the body in the other side, and remove the needle from the cord where it penetrated, then join that to that cord and continue sewing at the end of the body which is on this side of the tip; and remove that one from the cord which comes from that part.
And do this once and again, and repeat this once or twice in between which you sew everything that is outside according to that example.
And the whole of this method of sewing is that you sew with stitches on the skin where you stitch the skin. So that you sew the body once from the part of the end of the cord, and let that other stitch wait until you have completed it.
And the second type of my own sewing is called Gualia's method, which was described by him and recommended to him; that is to sew it according to similarity where some doctors stitch it like this, so they add all parts to their corresponding part as nature dictates; they apply the tip of another from them and the tip of the body on the other end of them, and this is done according to what I advised you.
And when you place the needle at the tip of the body near the outside part, make it penetrate into the inside part in that sole, and let go of two ends of the thread; then turn the needle and make it penetrate from outside to inside in two ends of the thread.
And then turn each of them, and make some from the inside part penetrate into the outside part in two ends of the body other than those on the opposite side.
And this way of sewing is better than common light sewing, and it is a type of sewing that anticipates memory.
This is the method by Gualia.
And thus some might say, the belly's sewing is corrected with two needles, so that you insert into each of these one thread, and start with the insertion of a needle from which you must do, then make it penetrate into the other side according to the sewing of those that equalize the bodies.
And know that when a rupture is in the middle of the belly, then this sewing of it is more difficult than in other parts of the belly.
And the treatment for wound care is judgment for the other wounds.
And this is the reason that when you catch the wound fresh at its root before the air changes it, and return the intestine and sew it up properly, then rest on that carneous powder.
And if the air has already changed the wound, then rest on that several ointments which are at your disposal until they harden and cleanse the pus, become consolidated and heal; and treat it like the treatment for other wounds until it heals.
If you are not present with the remedies, then pause on that just now, as it begins to bleed and exude pus, and change that twice a day, like what you were taught, until you are healed. When you no longer need other medications in various situations when the illnesses are simple,
If you fear that the infection might spread to the main limbs, then consider immersing wool in oil of good quality or in rubbed oil, and place this on the circuits located between the joints and leave them there.
And if you feel pain or putrefaction in their intestines, which happens under these circumstances, then apply a black stinging ointment, especially if the inflammation is localized in the intestine and causes an incision penetrating inside its cavity.
And know that what comes from the large intestine is a light pus for healing, and that which comes from the subtle intestines.
And it is difficult to heal that which is called "gallbladder" when it catches an illness that affects it completely; this is due to the large number of veins within it and their vastness in those, as well as the subtlety of its body and proximity to the nature of nerves.
If what you are dealing with is the fabric of the illness, and if you obtain that recently, reduce that according to your judgement on how to return the intestines evenly.
If it has spread within you and is now in a red or black state, then strengthen that with a bandage on the place where it is degraded in you, so that fluids of healing can come through, for there are veins and arteries in the tissue.
And then cut that which is another piece of ligament, and hang the ends of the bandage from your position at the exit point of the illness's area, so that when you are done with it, you will be relieved of its attraction to you, and the release of the body's fluids from the illness.
Reminder of illnesses when they occur in the intestine.
When there is a disruption in the intestine and it's minor, then it might be restored in some individuals. That's why I saw him being hit by a lance in his belly with the impact causing the illness from the right side of the stomach, and the illness was old and caused a fistula, and it had weakened his digestion and expelled gas.
Then I pursued the treatment of him even though it wasn't in his recovery from illness, but I managed to delicately apply this until he is healed and the area is consolidated.
And I saw the place already consolidated, took note of the location that suffered from this unfortunate incident in his stomach; and did not allow any other illness to occur due to this unfortunate event, respecting their dietary habits when eating and drinking, and ensured proper hygiene by bathing and exercising according to his instructions.
And it is said by experienced ones that when an illness occurs in the intestine and it's minor, then you should handle it like this: take large leaves of herbs; then adjust both sides of the illness area and place a herb leaf with its mouth open on both sides of the illness. So when they grasp onto those and strengthen their mouth, cut off its head, which sticks and does not dissolve.
And then place another herb leaf near the first one, and don't stop doing this by applying leaves one after another according to the amount of the entire illness.
And then reduce that and heal the illness; and remove those excess parts in the intestine until the intestine is healed; and it does not harm the body through injuries.
And it is possible for the intestine to be held with a fine thread made from the intestinal thread of animals attached to you, as it's more in needle form; and you take the end of these intestine threads, if they are well cleaned, then place that end on your thread, wrapping it, then introduce this needle thread into needles and substances within that animal's intestine, and reduce that during disruption.
And this method of sewing with herbs is merely by way of trust and hope.
If the illness is large and broad, especially if it's in one of the subtle intestines, then it doesn't heal through minor issues but only through hope.
Regarding the treatment of hernias and fistulas.
Know that all illnesses and abscesses when they fester and become old, cause ulcers, which are not consolidated and bleed constantly, and do not get cured. Therefore, wherever this occurs in any part of the body, it's universally named a fistula, and we call that hernia.
And a true fistula is a tough, white, non-painful nodular lesion, which does not hurt and has the texture of an abdominal pain; hence, it's called that way because of its similarity to the pain caused by distension.
And there are certain individuals who have a wet condition that bleeds; and reducing mild humidity can be done within a few hours. And some times this moisture causes problems, it is small, it is large, it is subtle.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
And thus I will teach you the cure for fistula, which is made through surgical operation with my own hand.
And know that fistula occurs in all parts of the body; some of those are fistulas that occur within major veins and arteries, or nerves, or the heart, or intestine, or bladder, or any part of the spine, or any joint made up by parts like hand and chest. And among those, there are ones that affect the proximity to the main member and resemble its shape.
And those among these fistulas that occur this way are related to the difficult recovery of ailments, and they do not receive treatment or cure, and working on that is labor and lack of knowledge.
And if there is any fistula whose depth does not reach these places as mentioned, and you hope for its cure, and wish to understand it better, then try with tools or iron. If the fistula follows straightness, then examine that closely.
May you also if the fistula is twisted, then investigate that with a soft lead tool. Lead in its body's lightness ascends and bends according to the twist of the fistula.
And if the fistula is so deep that it cannot be determined with a tool, then it's not possible for you to measure it on them.
Then cleanse the opening with your natural means of cleansing, for the moisture through which you cleanse that should go to the other openings and flow from them.
And inquire carefully according to how you can know if there are veins or nerves involved, and whether the location of the fistula is distant or close. Whether this is a fistula with multiple openings that covers your entire strength, in which case you would question the patient thoroughly, applying pressure on the area with your hand, understanding the implications and causes related to abscesses.
And when you have ascertained all those causes truthfully through observation, then proceed with the treatment according to your understanding: now consider whether this is a superficial fistula close by or in an easily accessible location, far from joints, nerves, arteries, veins, or any other places I've mentioned.
And then you dry out the fistula as it was explained in its description, keeping track of that filtering process and decayed tissues, whatever has emerged from the flesh opening or any part related to it. Heal within until it is healed.
And if the fistula is of considerable depth and follows straightness, then open it as far as possible while you can, and modify that around all its decayed tissues; then apply bandages soaked in sharp medicines into it, having understood how to insert them according to iron.
And do this several times in areas where the sharp medicine can corrode all that is rotten in the cavity of the fistula.
And then restore it with ointments that generate healthy flesh until it is healed.
If it has not been healed by this method, then you cauterize it according to what we have recommended.
If the cause of fistula is bone and you have certified this fact, then inquire about it and dry it out according to what we recommended before. If you do not find any cause related to veins or nerves or main body part as we have said.
And if bone is revealed to you and there's corruption and blackness in the patient, then remove that area until all corruption is gone; then heal it from within while ensuring the flesh of the patient recovers properly.
And if it's not healed and still retains its strength as before, then you should know that you haven't eradicated all corruption completely; thus, carefully uncover this again in detail and follow the treatment method until your final strength is exerted, then proceed to restore it.
And if it has healed, well done; otherwise, know that this corruption is deep within the body, which could not be treated, so you cannot do much except let it be.
And if the bone is slightly corrupted or you are able to pull it out, then you would use delicate forceps suitable for this task.
And if they are bones in mass, then carefully perform the extraction of all of them and do not leave any cause to your strength.
And if there's some contradiction or inconsistency in the moisture, and during their operation you have neither fear nor error, then cut those ligaments or tissues if they are present here, and release the bones.
And if you're not prepared to leave the bones of your time, then rest on that wound as it should heal there, letting it stay in the vicinity of those bone tissues and ligaments, preserve the wound from consolidating and ensure the section you cut during your operation is well controlled.
When you fear something, place your hand on their chest submerged in a soap lathered with oil, or the hand submerged in Egyptian balm, or in any of the vertebrae balsams, so that when those ligaments and bones are separated from each other by dissection, and from those excisions relief is felt.
If it's a large bone such as those of the leg or thigh or similar to those, whatever has corrupted him is only on his face. Then that rottenness goes deep inside, spreading that darkness and corruption, and then restore the wound.
If what has corrupted him is a large portion, and the corruption has reached the marrow of the bone, then it's necessary to close that hole completely, and then push inside where the corruption has penetrated, and then treat from within until it's solidified.
And I advise you that when dealing with a patient in their thigh, place this example and assistant over your operation.
Treat a young man around 30 years old, who suffers pain in his thigh. The source of the matter within the body is inside the body, where the matter has reached the thigh, and it's pus from an abscess, which is a large abscess. Do not attribute the cause to an extrinsic factor.
Then extend that period within the error of doctors until the abscess bursts and remove its liquid matter. The treatment is then carried out as soon as the change forms, making incisions on the pus orifices which all gave off pus and moisture from the body.
Then the treatment of doctors lasted for more than two years, and I didn't succeed in those who knew it, but only in the art when I was called upon.
And you see the change in him and the fluids that flowed from those openings through a large vein; and already his body of that man was entirely dried out, and the color of him was lemon yellow.
And then I introduced a thread into one of those openings and guided the thread to the bone.
And then I examined all the openings closely and found that they reach them from all parts of the body.
And then I took care and cut into one of those openings where I found a part of the bone, and removed that corrupted thing, it was already earthy, corrupted and degraded; and it had already corroded a part of the body which had penetrated to the marrow.
And then I tightened what was discovered by me and prepared from the bone found.
And I ensured that it wasn't in the bone but that corruption which shrinks and tightens up, and I had already removed it.
And then, for a long time, using consolidative medicine to restore the wound, it was not consolidated.
And then I repeated and found out about the bone again after the first discovery, removing continuous corruption from the bone.
And I tightened what appeared to me from that corruption, and then I did all the necessary operations for healing him and restoration, but it was not restored.
And then I discovered again on him and continued to gradually penetrate the bone little by little precisely, performing the restoration of him, but it was not restored until I penetrated around half his length, and I removed part of its marrow, and then restored that with medicines, it consolidated slightly and healed.
There is no need for repetition in the operation of him and section of him but due to the position of the intestines within him and due to his limited tolerance and weakness from death, which caused him discomfort at all times because of over-excitement leading to bad syncope.
And therefore, he is healed through complete recovery, nothing is instead of the hard flesh bone; his position is good within him in his body and returns his vigor; it adapts to his positions and does not oppose him in movement nor harm any cause.
If the bone is prominent in a location of the body already punctured, then follow this method to remove it: take hold of that ligament and strengthen that at the end of that prominent bone, command someone else to extend that towards your side; place that piece of woolen thread thicker than the first ligament over the flesh left behind by the bone. Extend its tip so you can pull the flesh towards those remaining parts, then uncover the flesh on the location you wish to tighten so the saw doesn't cut into the flesh.
And place a stool or table underneath the bone properly, so when you do this it doesn't prohibit using the saw that wouldn't cut through the corrupted flesh.
And have the saw cut through the corrupted area gradually on that location, so if it's inside the hollow of the corrupted bone and doesn't show up upon touch, force the other opening to make the closure.
And if the bone is corrupted and not prominent, before it's one continuous part from another, and the corruption is at the middle or in a part of him, then uncover the flesh from all parts completely; then place a stool underneath you, then make the closure of that first part where there is corruption, ensuring continuity of the closure of the other part.
And the saw should be in line with the location of the corruption just a little bit, as we have said.
And if the corruption is at the joint, cut that corrupted joint, and saw the bone where it continues from the other side.
And if corruption is in the continuous part of two joints, then it's not due to their ratio but rather their structure.
And if corruption is in the armpit of the hand or chest, it's very difficult; however, you must inquire about the corruption as to how it appears to you, and once you've identified it, treat that area according to every possible disposition which is within your capabilities, and with each case correct it according to what suits you, rather than causing harm to veins or nerves.
Know which are the incisors and the saws to use for this bone cutting depends on the location of the bones, the preparation of those tools, their thickness, the subtlety, size and smallness of those, and their hardness and rarity. Therefore, make sure you prepare every type of operation tool suitable for that particular operation.
Know what that operation means to you regarding the type of tool you need; when you have ample study and long experience with methods in this art, and testimony on how to handle various illnesses, then having encountered these situations yourself, you should understand how to choose the appropriate tools for every kind of illness.
And you will find at the end of this chapter the number of tools which you will use, as simple as those that follow your prohibition which you will experiment on others. Shape of saw:
Shape of another saw:
Shape of a large other saw:
Shape of the key: The tip of this key should follow the shape of the star-shaped key's head, and its points should resemble the points at the end of a star.
And it's only necessary that when those joints are corrupted, or the mouth is large and open.
Shape of the smaller knives:
Shape of the lateral knives:
Shape of another saw properly made: it should have an arch higher than the point of the needle and the sharpness of its blade be in descent from the handle, and the member of its head that's pointed should be in a descending fashion. Shape of this:
Shape of the knives where there is a hollowing out:
Shape of another subtle knife:
Shape of another curved knives with rounded ends:
Shape of the small razor resembling a net:
Shape of another smaller cutting instrument:
Shape of another cutting tool; it resembles a key, and its end is like a saw. It should be found in various locations according to the proportion of bones:
Shape of the key which corresponds to that which penetrates through the bones:
And its end is triangular and sharply pointed.
It is made of Indian iron, similarly to all the causes we have mentioned about razors, cutting tools and saws.
For the ends of incisions and for securing bones in place.
The ends are pressed either due to an intrinsic or extrinsic cause, or as you have treated that corruption with medications and the treatment fails to alleviate it, or sometimes the corruption spreads from the body part which was not touched by any cause. In such cases, understand that if you incise that body part within this range where the corruption is found, so that the patient's condition does not worsen due to death or malice that exceeds the misfortune of the body part.
And the sign of that to which it happens is that the body becomes black inside where there has been a fire, or you place this darkness inside that part of the body that affects it, and it spreads throughout the entire body; therefore, make your incision in that.
And similarly, if it is due to a venomous cause of corruption such as from sea scorpions or snakes or murex and their like.
And if the corruption or impact is in the end of the finger, then you should cut off the finger and do not allow space for the corruption to spread into your hand.
And similarly, if it reaches your hand, then you should cut that part of the wrist, and do not allow space for the corruption to spread into the elbow of the arm.
And if it extends that far, then you should cut off the arm up to the armpit at the joint.
And if the corruption goes beyond and surrounds the armpit, then that is death for the patient; another cause must be administered in this cure as much virtue.
And similarly, do so with the chest when corruption reaches that part of the chest; then you should cut off that area near one of the nipples.
And if it spreads to the bottom of the chest, then you should cut out the entire chest. May also if it extends to the belly, then you should cut off the stomach area at the junction of the belly.
And if corruption has already reached into the belly, then it is not treatment but dismissal; leave the patient to die.
The method of incising or sawing the body part is as follows: you strengthen one muscle in the part where you want to cut, and have another muscle over that spot. Extend your finger to the remaining parts on either side, then extend it with another muscle at their junctions; now separate the flesh between two muscles while leaving a slit open so that all the flesh can be seen; and proceed to cut or saw there.
And make sure that a sheet is placed on the patient from all sides so it doesn't touch the operation area, and that the injury goes directly to the wound with pus in the sick person.
If bleeding occurs while you are working, then you should use the cautery moderately on the affected area, or place some potent powders that restrict the blood on them; and afterwards return to your treatment until it is completed.
And if there's an affected member, place it comfortably under him, and treat that area until it heals.
And I advise you that when someone finds themselves in their foot, this accident befalls them which I and you recommend, one that happens to them with blackness in their foot under conditions similar to the ignition of fire.
And that corruption occurs first in his little toe, spreading throughout the foot.
And then that man prepares to make pus appear which will help the healing process go through his body with the intensity of what is causing him pain and discomfort, and he spreads that foot into the joint area, and heals.
Over a long time this corruption accident happens in the little finger of his hand.
And then it reaches me, and I properly understand the repercussion of that excess on what covers his hand with medicines, near the purification of his body; and the excess does not get reflected but begins to spread into the other fingers starting from his hand.
And he asks me to spread his hand, and I don't want to do that fearing the repercussion of that excess, rather I fear the spreading of his hand's death which was about to happen due to its toxicity.
And once he has forgotten about me, he returns to his land and I hear that the man prepared and spread his hand completely, and was healed.
And I have not recounted this story merely for amusement concerning this disease, but rather to provide assistance about it and its meaning which is why it's described and according to that it has been written.
Regarding the cure of inflammations and the quality of the enemas with medicines.
When gangrene occurs in fleshly limbs and the area of the gangrene extends until it accumulates pus, then it bursts and perforates, and the pus escapes from him, leaving the location empty as if it was a vessel, and the wound that opens up is covered by thin cloth, and it does not reach deeper corruption, nor spreads into bones or nerves or muscles, it is called an abscess, and it is not named fistula.
However, if the area extends until corruption starts in some member, then it is called a fistula and I cannot describe that.
And the treatment of it is to spread that wound completely as if it were being rolled out, especially when it's thin like cloth, and you make sure not to stick to the area due to its corruption.
And if you hope that the wound sticks and that this corruption hasn't reached deeper consequences, then you treat it with enemas.
And you consider it as an abscess; if it's large, and the arm that smells is of fat scent, then you treat it with an Egyptian enema made from oil and vinegar mixed in equal parts, which are placed in a container, and they're heated over fire until the medicine boils and reaches honey-like consistency.
And afterwards you take what's necessary from him and dissolves it in water and honey; and treat with that the abscess, strengthen his opening, and let the medicine stay in him for the duration of two hours.
And afterwards extract that with care; and do this for several days until the abscess is purified and his pus is increased.
And in some occasions you treat with ash water when this medicine is not available to you; and you take the ashes of oak, and put it into water; then boil that solution and treat with it the area where the abscess is, until you confirm that the abscess has disappeared.
And if his toxicity doesn't tolerate the Egyptian medicine or water of ash, then you treat with water and honey where it's mixed with strained vinegar; and treat with that with vinegar and honey mixed together; for honey has properties to purify and cleanse, and vinegar makes it stick to the abscesses, especially when there's excess of coagulation and drying in vinegar.
And as you do this for some occasions and confirm that the pus has increased, then treat with what causes birth in him.
And you take from diaphanosanguis oil and dissolve that with rubbed oil and vinegar; or you treat with some medicines and other ointments whose properties I have written about in the manuscript of ointments.
And if the opening of the abscess is wide in which no catheter for enemas can be inserted, then you gradually enlarge that with a small iron tool, and pause on him with a cloth wrapped around it dipped in Egyptian ointment or basil ointment until it's enlarged.
And similarly if the opening is wide, then you add his lips with stitches and leave him the amount in which an enema can be inserted.
And if the arm's opening which smells is elevated to his parts above, then dry that in the lower pus location so that the arm can flow into it. For when the arm is compressed within the abscess cavity, meat will be generated in him.
And if it is not possible for you to dry the sinus within the bone's edge of pus as desired, then pierce and prepare the limb for the procedure where the arm flows from him lightly according to your ability and so that no cause of the arm is held back in him.
May that which is over the sinus opening be adjusted at all times to prevent anything from restricting his arm. And so you may know if what flows from his arm is much or little, whether it is absorbed or not, whether it digests or does not digest.
And always consider the location of that sinus, if the patient feels pain there or not, and whether it is in a localized abscess.
And as your treatment is extended in this manner, you observe the material that is being discharged over the sinus opening has adhered, or if it shows proper adherence. Then you may remove it gradually or replace it daily, and when removing the wound, then change the dressing to another one and renew the ointment.
May it be that from the sinus there is a large space for the virus to spread, then do not despair of the patient's adherence, as his healing progresses, and such are those who take longer to regenerate tissue in their wounds. This applies particularly to those where the opposite action occurs.
And if for several days the arm remains indigest from the sinus, then you know that the sinus does not adhere; and if there is a delayed adherence of the sinus and it is due to prolonged treatment, then adjust in drying out the medicines. And if the medicines are wet through their substance and lose their efficacy, let them be dried as well like ointments dyaffinicon, when there is excessive addition of zinc involved.
And the best way at the end of what needs to be treated is to take dyaffinicon ointment and dissolve it in rubbed oil, apply this on his journey's path with its substance equivalent, then apply it there, use this method.
And it already imitates that action when there is no arm involved, dyaffinicon ointment with honey when rubbed in causing congestion, use this on him; or take myrrh and aloes and blend them together, then apply all of this heated over the honey, then spread this on a cloth and press this onto the sinus; and spread this on the honey which has been rubbed in causing congestion, then crush this into powder on the cloth and press this.
And some times these remedies are applied on the patient's long tongue and the wisdom of celestial lilies (and those are celestial lilies), flour from ashes and centaurian herb, use any of these simple remedies or mix them together, grind these finely, then apply the honeyed mixture over them; and use this on him.
And if the sinus persists and is not cured by this treatment, then you know that corruption is within him, and already there might be inquiry in his bones or in other hard members or in the joints; then you treat it with a tuberculous disease cure, as previously mentioned.
Of the treatment of skin eruptions and thinned nails, rubbing injuries, and insertion of a finger incisions, and sections.
Panarici is an abscess that affects the nail of any finger or toe on either hand or foot, and it affects other fingers to some extent. If it persists and its treatment is difficult, or if it turns into another abscess, or gets corrupted, then you allow his arm to corrode the base of the nail, weaken the whole of that part, and let its corruption reach inside the bone causing an unpleasant smell, until this ends up rotting the tip of that finger, and its color becomes black.
And so when you have that as we've explained in the division and if your treatment doesn't seem to work, then dig with iron all the excess that has gathered under the nail and proceed to cauterize the wound near this, for quick healing is beneficial in such cases.
And if the bone is sound and the nail is healthy, and the protrusions of the nail's tissue have already invaded the flesh towards the parts inside it, then start to pierce it and guide this process. Then you must place a fine thread at the angle that pierces the flesh, push this and insert some flesh with ease, pause where there remains a bit of flesh from the ointment of burning corrosives which gets remade; and proceed to treat it with ointments until it heals.
And if corruption has already invaded the bone, then you must dig into that bone and extract it, because nothing heals when there is corrupt bone within him.
And if the corrosion and corruption have spread in the finger, then you must pierce that at one of its joints according to where his memory presses, and proceed to treat it inside until it heals.
If pain is felt under the nail due to impact or irritation, and the pain is intense, then at that point cut into the patient's foot with your knife, and then remove the nail using sharp cuts on the edge of the incision downwards towards the toe, and make sure not to let the cut reach the flesh beneath the nail which would cause severe pain to the patient and lead to the formation of excess tissue in that area; and then treat that area with care as it will be painful.
Here is the translation:
And such is natural in the joint area, or it's the nature of it in some knuckles of the foot. The one that is natural in some knuckles of the foot isn't bad, whereas the one that is soft in joint areas causes pain.
And for those that are naturally fleshly, the cut is gentle; you should make your incision across the part of it on the side of the cut.
The one that is natural in the joint area has a difficult healing process; therefore, watch out for its removal.
In the case that is natural in the foot, cut where you make your first incision into its flesh at an oval opening into the bone, and then proceed to operate with one of those round saws suitable for this task. Make sure to treat that area until it heals properly.
The consolidation you experience between the joints or due to the natural development of the human body causing pain, or due to the consolidation of sickness, fire burn, or similarity, then cut where the consolidation occurs allowing the feet to return to their natural form.
And place between their sheets what you have rubbed with oil to prevent them from being consolidated lightly, or separate among those, or insert a thin sheet of lead between which will consolidate according to the cut.
Similarly, if consolidation occurs on some feet in the palm area, then you should dry that consolidation according to its preparation and make it conform to the shape of the limb.
From incisions made by vice (a type of surgical tool), they are varicose.
Vices result in varicose veins, which are swollen and full of excess melancholic fluids. These can be found in the muscles of the body's limbs, and the main occurrence is in the legs, particularly for travelers, workers, and those who carry heavy loads.
So cut when you administer a heart purge for black cholera, make several incisions for forceful expulsion, and then bleed the patient from the basilic vein.
The treatment of these is according to two methods: one is to make an incision and remove that black spot, and the other method is to elevate the vein and extract it completely.
The operation is done according to this method: first, immerse the area in warm water until the large spot has dissolved, which becomes fluid from the area, and then strengthen the patient's chest at the bottom part of their thigh under where it meets with the leg, and proceed to bleed on a flat surface or in two, three areas with wide cuts. Then lift the black blood upwards with your right hand above the area where the limb joins the body, inside and outside until you have extracted the desired quantity of blood that's necessary, which will be absorbed by the patient.
And then instruct him to avoid consuming foods that cause black cholera.
And repeat the treatment with bloodletting when the veins are full, and thus observe in the patient.
The elevation of these is according to this method: if you rub the thigh area on the leg, place it in warm water and immerse the patient's leg into it until they redden and the veins become prominent; or if you are unable to bathe due to its absence, until the limb is scratched.
And then dry the bed in the right side of the vein for a section along its length or at the back of it, or from the lowest part of the leg you should reach the knee, or from the lowest point of the leg you should reach the ankle.
And then cut the bed with scissors and scrape the vein from all sides until you feel it, and when you see the fluid escaping towards darkness, you should proceed with that operation.
And once removed from the bed, you should perform this white thing which is a thread.
And then you insert that into the place where it should be elevated and move from under the bed, suspending it with a hook or some other tool.
And then dry another section near that section for three fingers, and then scrape the bed from the part above the vein until you see it.
And then lift that and cut in the last section near the ankle, then extract that and lift it until you pass through the second section, and then extract that from the section above that.
And do this until you extract that from the section which is more towards the top or any other of all sections, where everything is seen; then cut that.
And if you don't follow to extract and lift it, then insert a thick double needle into that and pull it out, or insert your thread there and twist your hand in every direction until it's released. And be careful not to cause bleeding; for if it is broken, you will find it difficult to raise that part and it will come down upon the patient through that injury.
And when that whole area has escaped outwards, then place over the site of the wound a woolen cloth soaked in vinegar and oil, both mixed and unmixed, and cure it internally until it is healed.
And if the liver is contracted with twists that are enclosed in its parts, and does not follow rectitude as we have said, then mark to make cuts over that on all parts of its twist and at the sites of enclosure of it, and hoist that up under tension inside which will raise that whole area.
And be careful about your section; do not injure the vein and do not trouble that area, for it will be difficult to raise that part; use your caution in this.
Shape of the cautery when the liver is being treated:
It should not be heated like the others on them nor have a sharp tip that it might trouble the vein; and it has to have thick flexibility, because if it were subtle, it would cut into the vein by its subtlety; having this, in its superfluous thickness as we said.
Regarding the removal of the leg vein.
This vein is generated in the hollows on low grounds, like Al-Ategi in the desert areas of Arabs and in the dry southern regions of India where there is little vegetation and where neither grass nor bushes grow.
And strengthening, it is generated in other parts of the body except for these hollows.
And its process in them is of corruption that you leave behind the chain like a snake venom inside the body and worms and parasites and maggots generating between the chain and the flesh.
And the sign of the potential occurrence of this is when this vein strikes in the hollow with intense inflammation; and then that place swells; and then begins the emergence of the vein from the site of that inflammation which seems to be like a plant's root.
And when you see the end coming, then command that you wrap around that one a piece of lead whose weight is equal to that of a small dragon. Within two dragons' weights, place that and lay down the lead hanging from the chest.
And as many times as there are parts outside due to her causes, envelop this with lead and take it out. And if the motion is prolonged, then you should cut a part of it and envelop what remains; do not cut that from which its root is outside; for if you cut that, it will contract and enter the flesh causing abscesses and putrefaction in that area and a bad ulcer.
And know that it should be treated gently and is extracted little by little, until it escapes from the rear of it and does not leave any cause in the body.
And this vein extends in some people along their length up to my waist, and I have treated one that was as long as twenty palms.
And if it is cut during its treatment, then insert the needle into the skin and pierce that in long strands through the body, until all that is inside is evacuated, and administer putrefaction to the site for several days with medicines; and afterwards cure it for the healing of abscesses.
And this vein in some cases has thickened membranes, and especially when it appears at the junction of the chest or in the chest, and causes its thickened openings, and extends from any of those openings.
And then cure it as we have said in the division and according to what has been mentioned above.
Regarding the section over worms generated under the skin, it is called cow sickness.
This disease is named cow sickness in some places due to the fact that many cases are found among cattle and there is a worm inside them, one which is born between the chain and the flesh, goes up and down throughout the body, and is shown by its movement in member after member as it breaks open the chain and escapes.
And its generation is through the corruption of some fluids like when worms, snakes, roundworms, and ascariasis occur in the stomach.
And it is found due to the mischief of this, when it travels in the body and rises to the head, then becomes strong under it and enters and destroys the ear, and in many cases becomes thickened.
And when you want to treat and extract that, do not do it if the flow and appearance of it in your feeling is not visible, then know that you should strengthen what is over it and what is left behind of it smoothly and tightness, and afterwards dry it up and extract.
And if it is spreading in the flesh and you do not contain it, then place a cautery with fire over that area where it dwells, and the main cause that is feared is corruption of it which corrupts that site as we have said.
And if that spreads to the head close to the ear, then strengthen over the eyebrow with strong tightness, and afterwards dry it up over there, and extract; know that the patient should use changes in their diet with medicines evacuating bad foul fluids, and beware of foods causing putrefaction.
Regarding the treatment of illness or disease above its symptoms.
This sickness is called 'nafir' in our land, and it's characterized by pain that occurs in some body parts, and later spreads from member to member.
And I've already seen the second one which I'll be telling you about. I was summoned to treat a sick woman in a village, and I noticed a small swelling on her vein in the arm. After about an hour of applying heat, I saw that the swelling moved upwards like a worm climbing up, but more delicately than before, like living silver when it moves from place to place.
And then you'll feel the pain at that spot and it settles in the muscle, and here stays for about an hour.
And then it moves into the other body part leading to the other arm.
And then they told me that it would move around inside their body just like what I saw, and I was extremely amazed by the transformation and speed from member to member. And I had already seen something like this in front of my eyes according to that manner, but I have seen movements for which the pain is being transformed from member to member. But I did not see it like this in humans as in the woman.
And I didn't consider it to be like this before because of the woman's condition, she had sensitive skin and visible veins, and in this case it appears with that sensation of the wind being transformed.
And it is necessary that this does not appear according to this back-and-forth movement in those who are delicate and have moist skin with swollen veins.
And when you want the cure for him/her, and the patient feels that pain, then it doesn't appear like it does to us according to what we've said, so you press on that area gently and let it be slightly and moistly covered by that wind's warmth, and cauterize that spot.
But if you don't feel it in your own hands, then you treat that by removing the congestion from the body and by what you're releasing as winds, and make those into pills with sulfur or similar substances.
From the removal of arrows.
Arrows are diverse according to species, and according to the locations in the body where they're found. Their diversity is that some of them have large points, small ones, concave ones, and dull ones; these are solid. Some have three corners, and there are those with tongues; and others with sharp ends.
And the symptoms of poisoning occur when you find it in the arrow, and it penetrates the bone, causing inflammation on top of the skull due to strong acid secretion, blindness, dizziness, nausea, swelling of the tongue, spasms, confusion, vomiting caused by anger, loss of appetite, and a white humid spot similar to dust appears at the wound site, resembling the texture of meat.
And if you notice these symptoms appearing to you, then abstain from the treatment and extraction of the arrow if it hasn't come out yet.
The symptoms of the arrow when you find it in the heart are that it's close to the left breast, feels like it's embedded in hard tissue and isn't visible. The movement of the arrow resembles the movement of the wrist, and the disease spreads with a black spot causing coldness at the extremities, sweating, and fainting spells; thus you know that death descends from head to toe.
The symptoms when the arrow has pierced the lungs are a foamy blood discharge from the wound, and veins near the neck become congested, causing a change in skin color, excessive breathing, and the need to take deep breaths.
And if you find the arrow in the peritoneum under the feet, then the pain is near the small ribs, causing a large and strong pain with sighing, and not all muscles are affected.
And if you find the arrow in the stomach, then there will be some undigested food symptoms from the wound area.
And if you find the arrow in the belly and it's embedded there, it causes a hole at the wound site, or the skin or intestine which is ruptured, and there is no hope for treating that by extracting the arrow.
And if the arrow finds its way into the bladder and causes urine to escape externally, causing issues that lead outside of it, then experiencing pain over the body means it's fatal.
And for the other body parts like the face, neck, shoulders, and accessories, as well as the ribs of the back, the sternum, the knee, and similar characteristics to the body members when the arrow doesn't find a vein or artery and isn't poisonous, they are treated according to major precautions.
And I will advise you on this based on what I have seen of these arrows, so that you can understand about their significance in the treatment process.
This occurs when an arrow pierces the eye socket of someone's upper jaw and nose ridge, causing me to extract it from them on the opposite side. I remove their ear wax, and they recover; they do not experience damage in their jaw again.
And when another arrow pierces a Jew in their jaw in the ear area, I remove the eyelid and let it go, and the arrow was already hidden; it could not be obtained from that place but only a small tip remained which stuck to its shaft. It was a large arrow among arrows of sharp Turks, made of lion bone without any ears.
And if it's the Jew, and it doesn't happen to their jaw in a bad accident.
And when I extract another arrow from a Christian man that was stuck in the shoulder blade, it's an Arabic arrow, and that is the one with ears. Then I cut through that between two ribs, and it was already submerged in the shoulder blade of him; then I sharpened that part, and approximately extracted that arrow, and he recovers as a Christian.
And when I extract another arrow from a man that was stuck in his belly, and considered that he would die by it; then, since we've passed through thirty days and there's no change due to his condition, I cut into the arrow and removed it, and he recovers. He doesn't experience any bad accident either.
And I have seen a man in whom an arrow pierced his buttocks, the wound has healed on him, and since it's been about seven years, he removed the arrow from the surface of his thigh.
And I have seen a woman in whom an arrow pierced her belly; the wound has solidified inside her and is not changed in her condition, and the woman does not experience discomfort during any of her natural operations.
And I have seen another man in whom an arrow pierced his face; the wound has solidified and he removed the arrow, not suffering any pain or symptoms similar to this.
And I extract the arrow from the king's chief's man, that was pierced in the middle of his nose and had already receded on the right side, completely hidden was the arrow.
And I was called upon for treatment at approximately three days after the injury occurred.
And then I examined the wound of the arrow's injury; and then I probed that area with a needle, not feeling it; but he felt it more distinctly on his right ear, and so I assumed that that spot was at the tip of the arrow.
And I applied a poultice to the place with the attractive and digestive properties, confirming that this location is where the poison should be eliminated so that it appears to me the location of the arrow, allowing for its removal.
And it did not occur at the significant location that you have obtained this place; I continued to apply the poultice on it for several days and there was no accident; the wound is consolidating meanwhile, and he feels the arrow in his nose after about several days inside and tells me this.
And then I placed acute corrosive medicine on the wound for several days until it was opened, and with the needle I examined that, and probed the tip of the arrow, which stuck to the shaft.
And I then adjusted during the opening of the wound with that acute medicine until it became visibly clear to me the tip of the arrow, and I spent time with this for about four months.
And soon after the wound had expanded, and it became possible for me to insert scissors in him, I shortened that, and did not cause any discomfort. Therefore, I did not continue to probe and manipulate with various tools methods of how to proceed, starting a day on those methods of handling under forceps, according to what each form would be at the end of the capitol, when I extracted it; then I restored that wound.
And some doctors judged that the cartilage of the nose would not be restored, but I did restore that and the wound is consolidated. He recovers fully as a healthy man, and he does not experience any discomfort at all.
And I advise you on the quality of extracting some arrows so that you understand this rule and meaning about what I have not said, for parts of this art and definitions of that are not understandable from narration nor do they comprehend those freely.
And the artisans compare with few about motive; and on what is presented compared to what is missing; and finds a new operation and a new tool you must follow the origin of the foreign causes in the art when it happens.
And so I say that arrows are not forcefully removed from the limbs in which they are placed but according to two ways: or by piercing the location where they enter; or against the opposite side.
And that which is embedded in the location gives entry, or it's an arrow originating from a carnal place, and it's thrown and forcibly removed.
And if you do not feel any discomfort at the time of hunting, then cover that for several days until the flesh around it heals, and ease its piercing and exit.
And similarly if it is placed inside and does not follow your will, then leave that alone for a few days and continue to apply pressure and move it each day, and already it has been taken out.
And if you do not follow your will for a few days, then it seems that you are piercing through the path of the arrow in that hole throughout all directions within a subtle area where the location becomes enlarged with the arrow, and then extract it.
And if the arrow has already hidden in the body's location, and is hidden from feeling, then you inquire about it with attempts, and if you feel it, then pull it with such instruments that are suitable for removal.
And if you cannot reach him because of the constriction of the wound and the length of the arrow shaft, and here there is neither bone nor nerve nor vein, then cut into the wound where it has been enlarged so that you may be able to extract the arrow.
And if it is in the patient's armpit where he has been pierced from all directions towards all the parts of his body; then deliver the flesh in which it is stuck from every side to all the organs that you can perform; and proceed with this, if you cannot remove the flesh at the breakage of the axilla and within the twisting of those places according to your will.
And when you administer the removal of the arrow in every location where it is, then use both twisting of your hand and forceps from all directions wherever this makes it obey; and with subtle delicacy that the arrow is not broken and that it leads to a difficult extraction for you and of this removal.
And if you cannot about this at your time, then leave for some days within which the parts that are in the path of it should recover, and proceed with this as later becomes eased. And if it causes you discomfort or pain, then administer what we have said about treatment in his chapter.
And protect your virtue from the incision of vein or nerve, or string, and administer all possible means in your manner for removing the arrow; do this with ease, calmness, speediness and firmness as I have instructed you.
And then make the arrow twist by itself so that the thigh follows the figure according to which you must place the positioning of the arrow in him, for it is more beneficial. And if this is not possible to you, then administer that which is possible to you through the figures.
And if the arrows are outside of him in opposition to the other side, or have progressed some part towards the parts outside, or if it makes the end of the arrow twist with feeling from the part above its knee and sometimes that is more prominent; then you should grasp that one; and decide on this section according to the amount when taking hold with forceps; and then pull it, as it is easily moved by your will.
And if it is stuck in the bone, then twist your hand against opposition where the arrow forces itself into the bone, and enlarge yourself by doing so, and then extract that one.
And if not, leave that alone for some days, and proceed to extract it when there is fire.
And if the shaft of the arrow is in that one, then push that towards him.
And if the shaft is stuck and you wish to administer impulse, then insert that one when it's silent, use curved instruments so that they enter in the cavity of him into the arrowhead, and then push that towards him.
And if the arrow is concave, then push that one with strong force entering into it, for the arrow becomes eased by this.
And if the arrow is exposed, then it seems that you should hollow out all the flesh in which the bone is, if this is possible for you, and proceed to treat that according to what suits.
And if the arrow is stuck in the foot, or in the stomach, or in the bladder, or on the side, and it is close enough so that you can touch it with your hand, then if this is possible for you to decide about this one, then decide upon this and protect yourself from cutting a vein or nerve, and extract this one, and later stitch up the wound if necessary, and treat it until it heals.
Shape of forceps to which arrows are pulled:
Let their ends be like that of a bird's beak which are made as saws when they take hold on the arrow in such a way that they do not let it go.
And from those there are special spots, large, few and mixed, depending on the quantity of the arrow's size and its slightness, as well as the breadth of the wound, and the constriction of it.
As with a ray, so that it eases the insertion in him for the concave arrow and is pushed towards there.
Regarding bloodletting from veins.
The veins for bloodletting that customarily require bloodletting up to .xxx, which are in the head .xvi., These are the pulsatile veins, which are near the ears and are called auriculars; two plants that are apparent in both temples; and two veins that are in the two lacrimal cavities of each nostril and are called aspicients; and a vein prepared in the middle of the forehead; and the vein that is at the end of the nose; and two glands near the collarbone; and two veins that are on the upper lip; and two veins that are on the lower lip; and - these are the veins called algonic; and they are two veins that drain the tongue. These are the veins that are bled in the arms, there are .v., These are the veins that are bled in the thighs there are .v., one of those is cephalic, and is on the wild hand; the people call it "the head vein", and soft, it's a mixed vein made up of a branch of basilic, and another branch of cephalic; they call this the "vein of all the body" by the people, and basilic is the vein that is placed in the domestic hand, which is called "shimmering", and the vulgar call it "vein of the belly"; those of the arm are bled upon the elbow, and this is where bloodletting takes place, it appears above the knee for obvious reason; salvation, it's the vein between what was just mentioned, the smallest auricular; they are in its two branches.
And in the chest and the armpit there are three veins; one of those is that it drains the curvature of the inner elbow on the wild hand. And the second is the subclavian, its place is drained by the armpit of the domestic arm; and sciatic vein, its place is drained from the armpit of the wild hand; and in the armpit there are other veins similar to those.
The youth of the veins that are near the ears is to consider and catarrhal, emigrating, exudative, and ulcerous of the old head ailments.
And the quality of causing those is according to what I suggest to you: it should be on the forehead of the sick person, and rub the top of the head in the back (nape) where both veins are in a large fold with good friction; strengthen the sick person's neck with a bend in which two points are visible near the ears at the preauricular places of the head; place that one here on your finger tip, and if you feel the pulse of those on your finger tip, this is a test.
Close you take the cutting lance, and it is that which is incident, close you introduce your finger into the vein within the artery where bloodletting will proceed to the bone. And lift your hand up to the vein and artery towards the parts above, and cut into the vein at an incident point. And let the length of the cut be equal to that of two fingers or around this; and drain out the blood as much as you want.
And strengthen with powders, let that remain until it is healed.
And already mentioned in the beginning of this treatise are the cuts of those and their treatment with cautery.
These are the two arterial veins that are bled near the temples, and the age of bloodletting is catarrhal oldness and very harmful, recurrent ophthalmia, and general body pain with acute overflow in the nose.
And the quality of bleeding those is according to what I suggest to you: strengthen the sick person's neck with a bend in which two veins become visible at palpation by manifest appearance, and demonstrate that their pulse is on your finger tip; and then you can test this.
And lift the artery above the vein towards the parts on your finger tip indication, and introduce the bloodletting lancet at an incident point there, and raise the vein up to it; then cut that like you have done with other veins; and let the blood drain according to the amount of your need.
And loosen the constriction of the neck of the sick person, place your finger on the vein for an hour, and pause at that point with powders, strengthen that above against strong constriction, and let that remain until it is healed.
And already mentioned are their recall, and the cut of those, and the extraction in the beginning of this treatise.
And thus the age of bloodletting for the vein of the forehead is close to that of bloodletting in cephalic veins, for old ailments on the face and catarrh, purging, and fetid ulcers.
The quality of the bloodletting of the patient is according to what I recommend to you; so when his body strengthens with a lump inside where a vein appears, then take the instrument which is called a hemorrhage tool, having this form:
Place the needle at the protruding point which is at the tip of the hemorrhage tool above that vein, and strike it on the patient either straight up or tilted in your manner, letting the blood flow according to the amount you desire; and then release the incision of the patient's body and strengthen it within so that it may heal.
And sometimes the opening for bloodletting is made like that in bloodletting with a needle, but it's important not to have this bloodletting tool be of acute tip as with other bloodletting tools, before having its lateral tip, and that bloodletting (needle) goes across according to the cross-section, where the bone is close and hard it would break through in the patient when it was subtle.
Let the youth of the two veins that are at the tear ducts of both eyes through saliva from the eyes through sweat and pus in the eyes, and for the face's illnesses.
The quality of bloodletting is when the patient's body strengthens with a lump, and then you perform bloodletting on those areas, standing above the head of the patient.
And when bloodletting is performed according to the transversal and longitudinal for a short time with a few bloodletting tools, where in the area there's no flesh; and if the bloodletting tool is subtle, its end gets broken due to being hard.
And then let the blood flow as much as necessary for you, place your hand over those points, strengthen them for a night, and then release those areas.
Let the bloodletting from the vein of the nose be applicable to acute fever and strong heat, as well as facial illnesses and migraines that occur in the face, especially when they are old.
The quality of the bloodletting for this patient is that their body strengthens and you place your right hand on their nose with your own left hand, take the subtle long tool and position it in the middle location at the tip of the nose according to straightness. So that no vein appears here through sensation, and so that when the blood begins to flow shortly.
Understand that you should finish your hand with the bloodletting tool little by little and let the blood flow as needed; then keep that place for a night, for it is quickly restored.
Let the youth of bloodletting for the two glands lead to constriction, and to the beginning of leprosy, as well as bad facial diseases, itching, and corrosive ulcers such as erysipelas.
The quality of bloodletting for those is that the tool strengthens each one within its body with incision; and place the operator on the head of the patient, and have the patient lying on a couch.
And then perform bloodletting along the vein length with ample small tools gradually; and then extract blood according to the season's quantity or according to what you need for necessity here; and then pretend it is another vein.
And then release the incision and strengthen both veins with a midline stricture so that the patient's body is not weakened, leave it in the morning when the illness has been healed.
Let the youth of bloodletting for veins in the alar region correspond to small abscesses and pustules on the mouth, decay of gums, bad ulcers, and cracks; as well as bad ulcers that occur in the nose and in the circulation area.
The quality of bloodletting for those is to have your hand ready before you, strengthen the body's curve with a lump, and then move the patient's lips to identify two veins: one from the right side of the lip and the other from the left; each demonstration shows that one side has a darker color than the other, and this is more noticeable when there are small black veins in their circulation area; then you make an incision for each according to a diagonal cut.
If you have doubt and don't know which one of them is, then you understand to make an incision on the largest of those, and also on the pus that is evident in those.
And pretend it's like the two veins that are found above the lips.
The two veins that are near the tongue youth are similar to bloodletting of the cephalic type in front of preheats within the pharynx, for throat illnesses, and oral diseases.
The quality of bloodletting for those is to follow the tongue with your hand in front of the sun's position, elevate their tongue, observe your own tongue, from one side of their vein and the other side of the vein, and the color of each declines into darkness.
And then perform bloodletting on any of them; and be careful that you do not end your hand with bloodletting there, because those are arteries.
Your veins that are bloodletted in the armpit are in those where it is common for everyone, and their bloodletting is performed according to two ways, or place them on the bloodletting tool as if it were a myrtle or an olive with gradually decreasing thickness; or sharpen them with a knife-like tool, and call this one "awl", which is its form:
Let there be cuts as before with many times, and you should open the concave full veins that seem grossly apparent, and those that contain large stones.
This type of venipuncture is for lesser width and more subtle extremity, it's suited for the venipuncture of subtle veins that contain fine stones.
Let the youth of the venipuncture for the basilic vein which is one of three veins: extract the stone from the internal organs that give rise to pain and swelling in the limbs and the body, from this it releases the abdomen and chest.
And the venipuncture should be done by the one performing it, who must take care not to damage that area and keep his hand on it, noting if there is an artery nearby. If he misses or adjusts during the puncture of the venipuncture, he will injure that artery and cause flow of stones, so remember to do this venipuncture with a sharp tool before opening with cutting as you did previously.
And if the basilic vein doesn't appear clearly, then make sure you leave that area and try another, or look for any nearby veins; or do a venipuncture at the end of the arm where that is visible; and proceed with the venipuncture as we have described using cutting beforehand.
And if you want the venipuncture of a metatarsal, then look ahead of the wrist bend where you can feel the area containing the tendons, and position your hand firmly on it; and adjust the arm so that your hand is underneath it; proceed with the venipuncture at a concave section as we have described using cutting beforehand; remember to check for any space between this and the location of the artery.
And when you prick with strength into the area you've felt under your hand, then that swelling is the swelling of the artery, thus avoid that area.
And if the stone flows during venipuncture like urine of a child, then know that it's from the stone in the artery; and then you withdraw your hand for a long distance from that area; proceed with your hand as described, and when the stone is removed, where the veins are also removed, then strengthen your arm and leave that area.
And take care of the patient's wound, as well as his over-sensitivity and do not let it get infected for a few days until he heals.
And if the stone is not removed, and when you should not administer medicine to that area, then you will cut into the artery, if it appears before your eyes; where its extremity is contracted, and the stone is removed; or you take a long time and apply pressure there on the spot of the vein with tightness descending at the muscle and among the dust by the other day.
And if the stone is removed, it's good; otherwise, then care for that with this from which we previously referred to in recalling the location of the dust where there was flow of stones.
And removing the stone from him is difficult in certain positions due to the small size of the wound and the capability of the arm muscle.
The venipuncture for the dark vein is done with youthfulness by extracting the stone from the upper part of the head and below the chest; so as it's composed of branches of the basilic and of cephalic veins, as we have described.
And the one doing the venipuncture should be careful where they are during the venipuncture of that area, noting if there is a nerve in it; and so if they adjust during the puncture of the venipuncture and find the nerve, it will cause them to go numb, making their recovery difficult, and being strong not all heals. And this nerve appears at certain feelings; and if it's hidden from some people and is subtle and isn't shown, then make sure you pause the venipuncture in the area where you are performing the venipuncture, and avoid the nerve with your strength.
And if the vein is between two nerves, then cut the vein in its length.
The youthfulness of venipuncture for the cephalic vein is that you extract the stone from the head and brings relief to the limb pains.
And it's done precisely like this, if you want that the needle pierces into an olive venipuncture or a walnut venipuncture; which is the safest for all veins, so that there are no injuries to your artery or nerves.
However, it's difficult to locate in some people when they're not pricked during the first palpation, but you should feel for that abscess in its reappearance.
The first one is about knowing that bloodletting should only be administered under the preservation of health and for the hope and caution of the patient, and to prevent maladies. It involves doing bloodletting at one of the veins located in the arm: cephalic, dark, and basilic; and conducting bloodletting at the beginning of spring, after breakfast during springtime and autumn, and close to winter when signs of overeating appear.
And bloodletting should be performed and after three hours of the day, or even at the beginning of the first hours that have passed during the day.
Bloodletting may be administered when it is convenient and necessary for that purpose, either at night or during the day, in any hour and under all circumstances.
And it is known that an infant should not be bled before they are fourteen years old, a pregnant woman should not be bled until the fourth month of pregnancy, and elderly people should not be bled if they have already surpassed sixty years of age.
And if someone wishes to be bled by any means, it is known that they should alter their intestines before bloodletting with a snuffing of lion's dung, if there is an impregnated wound in those areas. This prevents the veins from carrying excess fluid during bloodletting on the intestines, which are cleansed and do not affect the main members.
And do not bleed patients who are severely debilitated or drunk, nor before or after illness or intoxication, nor those suffering from dropsy disease, and more that bloodletting should be feared during colic pain and nausea, as well as vomiting, and abdominal pain, and multiple sexual activities or work, and all causes that dissolve their virtue, whether it's physical or animal.
And in the delicate elimination of humors before that, if the complaint is heavy, with food and drinks, and with medicines if it's possible for the patient.
And between baths or any cause that doesn't prohibit it, or through some exercise for the sake that the complaint is refined.
And place the bloodletting on their chest at day time, which would be around the third hour of the day, as we have said.
And remember that the chest of such should be watched on every day of all animal accidents, such as distress, anger, fear, and all bodily accidents, such as work, excess sorrow, sexual activity, and things similar to them.
And according to their wish, make sure to bring the causes in using that which is common among men for scent and fragrance, and for balms and things similar to them, as per their capability.
And the bloodletting practitioner should use a cushion that is more than the size of the patient's pillow to be bled.
And then extend their arm, rubbing it with the bloodletting tool two or three times; and then tighten the bandage around it, covering it with two rounds.
And if the constriction is rapid, or if the constriction does not equalize, or if there's an excess causing constriction, then prohibit any discharge of the complaint; or if it's due to softening, then prohibit the body from generating more.
And during the constriction, it is known that the person to be bled should rub their hands among themselves before the veins swell and become evident.
And near the bloodletting practitioner uses a little of an anti-itching oil properly; and then pauses his left hand's index finger on that vein, indicating where bleeding is desired, so that the vein begins to protrude slightly, and pressing stops when you find which vein it is as if the heart is forced by the bloodletting, from those are full of air. When the practitioner presses over there, he withdraws the tool; and the bloodletting tool does not pierce the vein, and if it does, that one is tightened.
And thus, it is known that the bloodletting practitioner should be firm and attentive to all these causes.
And then pause the bloodletting tool, but if the vein is punctured in one round, then it's fine; and otherwise, continue this way, putting a little more on that spot, or pressing on them with force, if the spot isn't hardened.
And if the spot hardens, or the illness subsides, then you leave it for a day or two, and do not tighten the bandage, which might draw pus with force, nor take a bath.
And if the patient is in need, then continue the bloodletting process.
And if the pulse is small and the flow of the complaint is subtle, and you fear that it won't remove enough of the complaint, then increase the bloodletting tool in that area according to rightness and adjust the pulse slightly. Do this with force before the spot hardens; for men who are slightly ill, you should only a few pulses.
And if you have noticed that it has hardened already, then don't continue over them, for there is no excuse for any cause; pause on those some portion of oil's crack, which alleviates the body from the complaint. And it is better in this place than oil and that other oils.
And similarly administer a crack of oil in every bloodletting when one bleeds the veins, and they do this as a tumeric ointment and fragrance when it's paused from one of those over that spot, for the complaint is refined and mixed when it becomes heavy.
And if in the place of bloodletting a large abscess is formed, with many punctures occurring, and especially for those who have not been bled but only this puncturing, or at the site of the small vein opening, then you drain it, place your hand over that area with an infused sponge in water and salt, one cut into pieces, and strengthen it for an hour, until it is dissolved.
And know that this should be done close to the insertion of that vein either on itself or on another vein.
And if there is any darkness or greenness in that place for a few days, do not notice this; and if you wish, place something on that from aloes and myrrh dissolved, or some substance from the juice of mugwort or camomile or similar things.
And if there are many punctures occurring in abscesses and swellings, you should perform bloodletting from the basilica.
And then place your hand on that one, and if later you find softness, keep applying pressure on that part. If the swelling is bad and harmful; then remember to apply some substance as we have mentioned before, for it will flow from the sanatory artery when it's removed.
And apply plaster to that in water where it is fixed, so the place endures, and then attend to that with other treatments until it is healed.
And know that you should extract from the blood according to the quantity of its virtue and according to the color prevailing over the blood as it appears.
For if the blood is black, then you let it bleed until it becomes thin; and similarly if you find it thick, then you let it bleed until it becomes subtle; and similarly if it's sharp, then let its sharpness be contained within.
And know that for the one who is full and strong and needs blood extraction in a puncture, you should expand the bloodletting from the vein and make it long.
And for those who are weak, do the opposite of that. Know that extract it in many punctures, and let the wound be tight.
And the best that is administered in bloodletting from a vein is that it's a transverse section, not piercing.
And this method of bloodletting saves from blood flow and nerve injury, and it is commendable and more safe than bloodletting according to width and length.
And at which it is customary for fainting, you should perform bloodletting, and know that you cure that before the bloodletting with a little piece of cloth infused in wine from borage or simple camomile tea; and extract blood from the wound in three or four punctures.
And if it's made of complex ingredients, then take before bloodletting an infusion in a mixture of myrrh or flavored honey in spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger and similar things, or in a flavored and fragrant mixture.
And if fainting occurs, you should perform bloodletting, and if the cause of his/her bleeding is due to a hot blood state, then know that he/she should drink water from meat and flavored tea with subtle odor; and use aromatics for its chest until it is relieved.
And use the other causes that we mentioned in the division under the chapter of fainting for evacuation.
And whoever wants to empty his/her arms and dissolve his/her blood again after the first puncture, know that for those with blood evacuation, the virtue of which is cold, it empties the blood gradually little by little, so it depends on the quantity of its virtue in consecutive days.
Those who want to empty their arms and get rid of their blood again after the second puncture, and their body is strong, then do this approximately seven or nine hours after the first bloodletting.
Those who want to draw blood from their body against the direction in which it normally flows, know that it should be emptied on the second day or the third.
Those for whom there is already blood that has been removed and it is sharp, causing fever, know that you should empty this with one puncture and a large quantity of your blood, expanding the opening so as not to occur fainting. And when you are aware of all the conditions of bloodletting; and place your hand on their pulse for your blood's sake, in order not to die at the point of fainting, because many punctures should do this when the bloodletter is ignorant and negligent.
And do not know when you want to free the arm and empty the blood again, just as soon as close off the opening of the vein and makes bleeding from the blood difficult, then press under that with forcefulness and slightly bend it outwards, which is too bad.
Let it be that you leave it after a second bloodletting; or continue with the sharpness of the bloodletting that is coagulated by the blood in the opening of the vein; or place your hand on that with thorn apple ash, or sage, and press it lightly under which the blood should come out.
And if the vein is inflamed, then leave that and do not touch it until the abscess subsides.
And if necessity compels you to empty the blood again, and it is not an excuse, then you prick him/her in that spot or on the other arm through another vein.
The vein called "the blood cord of the arm" is ligated in place of the spleen or the basilica, when they are not present or hidden, which is made up of those.
The quality of the ligation for them is that the patient dips their hand in hot water into the fire, so that the skin turns red and the vein becomes明显manifestly visible.
And firmly apply there in the middle of that knot with a narrow constriction; and then ligate it according to the transverse direction, not laterally or according to length.
And make your incision wide and for your ligation, do it in the one where you ligate that above the joint of the hand, a little.
And if the flow of bile is prohibited, then you immerse your hand in hot water and lets the bile run in the water until you achieve your need.
May it be that you were in the days of summer, then you excuse the repetition of your hand in hot water, and in winter keep the body of bile in hot water.
The ligation for this vein is especially safe compared to all other veins, which do not have pulsating blood or nerves.
The ligation of the artery in the right palm is associated with diseases of pregnancy.
The quality of the ligation for them is that you strengthen your hand at the elbow or with your own hand, as you have it in hot water, so that the vein swells and is clearly shown; then ligate that transversely; and if you cut all those, don't let it bleed.
And remember not to end your hand in the ligation of blood vessels, for them you have the nerves of the fingers exposed.
And then immerse your hand in hot water and let the bile flow through it. If you don't immerse that in hot water, the bile will clot in the opening of the vein, and this is forbidden for circulation.
And when the bile is extracted according to the amount needed, then you place salt on the vein so that it doesn't clot immediately; similarly do this in all branched veins.
May it be that the youth of the ligation for this one in the left hand is associated with diseases of pregnancy.
And do something similar for the ligation of this as you did for the other one.
And the youth of the hepatic vein in ligation is associated with diseases that occur in the body's left parts, just like pregnancy diseases and retention of menses, as well as redness and ulcers on thighs and old sores, and it resembles other diseases.
The quality of the ligation for this is that the patient dips their hand into hot water and makes friction where veins appear; they place their hand on the chest joint with a strip; and in the area of the apparent vein you should apply your fingers, and from there its branches extend to the flesh of the arm.
And therefore ligate the widest branch or place the cushion under the increase of it, which is better and more salt.
And if you ligate that in the flesh of the arm, then you avoid the nerves that are on that side of the flesh, and stop your ligation at the place where you ligate across, as though you wanted to cut it.
And may the ligation serve you well.
May it be that the flow of bile is prohibited; then you immerse your hand in hot water and let the bile run through there until it is drained.
And if the ligature misses in the first attempt, then retry at the ligation point a little further down, which is safe; and do not fear its danger, but watch out for the nerves as we have said.
And similarly perform on the other arm in equal manner.
And for the sciatic vein, as we said before, place your fingers under the notch of the wild part's groove.
The purpose of the ligation for this is to relieve hip pain when it's due to bile blockage.
The quality of the ligation for this is that the patient dips in hot water and quickly tightens the leg at their ankle above the fourth finger on a long narrow bend, which only appears like this.
And when it appears, then you ligate that according to each organ as is possible and according to the transverse direction, which is better. Or cut there through incision or seal that with coagulation, where its location is safe.
And it is in the flesh of old men who are weakened; and if you find that one, but it doesn't show on touch, then ligate a branch from there, and that is the one that appears behind the said angular bone and the ring finger.
And watch out for the nerves, let the amount of bile you want flow.
And then relieve the constriction and place your hand on the ligation site firmly, which somewhat heals immediately.
Regarding suction and the qualities of using those [tools or techniques].
Suction devices are made from horns, reeds, or bones.
And ventilation is done in two ways: one of them is a cut and removal of pus, and the other is ventilation with a cut.
And this kind of ventilation which is through cutting has two ways, either by fire or with the aid of fire.
And the ventilation administered through cutting and pus removal is performed at fourteen body locations, of which one where the vents are placed is the navel, it being the last part of the head; and the middle location in the midst of the two parts of the belly; and mouth vent leaves the jaw, allowing pus to be expelled from the mouth; and vent on both spatulas; and vent at alohoster, it is at the end of the penis; and vent at both fire tools, they are one handbreadth apart; and vent at both armpits; and vent at both thighs.
And ventilation does not remove the pus but from thin, scattered veins in the flesh, thus it does not lose its virtue by that means, just as bloodletting is done; nor should ventilation be performed with fire or with the aid of fire in any illness caused by fullness inside where the body has not been fully evacuated.
May it be that when necessity prompts for ventilation due to illness or continuous condition, administer that at the beginning of the month and at its end, in the middle part of the treatment and at any other time.
And when in any cause of those, and especially if it is towards the third or middle part of the month, then commands for ventilation to be performed before passing the day or three hours.
And the youth of neck ventilation is that when it progresses in severity in the head and to what settles in the breaths; may it be that this corresponds to an evacuation of the whole body.
And this type of bleeding is at the site of bloodletting on the cephalic region.
And it is not written that one should use that which inflames or causes catarrh in him, as this can cause great harm.
And thus it is not appropriate to use that for the old people, and on their heads where illnesses occur.
May it be that for the one who is continuously over him, he experiences forgetfulness; thus it is wise to command the person doing ventilation to place his hand slightly under the suction cup at the points used, fearing the generation of forgetfulness.
Ventilation with alcohol is at the site of bloodletting on the dark vein and the basilica: thus it causes asthma, constriction of airways, splitting of bile ducts, coughing, and fullness.
And it is wise to apply alcohol ventilation for a short time; if it is left on longer, it causes weakness in the body and in the stomach.
And the ventilation with almond oil causes headaches in the head and eye diseases, migraines, pre-fertility, and dental pain; this is done at the site of bloodletting on the basilic vein.
And it is wise to command the person doing ventilation not to press their hand on a cut so as not to puncture an artery and allow pus to flow.
And leaving ventilation on the chin causes alcohol in the mouth, and decay of gum tissue, and symptoms similar to those diseases present in the mouth, and is done at the site of bloodletting on almond oil which is found on both lips.
May the ventilation that is performed over both spatulas causes cataracts, which is done due to fullness of quality.
And the ventilation over both parts inside the fire tools causes youth of bloodletting from three veins, which are the basilic vein, dark vein and cephalic vein. This one draws out pus from all those scattered veins present in the flesh, as well as those small veins within the larger veins where passage reaches the three veins.
And command the person doing ventilation not to proceed in cutting, where the place is stripped of flesh, and leave his nerves and arteries untouched.
And this is an extraction on which it is extracted from anus, causing hemorrhoids of the anus and leaving ulcers with pus.
And it is wise to command the person doing ventilation that it be strong and made of iron, where the place requires intense drying; and for him to use subtle suction cups that are cut with cutting.
May it be that the ventilation of the glands reduces them visibly, which draw out pus from the entire body and cause old chest pains, the womb, and bladder; they also induce menstruation, causing pain in the abdomen; this is done at the site of bloodletting on two sinuses, and aorta, and both armpits.
However, it weakens the entire body and causes fainting in adult males.
From the suction cups, the doctors direct towards the young to the young at the suction areas of both sides.
And the quality of the position of the suction cups is to place the cup at the beginning and let it work for a short time with early breathing, do not prolong the position of the suction cups, rather pause them lightly, remove them gradually, and have the fluids arrive at the spot in equal fashion. And don't stop repeating this until you see the area already turn red and swell, and that the sign of the illness appears.
And then you scrape and gradually increase the breathing, and more importantly consider the disposition of the body.
For that person who has tender flesh, it is wise to scrape only once and not repeatedly, so the area does not become ulcerated.
And command the suction cup operator to expand the scraping a bit and do it gently, always ensuring easy breathing.
And if there is thickening in the illness, then know that you should scrape twice, where in the first scraping, you open the pathway of respiration to the illness and to his moisture. And in the second, look into the acquired moisture from the extraction of thickened illness.
And if the illness is very viscous, then it must be done by scraping for the third time so that it gets to the end.
And gradually at the end, when we want to extract a little of the illness bit by bit or a small amount, up until now with one scraping.
And if we want extraction of a large amount of illness, we scrape with larger scraping; and if we know that the illness is thick, then know that you should scrape through wave-like scraping.
And the term of scraping ends at the depth of the chain just as much.
And if the chain of that person is thick, hard, dark, and his pores are stretched out, know that the suction cup areas should be moistened more gently, with wider, easier resolution; during summer time, for instance, use almond oil or lavender oil or oil from lemon leaves, or from coriander seeds; and if it's winter time, then use camphor oil, or oil of mint, or chamomile oil, or from illness, and similar things.
And if the excess is thick, rough, then know that use bitter oil, or oil of frankincense, or oil of almond, or thyme oil, and similar things.
And if the suction cup operator has large pores with tender flesh, then know that oil should be prohibited, and consider these for the areas under the suction cups near the suction process, they should be washed with warm water or hot water from solatrum, or with water from coriander, or water from basil, and similar things applied to those.
And for that person whose illness has a moist nature, wash his suction cups with vinegar, or water of myrtle and sumac, and similar things applied to those.
And for that person whose excesses are thick, wash his suction cups with vinegar old, or water of senna, which is marjoram, or from the decoction of thyme, or chamomile water, and similar things applied to those.
And know that the suction should be kept in front of bathing; also know that it should be administered close to the heat of the bath for one or two hours, and know that he should sleep near the suction.
What is it that needs to be done when regulating a bloodletting tool before using it for suction therapy?
Know that at the beginning: if the person who is to bleed or who needs bloodletting has anger and heat above his illness and inflammation, know that he should take cooling remedies, such as sorrel salads with vinegar and milk, seaknife, julep, and similar things.
And let his foods be such as poultry, game meats, and seasoned dishes with herbs, and similar things for him.
And for that person whose complexion is rough, know that he should drink essences of wormwood or essence of saffron from seeds, and sumac, and wine slightly fragrant between old and young; and it must be advised to him that he should use moderation in drinking and eating, and let his poultry foods, combers, rabbits, small game birds and doves pause.
And know that on the day of suction therapy and bloodletting, his drink should be more than his food.
And know that in some hours before some men take tincture of tyrian alfarac, or medicines with musk, such as cardamom, or nutmeg before suction therapy or bloodletting, or nearby, so that their main limbs are comforted and the illness is made subtle; do not let them take those scalding things.
And the suction cups that are for scraping should be suction cups that rest on the flesh, and over gout, and on the belly button, in the areas of joints, and the armpit, which these limbs do not suffer from scraping upon themselves.
And it is not due to those suction cups but the illness of limbs, such as resting a vacuum cup on the breast in illness of flow of body's illness from nostril; and we use that to dissolve the thick, viscous breathing, such as rest on the belly and umbilicus; for which that invigorates the limb, chills him and removes the pain that resolves the breath.
And when it is paused on the lungs whenever they occur or fall, which by virtue of suction force make a person vomit and remove the pain from its location.
Similarly when it is paused on the stomach and intestines, causing wind release in those confined within.
These suction operations are performed with water alone sometimes; some are done with fire as well.
Some are performed fully with hot water in the diseases of the intestines.
And this is why the suction should be full and produce much pus, so it's just hot water or water in which herbs suitable for the water are boiled.
Form of suction administered with fire: let the size of the opening be that of two fingers, according to how we have formed it; and the amount of charcoal is as much as a palm's length; and place it at the back of him, in the area where it is on the circulation route, the same length as him, take the forceps small according to the quantity that enters him with one needle.
It is made using garlic or citrus, large pieces, lion's heart, and tender parts in such a way that doesn't lead the member to its position above him.
And it should be at the top of his back in the cross-shaped area of garlic or iron, where the candle is placed on the fire.
And this is how the large suction is greater than the one we have prescribed; and use less oil according to the diseases and the condition of that which uses that.
And child suction cups and exhausted ones are different from teenage and large cross ones.
And the quality of stopping this suction on the member is to extend the material on fire of wood decently in front of a small candle of wax, and place that over the middle of the back across at the middle spot of the suction, so that the fire be lit around your position so that it doesn't burn the patient's body.
And return it to be placed on the patient's member, and let it be over the forceps that we have said, within which when we have the suction cups and they no longer need the forceps and vaporize above that forceps, then the suction should soon dissolve.
And heat the material according to its manner, and repeat that if you need more of it.
In suction used in the disease of pleurisy, with water, without any back or forceps, and is only administered when filled with water, and placed on the member alone.
And this is how it is: And this suction cup, the larger it is, the better it is, so that it can receive large quantities of water.
Chapter 97.
Suction cups are not administered in the mouth of members, but in the limbs where it's impossible to place suction cups due to their smallness, like the throat and gums, similar to them; or on a bare member of flesh, similarly as said, and those that resemble it.
And the quality of using those that you have found to be blood cups that are in the waters of cooked red water.
And let them rest for the day and night in hot water until they cool down, and do not cause any harm inside their stomachs; then evacuate his body at the beginning with phlebotomy and suction treatments; and wash your patient's limbs so that they turn red; and return them to be placed on him.
And when they are filled, and in case.
And if it's possible to use water from the area with suction, it's better for teenagers.
And otherwise, then wash the area with hot water and later with cold water; and let it be rubbed and squeezed.
And if the patient's body is prolonged under the place of the blood suction cups, and this water comes out, then you put a linen cloth in hot water, and place that over it so that the discharge is absorbed.
And if the sweat is multiplied, then sprinkle it over him with vitriol that has been ground finely, or gallstones and similar substances from the causes of stasis, so that the sweat is stopped; or place the ashes of cooked beans on the affected area, and let them be left until the beans adhere to the area, so that the sweat stops.
And if needed, repeat the use of blood suction cups, whenever it's possible to change those.
And if blood suction cups are not allowed to be suspended, then wash the area with recent sweat or leave an awl in the affected areas so that sweat arises; and let them return, for those when feeling any sweat should soon arise.
And when you want them to come down, grind a little of ground aloes or salt or ashes over those, and let it happen immediately.
So begins the treatment for the recovery part: restoration. This chapter is about necessary points in the art of medicine; it is about restoring fractures and accidental dislocations in bones.
Oh, son, know that doctors and the vulgar, and those who neglect the writings of the Ancients or do not even read a single letter from them, speak of this chapter.
And for this reason, this method of the learned in our land is made private; and I have not forgotten anything during these times that should be done; and I did not refer to anything that was mentioned, but through the long reading of the works of the Ancients and studying their understanding, so that I extracted the science from them.
And indeed, direct experience and study throughout one's life length is necessary.
And I have described in this chapter all that my science contains and on which my experiments have been made; since abbreviating it for you others and freeing it from the occupation of elongation; and abbreviate it at the end of abbreviation; and show it at the end of declaration; and form it into spots, patterns of the storms that are administered there, as done by declaration, thus I did in two previous chapters.
First chapter.
Summary and collections from the fracture of bones, from those being necessary for mention before we start recalling limbs and various parts of each. Let us therefore mention the summaries of the speech in the preface of this chapter; and the chapters which when presented at the beginning challenge the craftsmen's understanding on the truth of those; are you and those who prompt to know or learn this noble art, others from you.
And thus say that when you encounter a fracture or dislocation or twist or compression, then consider starting with bloodletting or treating that area, or at any time, if no cause is forbidden, such as vertigo or which affects that region, or rather in decrepitude, or it's the time of violent heat, or of violent sweating.
And indeed be content with food consisting of herbs, fawns' meat and crabs; and forbid large meats and fill in with all foods that fill the veins of sanx, within which you can be sure of an abscess cauterization, and if you do not fear effusion of matter to the member.
And then return the patient to their original position where they usually are.
And when the broken bone begins to be restored, let the patient be fed with nutritious foods that are thick and heavy, such as bread made from flour cooked in water, rice, carrots, meat, stomachs of cows, hams, fresh pork, and very thick and similar things to those, and under this regimen, clotting of the pus is done lightly and well.
And know that the bones heal when they are in those who are in the first vigor and in the old age, it is not possible for them to continue healing and be consolidated according to their nature through the drying of their limbs.
But indeed nature adjusts and renews about the broken bone of every part any cause similar to glue in which thickening adheres and strengthens it within which there are times of coagulation and are times when the end of strength and firmness come, such as fire at the beginning, within which for no cause do you prevent him from doing his work.
And for this reason it is necessary to restrict the foods of the patient, foods in which there is heaviness, viscosity and thickness as we have said.
And know that the types of fracture are diverse according to the variety of members, a fracture of the bone of the shoulder is different from a fracture of the skull bone; and the fracture of the foot bone is different from a fracture of the leg bone; similarly all other members differ among each other.
And I have completed the recall of every type of fracture, detailed in its chapter separate from the others.
Variety of self-intersecting fracture. And there are diversified types of fractures in the bones of their intersections; which is made an arched fracture or another that may occur in its star shapes. And sometimes the fractures are made according to the length of the bone: these are the fractures of the satellite, stars and additions originating and not originating, such as when it is prepared to write, and there is a fracture with bleeding and disruption in the head, and this is the small crack fracture.
And for every type, there is an own storm in restoration according to it that will come with the detailed recall of it in its places.
Variety of signs of bone fracture. And thus the bone fracture is known: it's the bending of the thing, and its prominence and location relative to the feeling, and in that when you press that against your hand.
And indeed when there is no visible bending and it's not felt when you apply pressure on the bone with your touch, when touching the bone under tension and the patient doesn't feel much pain, then there is no fracture here.
It is possible that there may be bending or small cracks, let it be known that you should hold this in your hand and under compression of the whole; pause on these with respect to medicines which we will recall shortly at this moment as they fit for its place; and straighten it through subtle constriction.
And know that when it is arched and not split into two or another that does not occur in its satellite, which is enlarged throughout its circumference, then let it be known that you should start with your time to correct this arc until it has an abscess cauterization.
And if it has an abscess cauterization, then smooth that for several days until the abscess disappears; and then adjust that according to any method of lightness and ingenuity that you can.
And know that the restoration of his health and improvement of his condition is much less than in bone where it occurs suddenly.
And strengthen the second one as soon as the patient's memory returns.
If it's in the bone where it's broken, then an extension of this broken member from two parts is necessary, whether it's a hand or a foot; or with your own hand if the member is small; or with two threads or one thread and your hand.
And make your position such that you place the member in its natural location equal to its figure, while extending the divided parts of the broken member, then do as much as possible to make those additions return and according to any method you can apply in their locations.
And guard yourself so that it doesn't happen to the patient during your operation or injury, and apply as much as possible with one bone to another their counterpart according to the best ways.
And when in that moment profitably touch your hand there, and if you notice any cause differently here, correct it and adjust it according to the amount of your virtue.
And avoid strong extension and compression, just as many veteran doctors cause blisters or abscesses to occur due to their operations, or cause contraction in the limbs, which we have seen happen through their actions.
The quality of the restriction of the broken limb is what you should know; that each broken limb varies in their size and their grandness and in their form.
And for those that are small like the arm and so on as mentioned earlier, then consider that the wrapping should be of soft fabric.
For those that are large like the thigh or chest, consider that for these there should be a firm wrapping, where you tie the rough fabric tightly around the large and strong member from all sides with equal restriction, so that it does not cause any marks.
And when you start, proceed with your adjustment and placement, properly on what suits, over the site of that fracture with three wrappings or four according to the member's need; and strengthen your hand a bit at the seam.
And when you move to that higher part of the site of the fracture, make sure not to allow your restriction (of the bandage) to affect the area where you have tightened the location of the fracture. And when you lengthen the wrapping on the site of the fracture slightly, gradually soften the restriction little by little until you have freed up a large portion of the area.
And take another bandage, wrap it around the broken area in addition to the wrapping, and when you move towards those wrappings near the more distant part of the fracture; and your operation is about softening and adjusting this wrappings following what we mentioned in the first wrapping above.
And when you are between the wrappings of cloth or bandage, make sure it matches the curvature of the fracture if there is any curvature in it; otherwise, don't pause on it for any reason.
And when you rest on the other bandage, then gradually make adjustments over these somewhat well-formed bandages. If there is no swelling or abscess in that area, then rest where there is that abscess or swelling; and let it be for a few days; then strengthen over this.
And may the stars of the length of cane be rough and well-formed; or they may be made from wood; or from palm leaves; and let each star have this size and this shape:
However, consider that the star placed over that fracture should be slightly larger and more accurate than the other stars. The length of the star according to its reading in size and smallness relative to the member; then strengthen on these stars with another bandage as per your initial restriction; then lie properly for adjustment as we have said about restriction, so that your restriction is most over the site of the fracture, and the more extended you make it from the fracture, the better healing will be.
And consider that the threads should be medium in size and thickness, and they should be many. If the threads are large, as I have seen from the operation of some times placing those large string cords for curvature correction, this is a great mistake when making the restriction equal.
And straight threads are not convenient because you won't be able to achieve the restriction that you want with them on these. And consider that there should be no more than one finger's width between each thread.
And if the patient is made to lie at the ends of the stars near the restriction in those areas, then pause with these as a layer of lion's wool or treated linen so that it doesn't cause injury.
Some fractures are caused by injury, leading to disruption in the chain of events, and I will recall that memory in that place at the capitol according to singularity.
Know that all broken members do not harden to stars on the first day; this cause is that when the member is large, it doesn't allow you to rest on your stars instead, approximately two days or three or more, according to your confidence in the occurrence of an abscess during cautery.
This is the method of plasters on which the Ancients worked, who were placed upon fractures, dislocations and twists.
The method of plastering like it is done in restoration of a fracture, suitable for complex injuries and mostly for women and children, which works without causing heat or friction: you take powdered flour, and this is the corn starch that comes out when the movement of the mill happens in the walls of the mill.
And do it this way as described, or else sieve that with egg white, and pause the thickening of your not-thin nor subtle mixture; then use that.
Another method of treating fractures and dislocations and twists: follow this recipe with asafetida, lapdanum, acacia, rue, and myrrh, all finely ground into a thousand grains each; for the total weight is one dragon. For myrrh and aloes it's five dragons' weights each; for alcohol or egg white if the patient's condition allows; and then use this plaster, which has good composition and restores broken bones gently, giving strength to muscles.
Another method of plastering which helps with fractures and twists: use this recipe - myrrh and white alum for one dragon, myrrh and aloes for five dragons, acacia for six dragons, and Armenian balsam for twenty dragons.
Of all parts they are ground in a mortar with the mixture for friction, then sieved, and made into a paste with water or almond milk, to be administered.
The method of plastering for joints and bones separated from their places, where there is friction in those areas and stress fractures or cracks occur: take wool thread and immerse it in vinegar and oil of turpentine, then place it on the affected area.
This plaster does not have healing power for restoration, for abscess cautery and expulsion of pains properly.
Another method of plastering that restores broken bones: take leaves of fig tree and leaves of saved opium poppy; mix both to make a plaster from them.
The abbreviated method of applying plaster for the restoration of bone fractures and when you want resolution of the remnant of an abscess: prepare a mixture from chamomile, violet flowers, flour of poppy seeds, in all parts one. Let everything be ground and made into a paste with vinegar if the member is not sensitive.
If it's sensitive, then use that in water of fresh lemon or in water and use it.
Another method of plastering for pus that promotes faster resolution than this first one, when an abscess occurs and requires the restoration of the member: prepare a mixture from chamomile, seeds of basil, and lavender, honey, thyme, violet flowers, chamomile, all in equal parts; everything is ground and made into a paste with water of sauzes or two waters or lemon water, according to the quality of the member and the color of it.
Mays Ypocras does not say in his free writings that it should be placed on the broken member for restoration, rather wax is used for the paste made of beeswax and oil instead of anything else; and it's recommended to have a medium consistency between coarseness and fineness.
Gualia sees that it should be placed on the broken member for its restoration and the causes where dryness comes from good quality such as myrrh, ashes, and things similar to those causes which we have recommended.
The method of plastering that helps with injury and pain: mix finely ground ashes, human hair cut off or animal bones, chamomile, and salt, all in equal parts; grind and sieve them, make them into a paste.
The amount depends on whether it causes inflammation and if it is not causing pain or pressure, nor has the bone been broken from its place, then you don't disturb the patient for days. And if it causes pain, pressure or swelling in that area, then you should either soothe it immediately or remove the plaster from it, and keep your plaster ready.
And take a cloth and a wet lemon sponge from him, immerse that in hot water, then using it wash the area until the pain ceases and the discomfort is relieved; then let the limb rest for an hour; also place on him wool soaked in vinegar and oil or rubbed oil, and cover him with this overnight to ensure there's no pus formation, ensuring the swelling of the limb subsides, and alleviate his pain.
And carefully iterate this compression, apply a bandage, and don't tighten it for your initial discomfort, also gently place this within so that it heals.
And if you notice that the pus and the heat and the pain and the swelling and all other incidents have already subsided completely, and you need neither bandaging nor compression anymore, then proceed with this method as you did at the beginning with equal measures.
And if no cause occurs to that limb from those we've mentioned, then don't disturb it but rather wait approximately three days or four or five or seven; And certain lacerations of this whole thing is left for twenty days according to how it appears through the loosening of the limb, as we have said, during which time the fracture adheres, and it settles into the coagulation of the flesh upon that.
And then adjust the compression more than in your initial compression altogether, and adjust to the swelling of the food of the patient, according to when memory returns for him.
Maybe if you notice that the place of the fracture has already dried and thinned more than it is covered, then you know that nutrition can no longer reach there; thus, coat that with hot water for each occasion; and do this for all three days; then slightly ease the compression, and through this operation bring nourishment to the member, and it heals somewhat.
Perhaps for those who restore fractures of the limb, another occasion when it is not restored at the beginning, according to whether it is covered or not and is restored according to its curvature, this is an error according to their operation, with great fear. And if it were a tailor, such expansion in their free works would be healed by that opened work.
And I haven't seen any of them do this, so it's more reasonable that this doesn't happen.
Consideration for when a fracture occurs in the head.
The types of fractures are impacts and their figures are various, as are the causes. Some fractures occur due to impact by force, causing the body to be completely shattered within it, leaving the bones intact, similar to when a log is shattered, for which this type is named 'shattering'. Or the force impacts a part of the bone, impacting the flesh without passing through its rear; and this kind of fracture is called absolute dislocation.
And the plague of these two types of fractures is great or small, and for crushing or pulling fractures. The cause for them is impact against stone or hitting on stone, and they resemble it.
And this fracture is penetrating that it almost reaches the pulp which leaves the bones intact; or in the surface of the bone. The plague of these two types of fractures is either large or small.
And it's the fracture that grows within the bone, with subtle hairs, for which this type of fracture is named 'capillary'.
And it's the fracture that is made by hitting or by impact on stone, which resembles them, causing some layer of bone to enter into the parts inside, and happens in the concave area, as happens with the teeth when they are hit and their entryway enters into the parts inside.
And mostly this happens in the bodies of moist bones, such as children's heads.
And for all these types of fractured parts, they are like separate stars. And I will come back with the healing of this in its place.
And I know all these types of fractures through detection on them and examination of the putrid flesh that is on them.
And the capillary type is known by this that it is discovered above the bone and it is cleaned off, with its limit on it being examined, for where the fracture appears black.
And in the treatment of fractures consider the symptoms of the patient at the beginning, and then if you encounter due to these symptoms which signify manifestly on pain, for example vomiting from colic, expansion, loss of understanding, tooth abscess, fainting, acute fever, nostril discharge and heat of those, as well as similar symptoms in major conditions, it is not healed.
And if you notice non-occurrence symptoms you expect recovery, then you begin the treatment for him.
This cause is that if it has come to you the injury at the beginning like it was injured and this happens in the days of winter, then after studying within the bone facing day 14 according to all disposition.
And if it's in the days of summer, then you can expect to leave the bone facing on the 7th day, having what leaves the bones being corrupted by the pulp, and that occurrences happen which we have recounted.
And if the fracture has already penetrated into the pulp covering the brain, and it's in parts that are crushed and pulled, then you can expect to insert the part with mixed and rubbed together, as I will instruct you.
And indeed you open the head of the patient's ailment, and expose the bone as customary and according to your skill and manner, secondly on the figure of the ailment, and ensure it is gentle upon the patient.
And if it happens that you need to detect the bone, fluid of pus or abscess flow, then you press against them with this tool, and indeed you smell the place with infused cloths in vinegar and rubbed oil, and make the patient rest inside the ailment where the abscess is sedated; and be sure of blood flow; and then start from around the bone and during its excision.
And indeed, one should operate according to one of two surgical methods.
And the first method is that you incise into the bone with an elongated cutting tool, and this is its form: And then administer another incision here, slightly shorter than the previous one; and this is its form:
And then administer more incision tools that are wider than the second one.
And you should use different numbers of incision tools, among which some are wider than others; and some of them are shorter than the others, with their tips being sharpened or pointed at their extremities.
And use them for ease in percussion on the incisions, so as not to crush the head and harm that one.
And if the bone is strong and hard, then you should puncture in front of the area where you will administer the incisions, which are named pre-cut tunnels.
And they are not called so simply because those do not reach the end of the bone test until it is close to that point; indeed, at the tunnel, the rounded extremity or edge is similar to a sharp cap resembling an edge or small circle, which should not be submerged and should not surpass the thickness of the bone.
And it is convenient for you to use a large number of these tunnels, each one suitable for the thickness of every bone, within which there should be an acute extremity at all times when present in all tests of the skull. The quantity in length and breadth should correspond to the amount of thickness of this test.
And this is the form of three types of tunnels: When piercing into the circuit of the broken bone, you press the tunnel onto the bone and rotate it with your fingers until you know that the bone has been penetrated; then adjust the tunnel to another location and press this one right in-between all, considering the thickness of the ray or around it.
And then you incise with the tool that is between any part of the bone, making it slightly deeper as you lift towards the end, just like we have said, while drilling the bone or with your hand or by some other means using tools you might have prepared for this, such as a small taphole and fine forceps.
And make sure that when using the tool, it does not touch any part of the patient's body.
And when you have drilled the bone through, and separated it from the body if it continues with this, take out that piece, be careful to compare and equalize its roughness with what is in the bone by another tool similar to a cutting instrument, however, make sure that it is much finer and more delicate than other cutting instruments.
And if you encounter any fragment of small bones and solid ones, take that with ease using the tools that are suitable for your hands; then apply this treatment to the wound with lint and ointments as we have said.
The other surgical method is gentler, far removed from pain, which Guillaume and Laузe performed using great skill; this is what they say: it is necessary for you at the beginning to start discovering the part of the bone in the location where the fracture is more intense and more obvious. When you have discovered that part and placed the tip of this incision tool gently and quickly, as follows:
And indeed, the circular part is smooth and does not cut any cause. The sharp part is in two lateral directions before its length, as it is said; that the circular part should be placed close to the body against the face of the sharp incision tool at an angle with the bone.
And then you strike upon the incision tool of one part with a small hammer while cutting through all the bone as smoothly as rotated it, and be sure of your nerves that they will not hit any accident which you fear in some manner. If the doctor was the most experienced person among all men and the least knowledgeable about them; certainly, if he was sleeping.
Then if you encounter any adjacent cause to the bone of nerves in some places of the bones, cut with this using the tip of the incision tool that is circular, and pull this off easily, which is pulled out from its injury and pain.
And if the bone fracture does not penetrate into the nerves, and what is separated or left of the bone is its face, there is roughness and delicate solids in it. So you should take care to smooth that roughness and remove those delicacies with finely sharpened tools which you have prepared in various amounts, so that you may possibly administer some from them in all places according to their most suitable qualities and the straight way of doing things when performing your operation on this broken bone and its shape.
And indeed, when you administer according to your judgement, clean out the inner parts starting with the opening of the organs, and then use it close to the subtle fluid beneath him, and do not cease performing this until you reach the discharge of both the thick pus and the subtle fluid from all those.
May this apply to any of the other small capillary fractures or subtle breaks, and when you administer treatment according to what leads to correction of him.
And it is because they are not healed on all those who have studied in that art. And stand on what we have written, showing great fractures.
And if the intestine gets stuck when you puncture the organ, then when you have taken the quantity of cloth according to the size of the wound, immerse that in oil rubbed and place it on the wound's opening; then take another folded or triple-layered cloth and immerse it in wine and oiled rubbed, place this one on the first cloth, and gently apply a little pus over it without causing pain. And administer lime over it as well, do not press it until you have covered the size of the wound exactly.
And let this treatment last for one or two days until you are sure of the pus being evacuated; then remove it and administer medicines that prevent excessive dryness, such as flaxseed and bran of oats, powders of ashes and aristolochia, and herbs similar to those.
And you should make this from these medicines as a powder to be sprinkled over the wound while it's dry; in general, administer all medicine of its properties that repel and do not bite.
And observe your virtue to ensure that the wound during your treatment becomes clean; and do not let it get into the greasy layer of ointment or any other thing; nor let you introduce toxicity in him; for when placed over the membrane of the brain, it corrupts that and leaves that, and then happens this evil malice on the patient close to this maliciousness.
And when it occurs in the head, as his condition changes with him and much more so when your treatment for him is neglected, and there's a darkness on the surface of him; then consider this time if any accidents that we've mentioned happen to the patient, know that it's all due to badness.
And if no darkness occurs but only from the medicine that's placed upon it, and this darkness is due to the virtue of that medicine causing that darkness, then when you take one part of honey and parts of oiled rubbed three times. And weave these lines on a cloth, then place this on the head; and treat him with the spices of healing until he's healed.
Chapter three.
About restoring the nose when it is broken.
Know that the nose is not broken into two parts simultaneously from above, or one of those split several times, because in him there are two bones, and the part you leave is cartilaginous, it's not broken, and doesn't affect him but rather causes irritation and obstruction.
And if one of the two parts of him is broken, then when you introduce your small finger into his nose, and equalize that break internally by your finger's tip, and place the finger's base outside, so that it returns the nose according to its natural figure. And do this in your ease, and observe not to let that your operation fall on the patient's whole body.
And if the fracture is in the upper part of the nose that's above, and your finger doesn't reach that, then when you equalize it to the extremity of the bone where there's a small thickness.
And if the fracture is in two parts, then you should make this semblance.
And guide yourself in the restoration of him during the first day of the fracture, if it's possible; otherwise, then by the seventh or tenth you should resume the pus evacuation treatment.
And when you're ready, insert a piece of linen cloth into the tip of the nose if the fracture is in one part, or two cloths, if it's in two parts; and place them inside the cloths to fill the nasal passage with as much quantity as fills the nostril.
And among the ancient restorers, they said that the cloths should be wrapped in gauze and changed every day, though I haven't seen this; when you do, make sure the cloth is wrapped with egg white paste mixed with powder of myrrh; then leave the cloth until the bone is fixed and the cartilage has hardened.
And some of them would insert linen cloths in the nose instead of a cloth, to prevent an abundant pus that's wrapped with linen from entering him; and it is that already you have the fracture of his nose very intense and that the patient isn't prohibited from breathing.
And this reason is not necessary to you; if you wish, do this, and if you wish, use cloths.
And if another pus discharge occurs during the treatment, apply a plaster on the nose with gauze or with a compress soaked in wine and oiled rubbed, or use vinegar.
And if no pus discharge occurs, then when you apply plaster outside with oat bran and powdered myrrh with egg white; then place on it a linen sheet, and do not touch the nose for any reason.
If you have broken the bones of the nose either in a small fracture or if they are comminuted, then make cuts over those, and remove them with instruments that suit those; and then cover the incision, and heal that by what unites and consolidates, and with plasters that suit.
And if an injury occurs inside the nose, then make cuts to heal that by cauteries and administer lead cannulas inside until it is completely healed.
Head four.
Regarding the restoration of the jaw when it is fractured.
When the jaw is broken and there's no need for surgery, consider if the fracture is only external, and is not split into two parts but bent towards the inside of the body, in which case its cognition is mild.
And when the fracture is in the right part, you should insert your left index into the patient's mouth; and similarly, if the fracture is in the left jaw, then insert that same index of your right hand. Push the fluidity of the fracture inward with ease to the outside parts, using your other hand on the outside side of the bone; do this properly as you've just done it.
And if the jaw fracture has already separated into two parts, then make sure to administer extension of both parts according to rightness while making it possible for their equality.
And if there's a commotion of teeth to disruption, then strengthen those you expect will break with the thread of gold or silver or copper; and place pressure on the broken jaw with a cast, and also place pressure on the patient's double sheet, and place pressure on the large star-shaped sheet that has been made decently, or one piece equal in length to the jaw; and lay that there according to how you've assessed the thickness of the material and that which suits its application, while ensuring it isn't destroyed.
And command the patient to rest and be calm, and let him pause from eating the lion's food.
And if you estimate that the figure has been altered in any way, then you take and untie that on the third day; and properly correct whatever is already altered in you, plaster it with bone dust, or with the album of oil, or with wheat flour, once you have covered the patient's cast again, and lay this woolen plaster over the plaster.
And when that plaster is properly placed on you, and the position of the bone isn't altered, let that be, don't untie it until it's healed and strengthens the fracture; this broken bone heals in three weeks.
And if another occurrence results in pus formation, then administer what we've said about healed situations for your pain while it heals, and ensure that pus is cleared from that location.
And if there's surgery needed for the fracture, then consider whether it's a piece of bone that's separated or stuck, in which case you carefully extract those stuck pieces with what suits you for removing them from the fluids.
And if the wounds of the surgery are stretched, then you should expand them with a scalpel according to the quantity of your need.
And when you have removed those stuck pieces and they are no longer present, then you should cover the wound area if it is wide; otherwise, place one of the plasters that suits here to fuse that part, while it heals.
Head five.
Regarding the restoration of the furca when it is fractured.
Healed situations involve breaking the furca from in front of the muscle, and this fracture is made in three ways.
Whether it's broken, separated, or separated into two parts without sticking together, this is easier to restore. Or if there are sticking pieces present, it makes restoring it more difficult. Or perhaps the fracture involves surgery.
And the operation in that case, when the fracture involves surgery, is for you to have two ministers present, so one can hold the assistant and follow the broken furca, and the other extends the neck muscles of that part.
And when you have united the fracture with your fingers until its form is made according to how you see fit, without it being too small nor concave in the prominence.
And if you require more extension, then make sure to place a strip of cloth or wool on the patient's expectation, and its size according to your need; extend and elevate the furca and bind that area with your hand until you unite the fracture as you see fit.
And if you cannot pull the end of the furca outward to the outside parts, due to it being pressed against the front, then make sure for the patient to lie back on their neck, and place a hand halfway in size over their muscle.
And the minister presses against the muscle of the patient outward until the bone of the furca is elevated as it is in front of their chest, then you correct the fracture and unite that with your fingers.
And if you feel sticking pieces of the furca that are stubborn, then make sure to cut over it and remove those sticking pieces with ease.
And if it's held in the bone, then you devise an incision from that with one of the surgical instruments you have prepared for this purpose, as you previously placed the furca on the tool that serves to cut through muscles; and this is the shape of that tool:
It is like the contents of which this forms the cavity; and its width according to what you need from it, according to the size of the bone or the fragility of it.
Let the length of it be according to what is feasible in the operation; may there be two ends like sometimes, and one end broad while the other is tight.
And if the wound disruption that you have caused when extracting the bone is wide, and you are sure of a pus pocket cautery, then adjust the two edges of the wound for suturing.
And if the disruption is small, or you fear a pus pocket cautery, then you use the wound with bandages and powders according to the amount of the cut in the wound.
And if pus pocket cautery occurs, then soak the cloth with vinegar and oil and water, and place it over that area.
And altogether, so that the table does not expose the broken bone; and by yourself check that you see your thigh each day, for when the ligament is softened or you see the table already being restored, then you correct this and strengthen the bond.
And then pause the sleeping of your thigh on your neck, and leave it with your patient's head in bed for at least an hour each night; so that at that point elevate the support of your arm under its elbow, and thus elevates the fracture of the sternum to elevation of the muscle; or have your arm lying by the neck of them.
And do not disturb the ligament if it does not happen immediately in that area or pus, within twelve days.
And then renew the plaster if you have seen your face up to that point, and adjust in the narrowing, restore it and smooth until it is restored and has coagulated the fracture of the sternum.
And it becomes strong and comfortable according to the month in twenty-eight days, and some patients are treated within months of that time.
Capitol. vi.
Regarding the restoration of the fracture of the shoulder.
The spatula tart is broken in that area on your side and not break it but its edges.
And when it is broken in your area — and it breaks in the middle of your area — and it is not known otherwise than through touch, then according to what is the shape of the fracture force you prepare it and reduce that according to the natural shape throughout every manner of art which is feasible for you.
And then pause on the area with flour of mill mixed with egg yolk and butter; and pause bandage with duplicate cloth powder; and then pause under your table thin board according to the amount of the spatula entirely or more than a little.
May it be that if leaving the table is concave in some of the areas of the spatula, then you fill that concavity with butter bandage, and then adjust the table according to equality.
And then strengthen above with breath long with constriction decent and the tightness of the table until it is not restored at its place.
And consider the ligament each day; and in all times that it is softened, lie another treatment and strengthen it and equalize the table if it has been restored at its place.
And let your thigh rest on its elbow there.
And the spatula is restored in twenty days or in thirty.
And when this number is completed, then you dissolve the ligament, and make sure that for that reason it is of bones from which it began not to be feared or its dissolution.
And if you proceed with the area of the bone and place your hand, then you cut on it, remove it, and do as we said for the fracture of the sternum in case of pus pocket cautery if it happens here.
Capitol vii.
Regarding the restoration of the ankle fracture.
The ankle, in some cases, is broken in the middle of it and that spatula should be applied; but its ends should not be crushed or reduced.
Of the accidents when it breaks in the middle of it is that it declines into the parts inside and happens to it a great pain, difficulty in walking, coughing, weakness and nausea; and it becomes evident in the cavity in the broken bone and is not hidden from feeling.
And the restoration consists in having him lie on his back, and place a cushion under him; and apply pressure to his muscles, adjusting his back against the hands of two, and refine the operation with subtlety regarding the patient's entire body mechanics and according to all possible methods that suit this situation, so that his figure returns as close as possible to its original state.
And then place a plaster and wadding on him, covering it with a delicate sheet of wax or calico and aligning them according to the patient's posture when you cover it with a cloth. And refine the application over the broken bone without causing discomfort; and adjust its position according to the curvature of your back for several rounds, strengthen that with decent ligature; and consider the wound at all times, and once it is softened, harden that.
And if it is necessary to induce disintegration or puncturing, or pain, or infection that occurs at the site, then remove and clean that area, remove the plaster, rectify whatever happens in this way according to your treatment method; and adjust the plaster if you find something wrong with the skin; and correct the ligature until it heals.
Chapter VIII.
Regarding the restoration of the ribs when they are broken.
Understand that a break in the ribs only occurs in large areas that cover both sides; and at the ends of their parts in front, it does not cause that friction with those because they are cartilaginous. And knowledge about it is not hidden from the feeling; you must inquire about it for each of these words.
And the restoration should be such that it equals the break in each of these words according to possible methods, so that it conforms when it covers, and then plaster and strengthen the broken bones with a sheet, if you need that.
And if the break in the ribs is decreasing towards the inside parts, then it affects the patient with severe pain and puncture, just like when you have pleurisy, because the lungs take on fluid; and it causes difficulty in breathing, coughing, and vomiting of undigested food; and this is hard to treat.
And already, the Greeks are skilled in such things at a young age.
And about them they say: cook the food that causes inflammation and flatulence in the lungs, so that the stomach is inflated and stretched, and the breakage is pushed towards the inside parts.
Let's not let that happen through us such that it doesn't become the cause of generating pus in the cautery, if it doesn't occur; and if it has already occurred, then help with that.
And they say that it should be placed above the lungs and close to being squeezed with strength; this is similar to reasoning, but it is feared that the suction will draw excesses to the site due to weakness.
And they say that: cook until the area is covered with wool that has been submerged in cautery oil, and place powders between the ribs as it fills up, so that the healing matches when you cover it according to its curvature; and then treat the chest with the treatment of pleurisy caused by food and medicine.
And if it causes intense constriction in the chest which does not tolerate it, and the lungs take on fluid due to tooth punctures, we are afraid of the chest; then cook until you cut over the site, reveal from the broken rib, and place an instrument underneath that preserves the chieftain, whose memory precedes this, and I will cut into the bone for ease, and extract it.
And when adjusting the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with stitches, and heal that with plasters until it heals.
And if pus occurs inside, then you should stitch it and place powdered in rotted oil on the site, and treat the chest with this method that deals with pus inside.
And when he is laid down over his back where he sleeps, until it heals.
Chapter IX.
Regarding the restoration of a break in the vertebral column of the back and neck.
Some breaks can occur in the bones of the neck, and similarly to their ligaments, as well as those of the back vertebral column. And if you want to know whether it will heal or not when something like this happens to someone else, consider that if their hands are already softened, numb, and dead, they cannot make those move, extend them, strengthen them. Or when you compress those against your own words or prick them with a needle, and you don't feel pain in those, then know it is not healed; and under such conditions it is fatal.
And if they don't like those and feel compression in those against your words and are pricked, then know that the neck of the bone is saved, and that the chest heals with treatment.
And if you see similarities to this in the back vertebral column and want to know whether it will heal or not, then consider the feet of the person.
And if you find that they are already softened, it occurs with those what happens to the hands, and when sitting on their back, experience coughing and loss of appetite as desired. Sometimes they sit on their back and want to urinate but cannot, then know that it is fatal, therefore do not proceed with treating them.
If no cause occurs from those things, then the cause is better and more mild.
And the cure for this is that you perform a soothing of the cauterized boil wound on the lowest part of the spine, which has been torn open or by lances; place your hand on that area several times during the day until the boil cauterized.
And then place one of the bandages soothingly and firmly, and press over that with strength; and command the patient to rest and be calm, not to sleep on the part where he finds pain until it is healed.
And if it happens that you need to remove the bone socket or any cause that has already separated from him, then cover the wound with a dressing and hold that bone; and adjust the two edges of the wound, sew if it's large; and treat that with some ointment until it is healed.
And if the tailbone is broken at the anus, this is the end of the penis, then cover so that you place your left hand's tip on the buttocks, and align the broken bone with your other hand as much as possible according to the second equation; and then hold over his bandage and sandal leaves, if you need those, and hold there.
And if you feel broken bones within him, then hold over that spot, and hold there, treating the wound with the cure that proceeds until it is healed.
Capitol .x.
Restoration of the uterus.
The bones of the wide uterus can be broken, and if they break, then the fracture is simply communication at the ends of those and are inscribed along their length; and it happens to the patient pain in that spot and punctures, and when it's a fracture, the change becomes stupefied.
And the restoration of him is that you extend your hand over that area within which there is the fracture, which is the figure of him.
And if the fracture is only at the extremity of him, then align that according to what you can do by equal equation until it's assembled to its natural figure.
And if the fracture is in the long or already declines to the parts let him lie the patient on his abdomen until your preparation for restoring that fracture is ready. And when you have aligned that, place over his bandage, and then hold over the sandal of wood or of chestnut, and hold there with strength about which do not fear puncturing of fracture or displacement of the star.
And align the凹陷 with that which fills that area until that accepts the constriction according to equality, and command the patient to sleep on his two sides or on his back.
And if an inflammatory cauterization occurs, then cease the extension of him and his restoration until the inflammatory cauterization is sedated, and place there that which heats that according to what follows; and return again to the restoration of him, and hold there as you would.
And if it happens in the bone socket or are fractured, then you must address them.
Capitol .xi.
Restoration of the restoration of the assistant fracture.
The assistant is that which is between the shoulder blade, in the back part of the shoulder.
And if it is broken, then the restoration of him can be in one of two ways, of which you take wood flat of medium size according to this form:
And let there be four limbs at both ends, and it should be suspended from the raised place.
And let the patient lie on one side; and then extend his broken arm over the wood until it reaches to his nipple in the middle place where the curvature of the wood is annexed.
And then suspend over that some heavy cause or the servant extends that to the parts let him do; and approach the doctor to treat the fracture with his hands until the fracture returns according to what you have done.
And the other way is that the patient lies back on his neck and hangs his arm from the collar of him with one limb; and then command two servants that one of them holds what is above the fracture with his hands; and the other has the pus below him; and each of them extends to his part.
And if you want the extension to be more forceful, then hold over the fracture with one limb and over that with another limb, and each of the two servants extends to both his parts.
And if the fracture is close to the extremity of the muscle, then cover so that half of the limb is placed on the nipple and the other part you should hold the bone.
And similarly if the fracture is close to the shoulder blade, then cover so that the limb is placed on that spot and on that shoulder blade.
Align that with ease and proceed with your work, and then strengthen that as long as it's being aligned according to what you've done and is applied well. And if there is no inflammatory cauterization occurring.
And if an inflammatory cauterization occurs, then smooth the constriction within the seventh day, and place over him coarse wool ointment for seven more days until the inflammatory cauterization rests, and then hold there again.
And the method to strengthen that is that you place bandages over the fracture, and then wrap a cloth around that bandage; and adjust his arm towards the assistant, and place his hand opened on his muscle.
And place the sheet and strengthen on the assistant's arm so that the arm is in the place of the stars, or else prevent any cause from breaking the bones.
And then use the stars.
And you should place that star over the fracture which is more solid and stronger than the other stars; and between each star place the width of a finger, and let the length of the stars according to the breakage be added with an extra three fingers from every side.
And then strengthen on top of the stars along the constriction which I mentioned at the beginning of the skull.
And your constriction over the place of the fracture should be more tightened. And as much as the fracture is lengthened, the constriction should be less.
And so, if you find the position of the stars and the constriction as we have said when restoring the member to its original place, then do it.
And if you fear a carbuncle forming with the heat, then leave the constriction and stars for a day as we have said.
And consider the circulation throughout in all directions for three days so that there is no inflammation or swelling at that place; or prevent food from reaching the member through the distribution of excess constriction; and then correct all of this according to what we have said.
May it be that you are concerned about avoiding any cause of this, then do not loosen the ligature until at least three days or more.
And let the patient's back sleep on its own, and their hands be under their stomachs.
And place on the assistant's full bed of evenly spread wool, and consider at all night or day that the figure of the broken member is not healed or dissolved, or that its circulation has been softened, then correct this entirely according to your skill.
And let the food for the patient follow the order we have presented before meals, so that the food is subtle in the beginning until strength begins; and then increase the amount of food from them.
That the strength of the assistant and the area from them is that they be strengthened for 40 days; then let it be that they are loosened, and bananas are administered which are ointments that correct that.
And if the fracture is heated and rubbed, then do not loosen that circulation or stars for one day or within two months.
Capitol. XII.
Regarding the restoration of a forearm fracture.
A forearm is composed of two bones which are called the radius and the ulna; among them, one is small and that is what we call the wrist bone, while the other is large and rests on the smaller when it's below.
And a broken forearm can only be that of the larger bone (the ulna) or the smaller one (radius), and they break at times.
And when the smaller bone (radius) is broken above, then the restoration of it is easier, and its healing is even easier.
And when the larger bone (ulna) is broken below, then the fracture of it is bad, and its healing is difficult.
And even worse than that is when both bones break at the same time.
So if the bone that is broken is the smaller radius above, then it is convenient for the surgeon, you should restore it, that allows a small extension to facilitate when that becomes equal.
May it be that if it is the larger bone (ulna) that is broken, then you should allow for an even more extensive extension.
And if both bones are broken at the same time, then let it be that you perform the reduction with much more strength.
And let it be that you place the shape of the hand should restore it and the extension of it spread on a cushion, so that all parts above are considered, and the wrist bone is lower than the other bones, and the back of the hand is resting on one bent elbow.
And let there be a cushion in front of it at the height or straightness of it, so that the back does not need to work.
And let the minister extend the arm of the part below towards their hand or circulation, and another minister extends similarly above.
And then, for the surgeon to equalize the bones until it reduces that according to the best figure that can be.
And if there are obstructions in the bone structure, then you must reduce all parts to their place with your skill.
And if there appears in it a separate obstruction that hinders the continuity and is not within your hope for restoring it, then you should operate on it and hold it according to the method we have described above.
May it be that if the fracture is in the case of an accident, I have already treated at this chapter specifically, and thus take care of it.
And if an infection with heat sets in at the beginning of your restoration, then you should line a cloth with a wax-soaked and white beeswax bandage, making it medium between thickness and subtlety, strengthen the cloth over that with subtle constriction until the infection can dissipate; then keep on changing the bandages, using an plaster made from clay powder in oil, and place stars; let the star placed over that fracture be closer and stronger.
And know that I have mentioned the names of the arm bones in the major dispositions, or whether it is a fracture in one place or two at once.
And place your compression over the site of the fracture with strength and vigor, and when more of the compression is applied to the divisions above the fracture or to the lower parts below it, apply a little more damp compression as the memory of it proceeds in the beginning of the caput.
And the cloths that wrap around the fracture should be damp and soft, not hard or abrasive. The plaster with which it is strengthened should be of a medium thickness between subtle and thick, as we have recounted.
And consider the limb and the joint for several days. And if there arises any cause for which correction is necessary, such as what happens to the limb itself, then immerse the limb in warm water until that pain subsides.
And let the limb rest without strain until it recovers, and then return the compression.
And if the compression has already been softened and the bone has already grown to resemble that of others, then correct all this according to your strength.
And consider more if nourishment is prohibited from reaching the limb due to excess of compression. In that case, immerse it in order to soften that slightly and let it for several days until blood flow reaches that again, then strengthen it.
If to the patient no cause arises from those we have mentioned, then do not immerse it until approximately 20 days or around that time.
And place the hand of the patient above their head by its strength in vigorous movements, and make them sleep on their back.
And know that this fracture is restored in 30 days or in 45 days, or lightly restored in 28 days, and all of this depends on the composition of the body and the disposition of strength.
Caput XIII.
On restoration of fracture in the hand and fingers.
And know that in the hand and at the joints of the fingers there may be fractures, but they do not occur to them without small torn motions.
And when a fracture or injury occurs to the hand, then immerse the patient lying down in front of them so that they are level, and then place the hand of them over that extended.
And let the surgeon extend the broken bones, and the doctor equal those within that they are connected with good growth.
And then immerse it while you apply plaster and stop the bleeding, if there is no pus. Then place points according to the size of the area, and you have already enveloped that in cloth for it.
If the strike is in the inner parts under the palm towards the belly, then make it resemble a half-sphere of cloth, and instruct the patient to hold that with their broken palm; then have it strengthened with long cloth.
And if the point of the cut is on the cloth where it lies, so that the body is applied to the palm; then strengthen that according to how you immerse.
If the fracture is on the parts outside, then immerse it above points and another point of that part left in the palm, so that the hand is open and straight; then return the compression, as if the hand was turned inside out between the fingers at the joint.
And if there arises a fracture in one of the joints of the fingers, then if it is the finger joint, make it equal as you immerse and then have it strengthened on the palm; and if you want, place that small right point so that the fracture is elevated and is not depressed.
If the fracture is in the other fingers, such as at the center point, or on the index finger, or the ring finger, then make it equal and flat at that finger where there was that; or they are all flat in continuity, which is better; or place a small point over that, as we have said about the joint.
And consider in your restoration and before that, the disposition of pus in the wound and opposition - during your operation - to what you immerse when a cause arises from those, according to the recounting of it.
Caput XIV.
On restoration of fracture in the bone of the thigh.
The bone of the thigh may be broken with torn motions, and it is perceived in the feeling according to whether it turns towards the front part or above.
And the restoration of it is done so that the muscle strengthens over the fracture and other muscles are left around the fracture, and the patient lies prostrate on their belly and face.
And let the surgeon extend all the muscle to its part according to quality, when the fracture is in the center of the bone.
If they are at the limit of the thigh, then make the muscle close to the knee joint towards its part, so that the extension covers them all, and the other muscles are left around the fracture.
And similarly if the break is close to the knee, then make the muscle close to the knee and let the extension be towards the remaining parts.
And the doctor equalizes the bones at both their ends so that you reduce that according to its natural appearance, and the bone is joined by good connection; then immerse it while applying plaster and compression, if there is no occurrence of pus in the limb. If it happens in their abscess, then you leave that alone for several days until the abscess heals naturally, and then proceed with your treatment.
The constriction of the affected area is done: cover the fracture with a hard bandage, fold it two or three times, and remove any excess; then wrap around the limb ensuring it reaches to the elbow and the base of the foot.
And insert a long needle between the foot and the limb close to the ankle towards your limbs, then extend the needle from the insertion point beyond both sides, and then move around the limb and foot so that excess of the bandage is removed.
And place on the foot at the spot of that fracture stars, and place one star over those bones in the limb.
And fill the gaps between the limb and foot with many layers of cloths, so that the constriction may clot.
And start with a firm constriction in the middle over the spot of the fracture using three or four layers, and as you move away from the spot of the fracture, your constriction should be smaller, lighter, and more moist.
And extend both ends of the needle to your limbs ensuring they reach into the cavity of the chest, and strengthen both ends of the stars from the other side so that the limb doesn't move out from its place.
And leave the constriction over that area, so it doesn't cause erosion or abscess in the limb nor swelling and resembles those; if any of these causes happen, then prepare to treat them immediately. Adjust everything as we have instructed with several times of repetition.
If there is a gap in the bone where it should be filled, then cover such that you equalize it according to what's possible; if not, apply pressure and secure it, treating with the one who precedes the healing until it heals.
And for several repetitions strengthen this fracture of the foot in another way that fits your stars, as we have said in the manual and for arms.
However, in restoring the patient this way, do not cause limpness in the foot; and if it is restored alone, from the other limb applied elsewhere, then that part should also show limpness during its healing period.
Know that the foot is strengthened in about ten days or a few months, and all this varies according to the diversity of the individuals and other arrangements.
Chapter XV
Regarding the restoration of the fracture in the ankle joint.
Know that fractures of the ankle joint are common injuries, but they occur several times due to accidents.
If it happens to the fracture, then it's simply a crack or break in its parts, and this is from an accident or series of accidents, and on that entire matter, all is established according to feelings.
And the restoration of it aims to be equalized what is broken in its parts according to what was said, so that it can be added and combined as much as possible for harmony, ease, and craftsmanship.
And apply the plaster and place a round star on it, if you need that from there; and strengthen above with constriction to an extent that is suitable.
And consider all the arrangements that we have recommended in other fractures, such as abscesses and swelling that resemble those when they oppose to every injury so that it is convenient for it to heal within.
Chapter XVI
Regarding the restoration of the fracture in the limb.
Know that in the limb there are two bones, one of which is thick, and it is named as the name of the limb; and the other is delicate, and it is named easy.
And it can happen to any of the types of fractures that occur in both bones of the arm, and thus the restoration is done like the restoration of the arm equally, and the operation for it is one.
And if two bones are injured simultaneously, the limb transforms into all directions.
And if it is broken with the thinner bone, the limb transforms towards the front parts.
And if it is broken with the thicker bone, you move that limb, and these are from those causes that are not within your control.
And apply extension, equilibrium, and adjustment of the stars according to that equalization.
However, bear in mind that if the fracture of the limb is away from the usual locations, then extension should be gentle and lighter, and support your strength.
And in the limb there is an operation on the arm due to it, and when you equalize the stars and complete your entire operation, then you take weights of wood that are held by these causes which are in solidities, they are made from branches of palm; remove those towards the ones with small roughness, not with hard hands, and make their length according to the length of the limb, inside the most towards the most away.
And wrap around each cloth in two layers according to the length of it, place one over the limb part of the limb from one side and the other from the other side, have them inside towards the most away at the lowest point of the chest.
And tie the two stars in three places on both extremities and at the middle point, where this structure is not allowed to lean towards either the right or left side, staying in good position.
And after applying a floss thread according to the length of the tendon; then place the tendon on him, so that it keeps its movement.
And especially make sure you do this in a fracture, and when it comes to that particular disease.
And consider each day the tendon and study it from behind, and guard it against abscesses and inflammation or other similar causes; and when any cause of those happens to you, then stay with him so that your action is within what makes him heal.
Chapter XVII.
On the fracture of the heel bone and bones of the foot and fingers.
On the heel bone, it does not happen to suffer fractures in entirety; but on foot bones, some fractures occur; and on the fingers of the foot, few fractures do happen, and they do not happen to them unless there is predisposition during the months.
And if on foot bones fracture and happens that those bones rise over themselves among each other, then the patient places his foot on a prepared ground as it is done in normal situations.
And then place one foot on that which rises from those bones, and press those, and apply pressure, and adjust those within each other so they return to the original locations.
And then place plaster and seal above, and leave the patient's abdomen on a small table where two cushion heads are placed.
And then strengthen that on the foot at its descending structure, since you have enveloped that with bandages and against other causes from which you are in need.
And when three or four days pass for him, then you release the bandage, whereupon you will find the bones adjusted, if they are broken or dislocated, and the operation in those is as you would know.
And if any fingers are broken, then restore those, and adjust them as I have recommended to you in the restoration of fingers of the hand. And then place the broken finger on a line according to the length of the finger, and make it slightly more elevated than him; and leave his foot on this table which I have recommended to you, and strengthen that in its descending structure.
And if what is broken from the bones are two or three or more, then you place on each finger a line of its quantity wrapped in lion skin, and strengthen the table at the very bottom of his foot, and standing on one of the table's head make him lie with his abdomen elevated so that the tongue has good retention.
And it is important for you not to forget that you should not consider all the causes that I have mentioned to you in the other fractures of accidents we have discussed; and stay with every accident so that your action is within what makes them heal.
Chapter XVIII.
On the fracture of the knee cap and the bone in the heel and the spine of a man.
When the knee cap is broken, then let it be laid on its side facing down, and place it slightly tilted towards the right side, with it being held behind.
And then the midwife places the kneecap under it, and lets him be placed as he wishes in the kneecap; and let her bend the woman down, and lift his two small ones little by little, so that everything happens as she wishes with the knee cap facing forward, and the broken bone returns.
And then place powders on his back, and when he wants to urinate help him with ease, and let him urinate, and then return it according to the method in which you mixed that at the beginning, and return to his first powder.
And do this for seven days or approximately those, until it is restored.
And if you wish, take an ointment of sheep and place a thread of flax on his knee; then immerse the whole bladder in his knee, and blow into the tube with strength so that the bladder inflates inside the knee, where the fracture returns.
And then it is filled with kneecap and stays for as many days as we have recommended, until it heals.
And when the bone in the heel of a man or woman is broken, then administer to its restoration and adjustment what we have recommended for the thigh bone.
And that which is straight is not hidden in these nearby fractures and do not happen often, especially for the one who has some study and you understand my free speech; because that fracture means to you in the major directions via of movement in its restoration and adjustment, so understand well.
And when the spine of a man is broken, take care of it with a guard, and put the spine in that; then place him covered with cloth, and he should be wrapped, and leave him for three days or approximately those, and heal.
Chapter XIX.
On the restoration of fractures when they are diseased.
It is convenient for him who suffers from fractured disease, and especially if the bone is large such as that of the elbow or the humerus, or similar to those, you take care of it immediately with bleeding and syringing it right away if the conditions of bleeding are present or testify as we have mentioned above.
And if the wound is releasing pus, then cover it with a cloth that you immerse in water where you powder over it thyme, if there is another reason not to do so.
And then begin to restore the fracture on that specific day, and do not prolong this treatment, if an abscess does not occur.
If an abscess does occur with the cautery, then let the restoration of your patient happen within the first 9 days, until the abscess subsides, and do not come close to him on the third day in total, where you will cause harm.
If the broken bone is imminent over the exposed wound, then cover it by having you forcibly reduce that and equalize it among your hands for ease and with little extension.
If extension is not at your disposal and the equivalence of your hands among your fingers, then reduce that among your hands with this instrument; and this instrument is made of iron, its length being seven or eight digits long, and its width according to the size of the wound; and thus it is necessary for the doctor to take one of those three or four depending on what you need in total for treatment in all cases of fracture.
And if it is soft, and with little hardness so that it does not bend, you must compress it over that during the time of operation.
And if it has an acute tip with a margin on its own extremities; and let the upper part be thick in totality, and inside let its parts be small.
And this is how it looks:
It's called "labre volentz atelarem" in Greek, so it's a small palette.
So that you understand that the extremity of this thing should be raised above the protruding part of the bone.
And push it into a groove so that the bone returns, and it must be equalized among some levelness.
And then force to equalize the extremities of the fracture among each other, and if the broken extremity is thin, and does not take that tool for good access, then cover that you insert the extremity of that bone into a place where the instrument has power over this.
If you cannot reduce the bone entirely as we have recommended, then cut that with any of those scalpels which we have said; or cut it with one of the saws in whatever way is possible for you.
And then take that which stands in the bone of roughness and small remnants.
And when the bone has been reduced, and upon this reduction the patient feels intense pain, know that the bone has not returned to its natural position; and thus let you give comfort to your patient with great kindness.
When your restoration to the bone is completed, then immerse a cloth in stoptic water, and especially if it's summer, do not apply plaster or any other cause with oil on the wound, so that it does not cause infection and deterioration.
And then administer styes during the time of your completion to the restoration of the bone, and leave the wound exposed so that you insert it with scissors and use bandages according to the size of the wound.
And be careful to not strain the wound on the fracture, which often causes doctors in the past to do this, and it causes death or illness among their patients that corrodes or seriously affects them, it is health. And if your tightness is slight, soft, different from the tightening of other fractures.
And if the wound is large or a bad wound, and you fear any harmful accidents that we have recommended, and you feel pain in this area, then do not cover with styes over this part, but make an enclosure of stiff cloths instead of styes and strengthen it around this.
And as soon as one or two days have passed and the wound begins to grow, then raise up from under the cloth which you had placed over this area in oil, and then administer calks, ointments as those that we are accustomed to heal wounds, thus like tetrarhamphacon and similar ones.
And it is important for you to loosen the bandage and consider the wound each day in the morning and evening until it has consolidated and hardened, and cover that the member is prepared in such a way that infection runs from him to your parts with ease.
If the wound lasts several days and is not consolidated or is still covered with oil, then know that you are dealing with small ones where you should cover the wound when you apply it. And of those small wounds that are separate and removed, and those that do not separate from them and put the member in place causing pain, force yourself to insert them according to what is possible for you.
And if it happens that the wound swells or decays, so it's styes or another type of corruption and putrefaction, then cover that you stop using one of those according to which is suitable for your treatment as previously detailed in its section.
And from this point forward when you have to do the best, make your presence felt: when bone is broken and protruding, it should be on the member like the bone of the thigh and the helper and similar ones among large members, and don't assume an injury to him or the removal that happens through this causes death; leave it there where it can fall naturally about xx days or .xxx. When you see the wound, then heal it if it is visible, and if not, leave it.
Chapter XX.
On the treatment of a miscarriage that occurs in the sign of any fracture.
These symptoms occur in this miscarriage at the sign of fracture healing, especially close to joints, and it inflames the figure of the limb; and strongly you prohibit the member from its normal operation.
So if the miscarriage is recent, consider administering medicines that have a stoppage effect like aloes, yew, vinegar, garlic, and onions; try some or all of them, and see which ones work when applied to that area. You should apply them on top of the miscarriage, and ensure they are bound properly for a good constriction.
And leave the constriction without removing it for several days; then remove and repeat with another until the miscarriage heals; or reinforce over that lead sheet, as lead has a property to reduce everything that swells in limbs.
If the miscarriage has already turned and is expelled, if necessary, cause the clot to come out gradually, then cut it along the upper part of him, and remove the excess or pinch that off with some threads until it heals. Heal it while it remains healthy.
Chapter XXI.
On the restoration of fractures when they are restored, and it is proper to manipulate the delicate member according to its natural state.
When a bone fracture is restored, and it is proper to manipulate the delicate member according to its natural state, this should not be done without reasons: among which one is an abundance of lymph fluid from the ligament and the action performed incorrectly; or due to excess constriction of the ligaments where nutrition cannot reach the limb; or due to excessive greasing; or due to unnecessary movement when it's not appropriate; or because of weakness in the patient's body and debility.
And the treatment for this is to give nourishment to the patient and make the heart of him tender until his strength multiplies in him; administer baths; and introduce warmth and joy on him.
And place heat on the limb, so that the heat attracts his body's nutrition, or continue greasing with fat mixed water, until nutrition flows and returns to its natural shape.
Chapter XXII.
On the treatment of bent bones that are restored improperly, and you prohibit their operation according to what is done.
When the member already restored is affected by healing of its deformation and enlargement of the bent bone and miscarriage, thus shaping the form of the limb, however, the member should not be prohibited from its natural operation, it only matters that you receive the word from him who exists that this member is new.
Only now do there exist many doctors and restorers who have done this in our land, and this operation is highly reproachable leading to great fear of the sign that makes one die.
If limping and miscarriage are recent, it should be that they are soaked in fat water containing soft herbs such as rue and parsley, among others; and this is done by applying the poultice of mollifying treatment similarly to how duckweed is treated well; or if it is taken with mucilage of parsley root and is wrapped in gray mullein or in camphor oil, and it is poulticed with that; or if figs are pressed with beeswax and are sewn with silk threads, among others, those like the medicines known as consolidating remedies.
And some times it is dissolved with continuous light rubbing and is applied to all parts of the limb at any time.
If deformity has already occurred and been done forcefully and turned into bone and caused the need for treatment with iron, it should be that pus is above it and the continuation of the bone is dissolved, and this excess from miscarriage is cut off towards the bone using fine scissors, and it is administered with care and study.
Chapter XXIII.
On the topic of dislocation.
Dislocation is the disturbance of any joint in its place, which prohibits movement and causes the figure of the limb to be upset; it brings pain and serious injuries upon the patient.
So when a dislocation occurs, it should be done promptly to force its reduction, and not delay that reduction; if it is delayed, the joint gets stuck and makes it difficult to perform the reduction of dislocation.
And for this purpose, it should not be that it is swollen or stretched during the time of immobilization, which causes various symptoms to produce seizures and piercing pain.
When this happens, it should be that you apply the flaxseed to the patient's body, and then leave it so that the swelling rests; and place the limb in warm water and oil, and try to reduce it easily.
And all limbs should be treated with what will bring back their memory to its place.
And I have already arranged the chapters on dislocation according to what was preceded in fractures; from the upper part of the body up to the lower part.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors. And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out. You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
On the treatment of dislocation of the jaw, leave it to do so.
So if both jaws are dislocated and cannot be handled; and the dislocation of both is performed according to two ways: that either they are gently moved back to their places by a little movement, and become somewhat softened; or they are completely dislocated and fully performed, within which they are softened at the part of the joint where saliva is coming out from the patient, and she/he cannot have it nor can she/he close her/his mouth, and her/his tongue is enveloped in that.
When the dislocation of the patient is slight, then through major adjustments it returns by itself due to a minor cause.
If the dislocation is complete and full, then it should be that reduction of her/his is administered slightly, and it should not be delayed in any way.
And the minister should have the head of the patient, and the doctor should enter his/her hand in the mouth of her/him, at the position of one of her/his hands on the side of the jaw dislocation within her/his mouth if it is a dislocation of one part; or he/she should enter both his/her hands simultaneously, if it is a dislocation of two parts, and the other commands are made towards the direction of her/his other hand outside which equalize; and command the patient to stop moving her/his jaws and make them go back from every side; and the doctor should adjust the jaw and insert the jaw so that it returns to its place.
And if the reduction of her/him is difficult, especially if both jaws are always dislocated, then administer sweat baths with water and oil, during which a slight reduction of both should be done without delaying the full reduction of both as we have said.
And once they return and are adjusted, and the mouth of the patient is closed and does not soften, then place over those powderfuls of drap with cerat, and do it using melted wax and oil; and let them be placed by facilitating the molten substances.
And let the patient sleep on his/her back, her/his head lying between two pillows, so that she/he does not twist at the right or left part; and do not force her/him to swallow for any reason; eat her/his food carefully in a solid form, until when the pains are relieved and the jaws are no longer dislocated, then let her/him have what she/he desires.
And let it be administered with ease, and do not perform any operation on the mouth during eating, drinking, and rest until the jaw is corrected and healed.
And if it is difficult to reduce two jaws when they are dislocated at any time and do not convert back to their original places, then hot baths and frequent doses of soda are advised, and strengthening the patient's digestion becomes necessary, and there should be plenty of water and an uncontrollable vomiting.
And when you do this, then know that it is a loss; and hot baths will kill the person to whom this happens within three days.
Capítulo XXV
On the reduction of the dislocation of the furcula and the end of the muscle.
The furcula is not dislocated within the cavity by its continuity with the bones; and sometimes it is dislocated at the site outside, which is declared by touch.
And the restoration of it is that the patient lies on his/her back and extends her/his arms. And apply pressure with your palm at the spot with strong pressure, so that it will return.
And place there plaster and powder, then strengthen it.
The end of that which is located on the chest and continues with it, will not be dislocated in any way; then it should be reduced and adjusted according to what we have said and according to your equipment.
And place there plaster, powder, and tightness, then command the patient to rest and have recovery until she/he is healed.
And in this particular treatment, it reduces the end of the muscle when it is separated from its place.
Capítulo XXVI
On the reduction of the dislocation of the muscle.
Know that the muscle is only dislocated in three ways, of which one is when it is dislocated at the site of the nipple to the left side.
And the second is when it is dislocated at the site above the muscle, which is done promptly; and it is not dislocated at the sites behind the shoulder; and it is not dislocated at the sites in front by nerves.
And especially it is dislocated and somewhat outside at the sites on the left of the nipple, especially in those with fewer muscles, slightly dislocated; more in those with many muscles, it goes out somewhat.
And force often happens to some people due to impact or blow, and the muscle of her/him is inflamed by a scab, and it gets dislocated because of this.
And when you know that she/he has done this while heavily burdened by her/him, then proceed with the treatment of her/him.
You are familiar with the dislocation when you touch the parts where they should move; so that you can distinguish between the dislocated muscle and its own muscle, which you find among those variously manifest phenomena; and you find in the head of the muscle a concavity and you must stimulate gently the head of the muscle like this as in a chicken, and for the patient not to be able to reduce their hand to their elbow area, nor even that one by all movements.
If it is dislocated you touch the hand or on it, and then you find a clear tenderness, and it is not concealed.
And from this dislocation there is slight reduction when it is cool and the patient feels better.
And the reduction of you is that the minister lifts your hand to its place; and then press your fingers on it gently, and lift the joint with strength in its own place, and the minister lifts your hand, and extends that one towards it; and then pause that there so that it returns slightly.
Maybe if by what we have said it doesn't return, and it's due to the nature of the dislocation, a few days later, then have the patient be bathed in hot water and administered a soothing ointment that calms and lines it like if it were high wheat straw, fennel, and dill in water, and administer it.
And have the patient lie on their back and press gently with your fingers, wait until there's an equal balance between lightness and tightness, then the doctor places his hand on the spot, lifts the head of the muscle with force, pulls the patient's arm so it doesn't hurt in the affected area, and another minister holds the head of the patient's arm, making sure it doesn't get hurt in those parts, until that very soon returns to its place.
And if you wish, reduce that second in this manner: and make it so there's a man present longer than the patient, who is on his side, he inserts his muscle with your fingers on the affected area of the patient, lifts your fingers up to the parts above him while the malaute hangs in the air between them, and another minister pulls the patient's arm from the affected parts below his belly. Maybe if the patient is slight, then it might be that another cause is suspended, because for one that's serious, where the dislocation returns very quickly.
And it is reduced by means of another method: and you place in the ground a long pole whose head has the shape of a ball, like a mortar's handle, which shouldn't be thick nor thin, then have the patient lay with his hand extended to the affected parts on the other side; and extend your body from the other side with strength, so that the joint returns to its place quickly.
And if it's difficult to reduce you for all the causes we've mentioned, then use this remedy: and you take a pole whose length is that of two arm spans, and its thickness is four digits, and the roughness of it should be as in this form:
And have linen strips wrapped around the round head to make sure the pole doesn't hurt the patient.
And then place your fingers on the affected area of the patient, and extend their hand or arm over the pole within those parts, and hold the pole against the support and arm and the end of the hand.
And hold your arm on a step ladder according to its thickness, and extend your hand to those affected parts, and the other body is suspended from the other side, so that the joint comes back very quickly.
And when the means of you is completed according to any method that is possible for you, then have your wait with a woolen cloth of equal quantity; and have it covered in an ointment prepared from moli powder mixed with chicken egg white over all the muscle, like it's being stirred on top. And press gently on it until it becomes tight enough; and mix the mixture on the ointment, and your hand is attached to your neck, and leave it alone, making sure not to hurt your hand for seven days.
And have the food of the patient be minimal, during which time the member is comforted, which is easier to heal for you.
And have the food be given in larger portions around seven or five days and exercise some movement; and thus if it's closed and not softened, then already it is healed.
Maybe if the joint is dislocated due to moisture that affects it or for another reason, then you should administer a cautery in three places, according to what was said in the section on cautery as mentioned earlier.
And if all this has been done and after seven days the ligament and joint are released, but the plaster and stiffness remain in some areas, not closed and so cannot lift that arm to those parts above, then you should know the nerves of it, which are at the head of the muscle, have already been cut or stretched or softened, and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
From the dislocation of that which is done on the feet and nipples or behind the parts, the reduction is done with pressure and extension at the hands, until it returns.
And when it comes to treating that other constriction, cure it while waiting for healing.
And if the recovery of gravity happens close to the body part and the return of movement takes time, then the patient uses moistened clay bandages until that gravity is relieved and returns to its original nature.
Chapter XXVII.
On the treatment of dislocation of the shoulder.
Know that the shoulder joint is dislocated with difficulty and similarly returns with difficulty; this dislocation occurs in all directions, but more so towards the front than behind. The dislocation of it cannot be hidden whether you feel or touch it according to whatever figure it may have been dislocated, and when you adjust the dislocated shoulder to its place, it is made clear to you, for the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm, nor touch upon itself that muscle.
And consider the shoulders, and reduce the dislocation as soon as you find the dislocated area. For when it reaches that hollow in your hand, reducing it becomes difficult, and if it's located at this hollow in your hand, it is very hard to restore everything, so recovery is not complete; especially when it happens behind, which among all other types of dislocation, causes more pain, and hot moistened clay leads to death.
And the restoration of it, when that is possible to reduce, is when your hand is extended between two breasts, and your arm is spread out, and the doctor's hands are on the shoulder and under you, and you push the joint against the doctor's breasts or against the edge of his palm while he returns to its place.
If the dislocation is in the front parts, then return it by bending your hand onto his hand, while hitting the shoulder against the edge of his palm.
And if the dislocation does not yield to reduction, then administer strong extension and forceful motion.
And it is that two ministers stretch their arms, and hold this tension between the two ministers so that it does not diminish with extension.
And then rotate the arm entirely, because it is enveloped in folded long cloth over his hand, or elsewhere.
And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, grease that with some oil so that those causes which help in the lubrication of the joint for ease are facilitated; and then forcefully push the joint into pressure until it returns.
And the reduction of it comes when placed upon that mat on which stiffness and mobility are provided with lard, and stretched against the dislocation downwards; the arm should be hung from the neck, and left for a few days.
And then it should be released; and therefore if the joint has formed in its place, then you release the bandage on him and leave that.
And if you see that the joint is not strengthening, then you reapply the plaster and bandage, and leave it for some days until it stretches out; then release that.
And if gravity occurs near the reduction of the joint, and your position is in movement, then apply moistening in the bath and subtle friction, until it is relieved; or place yourself over the joint to rest on a fatty skin cushion; then bind it, and leave that on the bone during the day and night. And then hold that, and immerse that in the bath; and when it's clean, then rub the joint with seasoned friction, and then place yourself on that to rest twice, once as fat grease for movement, and then the second time, and the third time,. Corruption has already penetrated inside the body during treatment, within its limit.
And if you wish, rest on that wet and scorched opening with a hot iron; and do this several times until it's damp again and returns to its position.
Chapter XXVIII.
On the treatment of dislocation of the elbow joint, which is between the arm and the hand.
The elbow joint of the hand occasionally is dislocated, and the reduction of this dislocation is easy. The opposite is true for other joints, but it comes with speed in the reduction of it before the hollow area stops or an applanation occurs with a heated point.
And the reduction of the dislocation of it is that you stop the elbow joint of the patient on a table and have one minister extend his hand. And the doctor pauses his hand or palm over the edge of the joint, and pushes that until it returns to its place.
But it should be considered whether the palm has already been placed against the belly of the hand; then the patient should pause both of his hands on a table with extension and reduction; if the dislocation is anterior, then the position of the hand of him is inherently on the table, so that the doctor's hand falls over this edge of the joint.
And if it returns immediately, it's good; and otherwise, then strengthen that with plaster over the hollow area and leave it; and don't repeat this, for otherwise, you can neither endure nor manage the reduction of it when days have passed.
But the joint moves according to its curvature; and do not blame the patient for any cause, but only when the hand is softened and cannot endure any cause; then you should know that the nerves are injured or cut off, and then it's impossible in him unless strengthened with a cauterized area and make it endure some cause.
When the diseased area returns, then place on their dressing which we have replaced, and let it be left and strengthened for three days; and then gently remove it and leave it, exercising your hands upon them.
If the patient's movements are still limited and cause discomfort, then apply a warm water compress and do some mild friction exercises, during which they will find relief.
Chapter XXIX.
On the treatment of dislocations of fingers.
Some symptoms cause dislocation of fingers in all directions.
And when one or more fingers are dislocated towards the back of the hand or inside them, then hold the finger and push the dislocation with your thumbs until it returns.
And next hold the head of the finger, and lift up that part to which it is dislocated, and leave it for two days.
And then lift that up and extend it until its length is equal to the original length of it on its second day.
And when it is morning, let him continue according to that instruction, and do not cease removing it during the day and exercising with movements, and let him rest at night; and do this for several days until it is straightened.
And pretend to do so if it is dislocated in the back of the hand, let him rest towards that part and perform your first operation on it until he is healed.
And similarly do so when it is dislocated in other parts.
Chapter XXX.
On the treatment of dislocations of the two spines.
When a complete dislocation occurs in one of the spines of the neck or back, and you remove the affected spine, then there is no cure for that, as death will overtake the patient.
The sign of this is that the patient's bodily waste goes out without their will and they cannot retain it; and some symptoms cause softening of certain parts or legs of them, or on both sides of them, or two spines; or removing one spine from its place causes bleeding spots to appear and bleeding spots are made in the removal of those to four directions.
Then that has already been moved behind, it is named yellowishness.
As for the treatment of this, you should consider if the yellowishness is due to infancy; in which case there is no cure and he cannot be fully healed.
In cases that occur through injury or impact or similarly to those, the Ancient methods of treatment were detailed and extensive, as such, I have returned to the essence; however, I have briefly summarized from this for which there is little excuse for too much text due to its proximity to my understanding and exposition, with which I have laid out and organized various tools of that which I will demonstrate and explain here.
And only that which occurs in both properly at what I have described is cured of those.
And that the patient should be laid down on his face with his head close to a wall, and spread out his legs as far as possible until not even his feet are touching.
And next, a stick straight should be placed, fixed in the ground at the end of the wall near the head, and another stick should be laid under his feet on the opposite side of the wall.
And the attendant holds the stick, not making it too tight in a hole; and another attendant holds the other according to that form.
And next wrap around the head of the patient and tie them tightly with a lion's hair band; extend the end of this band to the stick which should be under his head, lay him there; and then tighten the other band over his buttocks and knees, make sure they are in line with his feet; and adjust all the bands and let those lie on the other stick which should be under his feet.
And next the attendant extends the band at the junction of the stick, and do not move or tighten both sticks and the bands in which they are located, but rather, do not tighten them as we have said.
And the doctor holds his palms on the spine with strength until it returns; or he holds one of them on that table and next makes sure to adjust his feet on the table until they return.
If it does not return in this way, then take a table whose width or length is about three feet, and dig out the wall as we said that there should be a place for the patient between the end of the table. And next place the back of the table on the spine, the doctor places his feet at the other end, and stretches until the spine is compressed and returns to its place.
And if you want, open the one that is twisted in the hand; and it is that you place on the ground the head of the patient at the back of the wall with two sticks, their length being a foot, and place his head at the back of the wall similarly with two sticks; and make sure that the distance between each stick is a hand's width, and this has been done in each stick to pull towards which turns around, and each should be firmly planted on the ground so as not to move.
And there is a rod in which it twists, and it revolves on both sides of the two shafts.
And at the extremity of him is a rod in which the shaft is formed, its length being about as much as his hand that revolves it; and on the other two shafts there are similar ones.
And then strengthen the ligaments that you have tightened in the legs of the patient on the rod which is at the head of him, and the ligaments that you have tightened on his thighs on the turn which is under his feet.
And near each turn place one minister who twists the turn with his hand, and the doctor adjusts the spondyl as we have said.
And once the spondyl has been returned and the area has been adjusted, then cover it with a poultice of dried excrescence in the album of hog's grease, and place a stop; and over the poultice lay a board whose width is about three digits or around that amount, and its length corresponds to the area of fatness, and on the part of the spondyl there.
And near it lies the ligament that we said, and use the patient with subtle nourishment so that he is healed.
And if there is any lingering concern in the area at the end of the healing, then cover that with medications that soften and clean up until the board period, which we recommended; and already an antimony leaf has been administered in that area.
And some boils occur right at the end of the spondyls of both, and it is twisted due to that dislocation; and those bones are which already have an issue so that one should not expect any suspicion towards him with this medicine, which will cause you to experience death.
Capitol thirty-one.
Of the treatment for a dislocated hip joint.
Know that the joint of the thigh and the joint of the muscle do not deserve anything other than dislocation only, and it does not happen to them what happens to the other joints with slight movement and cavities.
And the joint of the thigh is dislocated according to four manners, which are dislocated towards the inward parts, or towards the outward parts, or towards the front parts, or towards the back parts.
And mostly it is dislocated towards the inward parts, and few towards the front parts or towards the back parts.
And the sign of dislocation towards the inward parts is that when you adjust the healthy knee on the thigh, it becomes longer, and his foot becomes more prominent than in the healthy side, the thigh cannot bend his leg against his tongue, and this is where the tongue gets stuck under a cauterization burn, so that the head of the thigh bone has already penetrated here.
And the sign for those to whom dislocation happens is towards the outward parts, it is that his accidents are contrary to this accident.
And the sign for those to whom dislocation happens towards the front parts is that he expands his healthy side according to a complement, however it does not bend that pain which is in the thigh, and if it is forced toward going and cannot do so; and his urine is retained, his tongue gets stuck, and you should place his walking on his foot.
And the sign for those to whom dislocation happens towards the back parts is that he does not expand his thigh, nor can bend it in front where bending would touch his tongue, and his knee is shorter than the other one, and his tongue gets softened, and the head of the thigh bone should be at that location.
The possible reduction of the various types of this dislocation is that you consider it. If the dislocation is old and ancient, that has already happened to him with his previous handling, then when you administer this to him according to its disposition, then not in all that treatment; hence do not expect any suspicion from that treatment.
As for the one whose dislocation is recent and of one of the four types of dislocation, then you have to return the joint and extend that towards the inward parts and outward parts, and move it to the right and left sides, which forces him back and does not require another treatment.
If it doesn't return in this manner, then prepare a strong servant and extend his healthy side from the part that you have prepared, or on his thighs, or on the ligament which is attached above the healthy part; and another servant extends his hand towards him to place his thighs under yours. And strengthen with ligaments over the tendon of his thigh, and hold another servant at the extremity of the ligament.
And for extension of him or from the inward part to the bend at the waist part, or from the back part to the part of the other.
And for all those extensions in one go, where his thigh is elevated on his body of earth and hangs down.
And this type of extension is common to all four.
And therefore, if the dislocation returns as we said, it is good; and otherwise, then for every type it requires the proper treatment which we will discuss.
In the reduction of his own, when it is dislocated, and the dislocation is towards the inward parts, then let his thigh be tucked under his buttock; and place the ligaments over the tendon of his thigh in that location where between the head of his thigh bone and the location where he gets stuck with his tongue. And extend the ligament from the side of the bend to the other waist part.
And then another attendant vigorously takes hold of the patient's arms, softens the large area on the bad thigh, and extends all parts outward through strong expansion, so that it returns to its place.
And this method is for a slighter cure of the limb when it is reduced compared to other methods.
May if you excuse me and do not follow this treatment method entirely, then I will have you place your hands on both thighs at the same time firmly but gently, evenly across both knees and ankles.
And the length of each is equal to the size of four fingers, and the bad leg should be extended more than the other by two finger widths.
And then the bad leg should be suspended over the head of the staff, and it should be in the left hand. And the length from the ground to him is equal to two arms.
And then instruct a strong youth to hold the foot of the bed down, and have another strong youth suspend the bad leg with him. And let the other youth pull the body up with great strength, so that the joint returns to its place quickly.
And in the self-reduction, when there is dislocation outward, have the bad leg move according to what we recommended during the hot bath; and strengthen the ligaments over the swollen area of the bad leg and over its ankles.
And then two staffs should be placed, one under the foot of him/her, and the other on top; and two adjusted staffs should be positioned halfway along the length laid out with wet cloths wrapped around them, so that the bad leg is not dampened by the staff being between his/her thighs, for you must ensure that the extension to the parts left is not pulled.
And then each attendant should extend his/her part, and the doctor holds the reduction with his hand according to the art.
And when the dislocation is at the parts in front, then let the swollen area be extended slightly, and do it according to this half of the story about the body; and the doctor places the palm of his right hand on the back of the bad leg, and moves it with his left hand, and during that movement he keeps extending the parts left until reaching the ankle.
And if the dislocation is at the parts behind, then do not let the bad leg be extended to the left and right parts, but elevate it above the ground; hold it on a hard cause such as a pillow, as when handling an egg if its width is dislocated outward, according to how we discussed his position on two widths; and it's over his face and the ligaments are stretched, as we said, almost exactly.
And let there be applied pressure on the table at the place where the joint is located.
So, when the reduction is completed according to what you do - and you cannot hide the signal of the reduction in him/her, which means that you extend both parts from the bad leg, and when you make those adjustments and the bad leg extends its swollen part and spreads its discomfort area, then you know that the limb has been returned as it should be. Then you adjust two things and apply the dressing and spread them out in this way so that no width is damaged in any of the parts; and keep the bad leg at rest for three or four days.
And then loosen the bandage and dressing, and compare one part to the other.
And then, if you see those adjustments have been made evenly in his/her condition, then you know that the dislocation has already been closed, and therefore allow him/her to go.
And if you see any cause of healing, then return and plaster that area again, extend it according to your first extension, and let it rest for three days.
And then remove that, have him/her stay in bed for some days until he/she is comfortable with walking around.
Chapter xxxii.
Regarding the treatment of ankle dislocation.
The ankle can be dislocated in three ways: it is dislocated outward, inward, and more to the sides than towards behind; and it is not dislocated at the front.
And the signal of ankle dislocation is that you command the bad leg to press its swollen part against the foot; then you know that the ankle has been dislocated.
And the restoration of all these ways is that you straighten out the bad leg, as if it can extend its swollen part; attach your two hands to his face, and place his foot between your feet; then have another attendant hold the ankle with both hands and pull them back in their strength, while another extends his foot until the ankle returns to its place.
And the signal of recovery is that its swollen part adheres to the foot with ease, without causing any strain.
And then plaster that area and make the swollen part adhere to the foot, and let those adjustments rest for one bend for three or four days, and remove those plasters.
Do not use the patient for walking for a few days until they are healed and comforted.
If the reduction of the patient to you is justified, then administer a strong extension of the ligaments in which there is a prior narrative about the hip's healing process.
Chapter xxxiii.
Regarding the treatment of the dislocation of the tibia.
The tibia is sometimes slightly displaced by small movements, and in other cases it is dislocated according to the complement, and the dislocation of the patient is either caused internally or externally.
And the sign of the dislocation of the patient is that when the tibia swells up, moving towards the part where it is dislocated.
The treatment of correcting your displacement is a gentle exercise, and it should be done with ease on the hands and should be balanced until it returns.
When treating your case where it is dislocated according to the complement, you should make the patient lie straight down, and have a strong and brave servant hold that part behind the two of those in the middle of him.
And then position your own right hand under the knee and your left hand on the lower part of the chest in the place of the groove.
And then pull the chest towards you with your right hand, and move the left side twice, and extend the left. And push the bottom of the chest from the right to work on the curve.
And perform these two movements as we have discussed.
And then push the bottom of the chest towards the curve on the third movement, and you are at the groove.
So if it returns in one or two movements according to this method, and if you find the chest even, it's good; and otherwise, then on that condition repeat the operation, until it returns.
If you are prevented from reducing the patient as we have advised, then make the patient lie on his back on the ground, and place a piece of cloth on the floor, and fix a strong pole in solid earth, and put it between the thighs of the patient, and already wrap a sheet around him to prevent slipping off the cloth.
And then the servant of the patient holds his thighs, and another servant extends the chest with his hands or on the ligaments that lie over the chest; and also extend each servant against their own extension side, and the pole is present between the thighs of the patient to hold him, so that the body of the patient does not pull towards the parts behind his extension.
And then the surgeon balances the dislocation with his own hands, and another servant holds the healthy thigh in the parts behind, so that the dislocation returns smoothly.
And when the dislocation returns and is declared to you as healed by your treatment, then apply plaster and strengthen that area strongly with strong ligaments, and bind the chest against the curve.
And when you fear or protect yourself from the nerves which are behind over the tibia, so that the ligament over it does not become too strong and damage it strongly.
And then allow him to rest for two days or three; and if the ligament is softened, strengthen that area again.
And then gently move him on the third day or the fourth, and prohibit the patient from walking for ten days. If it is forced to walk in front of that space, not until the certainty that the dislocation has not dissolved and corrupted over him, then what does not receive treatment should not be done.
And if you happen to open an abscess cut, then know that you should administer in the reduction of him what we previously mentioned in our narrative, in another place of healing and coating until it is corrected.
Chapter xxxiv.
Regarding the treatment of dislocation of the toes of the feet.
So that the one that is dislocated is balanced with a little extension several times; and what is not difficult, before it becomes easier.
If the dislocation is in some joints of his foot, then know that you should make him lie with his back on a level spot or on a table, and being standing as if he was walking.
And then you stand with your weight on that which corresponds to the joints, and move his feet against the curve of your hand until it returns, and see him already balanced without any appearance at the corresponding spot.
And then pause with the belly of his chest on a table that takes all his feet, which has two ends, and strengthen him against a firm structure for three days; and then gently move him to rest from walking for some more days until it is strengthened and assurance of improvement is established.
Chapter xxxv.
Regarding the various types of dislocation that may occur with inflammation or in fracture or at any time.
When any cause of those happens, and you engage in the treatment of that and restoring him/her, many movements may lead to death.
And so do not presume on the treatment of him/her, but rather, whoever is knowledgeable in this art with long use, compassionate and merciful, slow, non-impulsive and not presumptuous; who uses only medicines that allow pus to drain out completely, and leaves the patient to divine judgment, not to any other person hoping for salvation from disease, aiming for alleviation of illness, where there appears some hope. And immediately strive to make him/her reduce in the beginning of the cure, before it turns into a pus-filled wound.
And when the limb returns as we wish, then administer treatment which allows for a cautery and heals the wound in such a way that is convenient to you from the dry ointments.
And if dislocation occurs like a fracture and happens in the separated bones of the skull, then you puncture their articulations, and proceed as we have said for simple injuries that precede those in these areas.
And according to your skill, follow that in the inner chamber as per the paths of fear following my instruction; this is what is better for you from your Creator, more permanent for your glory, and more healthful than those you will see in your time. Thus ends the words of Al-Bu'瘴im perfectly from which God may be praised. Amen.
