Oh children, grant me your patience as I complete this book, which is the last part of medical science, and for its completion it brings to fruition his health, and through its explanations, and through its declarations, in my view, I believe that I have completed that towards you with this treatise, which forms part of the operation with me, it is surgery.
The operation with me is reduced to our region and in our time it was entirely private, through which the risk of its science increases, and its traces have remained; and without progress from it, except a few small descriptions in the works of the Ancients, which correct the mistakes and errors among those who are confined within their explanations and extend the effort and skill.
And it is seen to me that I will enliven this order of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and so as to come upon the forms of the tools of cautery and other workshop instruments such as for addition in the declaration, and for preparation which is necessary.
The reason for why it is not possible to find a good artisan in his own trade in this our time, is because the art of medicine is long and complicated. It requires being trained beforehand in the science of anatomy as Gualia knew about the joints of the limbs and their forms, as well as their connection and separation; he had knowledge of bones, nerves, and muscles, including the number of each and how to handle them; and also about pulsating veins and quiet ones, and the places of their secretion.
And that's why it is said by Hippocrates that in his name there is a lot of work, but more so in the minor part, and greatly in the art of hands.
And we have already mentioned this in the introduction of this book; whoever does not know what we have told about anatomy will inevitably fall into error which can cause death to people, as I have seen too many cases like that. Some are formed in this science and then leave it for another field of study and its experiments.
And I saw a skilled doctor who had applied an abscess on the neck of a woman and then opened some arteries in her neck, causing great blood to flow that resulted in her death before many could help.
And I saw another doctor who was about to swallow the gallstone of a man who had gotten stuck in his state, and the stone was large, it passed into him and dissolved that gallstone with a piece of the bladder, so that man died on the third day.
And I already tried to extract that stone, and I saw that due to the size of the gallstone and the position of the patient below him, it would result in his death.
And I saw another doctor who was taking a salary from the Duke of our country for surgery, and he ended up on a black soldier whom had been wounded in his leg; and with his lack of knowledge, he extracted the fracture from him, covering the wound with poultices and splints made of strong material, and did not allow air to escape from the wound.
And it proceeds according to his wishes, and it is dressed with bandages, and it is treated for several days as commanded that we release him. And thus when the leg and foot are infected, it ends in loss.
And I tried to apply this on him, and arranged to release his tension, resulting in calmness and alleviation of his pain.
However, corruption was already confirmed in the limb, so I couldn't control that, and it didn't stop spreading the corruption through the limb before the patient's life could be endangered.
And I saw another doctor who drilled an abscess on cancer, and was inflamed for several days after that, during which the severity of his disease became evident to its lord.
The reason for this is that the cancerous lump is pure of melancholic humor, so it does not allow itself to spread throughout completely, but rather that there's a limb being affected by which everything was poisoned.
And for this reason, children, it is necessary for you that the operation with me be divided into two parts: one being in operation associated with health, and another in work where there's great risk in major positions.
And I have already established this throughout all sections of this book concerning operations where errors and fear occur; so it is necessary for you to keep this in mind and refrain from telling others, lest your pages be taken out of context and mislead.
And so take your weapons for the service and protection of God, and your patients for happiness and strength.
And use the best way by God's grace for salvation and possible succession, and leave your terrible illnesses with difficult recovery, and keep your weapons from what makes you fear, so that endurance is in your faith and in your name does not fail: those more remain to your glory, further in the world and finally to your sanctity.
Gualia had already said in some of his monastic sayings: "Do not treat terrible illnesses with bad doctors, for it is the fault of bad doctors that one does not recover".
And I have completed this book according to three chapters.
Starting the division of the work, and beginning with the first part of the first section. The first ordered chapter in the section about feet, concerning the tools and instruments of cautery and what is necessary for their operation.
The division of the second part. The second chapter, about drying and piercing, as well as about suction cups, boils, extraction of arrows, and matching them to those, all organized by the forms of the tools.
The third chapter, about restoration and dislocation, as well as treatment of twists and matching them to those; a chapter ordered on operations in the feet, and concerning the forms of the tools.
Let me tell you about the quality of those cautery tools and their use, as well as when it is forbidden to use a cautery.
Therefore, the discourse about the quality of cautery needles and their materials is long and tedious, subtle in science, and secretly concealed; many great scholars have spoken on this subject and they disagree among themselves. I am content with a small part of their discourses, fearing overindulgence.
And so I say that the cautery agrees with all parts universally based on their material or multiple materials, except for two parts, which are those of the anus and rectum.
In the part of the anus and rectum, there is a material that would dry out; some people say that the cautery should be used for this condition, while others argue against it. They say that it is not convenient to use cautery in illnesses characterized by their nature and dryness, because fire (or heat) and dryness are what cause illnesses of the anus and rectum to improve when treated with heat or drying processes.
And those who say the opposite argue that cautery should be used for any young illness of the anus and rectum that occurs in human bodies. When you compare a human body with its humidity to the nature of fire, you find that the human body is already hot.
And I say according to their discourse, something that I have experienced several times before discovering it myself.
However, I do not intend to delve into what has already been elaborated upon in the section on cautery procedures and exercises, nor have I come to understand the diversity of human body parts and the disposition of illnesses within them, as well as their causes, occurrences, and the time periods associated with these.
In other parts of the body, there is nothing to fear, especially with respect to damp and moist illnesses; all doctors are already familiar with these conditions, and they do not disagree on using cautery in such cases.
And know, children, about the secret of healing through cautery with fire and its benefit; this is about cautery with burning medicine. The fire itself is simple, its action only affects the member being cauterized and does not spread to other members without a small harm.
The action of burning medicine reaches there to those members from which it emanates, and strongly prompts the difficult healing of the diseased member and effectively suppresses it.
The fire, thanks to its superiority and the goodness of its substance, does not do anything except overflow. We have come to know this through experience and long years of service in studying the art and understanding its causes; thus I excuse myself for the length of my discourse, for there is no mention of it in my work about this hidden knowledge of fire, and the quality of its operation within bodies and its expulsion via which you expel illnesses, with a philosophical demonstration that would sharpen your minds.
And know, children, that they disagree about the time in which it is suitable to do cautery and pause the best springtime.
And I say that cautery is convenient at any time because the inconvenience due to accidental delay is submerged by the youth that comes from what follows after the cautery and especially if cautery is for pain or necessary pains, strong aches and swellings which do not tolerate tardiness as feared for those causing malice, which exceeds small harm entering through time.
And do not doubt this in your minds, or, children, that which only considers the common people and lay doctors say, is that there is not an absolute time for all illnesses to be healed by cautery, and they pause at those consequences.
And the reason is not that they are worried about this, because cautery is only medicine in a place where it alters the constitution and dries up the humidity which is the cause of pains.
But, nonetheless, unnecessary cautery in addition to medicine due to the value and virtue of its operation and the greatness of its master.
And it's possible that its illness could return at some point in time, depending on the nature of the ailment and the location of your illness, as well as its virtue, what has been prepared within you from the addition of excesses in you, and what is consumed by you through food and items related to those causes; unless the illness treated with cautery is a subtle illness affecting parts with few excesses and humidity. Like tooth cautery for pain and things related to that, it's possible that such pain doesn't return within you, but this happens in small cases.
A common medical term is that cautery is the last tool of medicine, and this is a professional discourse, not something I understand in it, they believe that there is no cure that improves with medicine or other cause leading to cautery.
The reason is opposite to that; and I understand that cautery is the last tool of medicine only when administering methods of treatment in some diseases, those medicines do not provide relief, and at the end of the cause one administers cautery, and improves with that. And from here it is known that cautery is the last tool of medicine, not according to my understanding which agrees with the vulgar and many doctors.
And it was said by the ancients that cautery with gold is better than cautery with iron, and they did not say this simply because of the equality of gold and the inferiority of its substance.
And it was said that the location for cautery does not make a mark, as this is only partially true, because I have already done this and found out that it doesn't do that in certain conditions; gold cautery is good and better than iron in that case as they say; however, when you do cautery with fire using gold, it's not been clearly explained to you, since the heat depends on the quantity you want according to the strength of the gold, and what needs to be received for the process; and if you adjust the fire above it, the gold melts in the fire, and sometimes a few layers are produced that allow the artisan to work on it based on the size of that piece.
And because of this, when doing cautery with iron, you should apply it more gently and more precisely in line with the operation.
And I have already organized this chapter on cautery according to sections, I have organized those pertaining to the foot under it, so that I can request what you want from them.
The first section.
This cautery treatment allows the dampness and cold to cause the unfortunate incident of which there are two causes, it is the source of swelling and an abundance of traumatic fluxes, called aural flushing, from the head down to the extremities and ears, as well as all kinds of sleeping disorders, toothache, gout, and universally for any ailment that comes from coldness, such as paralysis, acidity, and apoplexy, and is similar in those ailments.
The method for this cautery treatment is as follows: first, you instruct the patient to undergo a purging with an emetic medicine on their head every three or four nights, according to what suits the patient and their age and their usual practice.
And then you instruct them to shave their head with a razor, and then they should apply the points on their neck on a flat surface, and place their hands on their feet.
And then you place the palm of your hand near the nose tip between their ears. However, when you have found the right location as instructed by your guide, mark that spot with charcoal and then ignite olive cautery of which this is the form:
And then place that (cautery) on the marked spot under pressure, in such a way that your hand is gradually squeezed down, and you rotate that.
And then lift your hand gently and look at the spot, and if you see that some quantity of the head is exposed, like the amount of wax, in this case raise your hand, and if not, turn your hand towards iron or another one, if it's coldness, so that you can see from the mouth what I've told you.
And then take a little salt and dissolve it on that spot and leave it for three days.
And then place the burned stick in ash and leave it on him until the ashes of the fire are destroyed. And then treat the area with tetrapharmakon ointment until it is healed.
And it was said that when the wound opens up, then the mark heals better and is more rejuvenated, so it's better and more advantageous.
And some of them say that when the canal is burned inside the mouth, then keep the cautery until it becomes reddened from a part of the color of the bone.
And then make this mark which adheres to the bone, and then treat it well.
And others say that when you reach the end of the cautery, you should proceed inside the mouth until it becomes strong and then the bone falls out, this is the form for small alpha cautery: And they estimate that from that spot, vapor from the head escapes.
And if the wound is open for a long time, then it should be healed until it becomes consolidated.
And yet, I have not seen these two species of head cautery in all their forms, but rather in some people according to fear; leave it as is, you should know that the best thing is with health, whenever it happens; when the head is treated by solar heat continuity of what we have testified in other members, and especially when the patient's head has a cool nature.
The first species of head cautery is better saved for me, and from that point onwards, do the work with health.
Second section.
From the head's cautery.
When throughout the entire head there occurs a chronic and long pain, and this extends in the thigh for an extended period, using wars, drums, cymbals, bandages, plasters, gloves, swords, and other tools, mostly if one has already undergone a cautery with a cautery which resists these causes without being worsened by them; then consider that if the thigh of the patient is of strong creation in its nature; and does not endure much friction or fatigue; then this cautery should be repeated again; and the other leaves a small one to the first. And place that one on the patient's forehead with an inner cautery, where the disease is divided. Make an incision and expose the amount of disease from the mouth that we have recounted, then apply cautery to it with a cautery in the rear part behind the head at the location which is called the artery -- and this is the area where suction is placed. And comfort your hand with aloe, and do not expose the mouth, for this patient undergoes great pain from this method differently than the pain from all other head cauteries.
And I say this about this cautery in its location, for it seems that the cautery with which you apply to the horns of the head and the occiput is more subtle than this one which applies to the middle part of the head; and this is how he does it.
Headache resolved.
Regarding the new migraines cautery treatment.
When there is pain in the rear part of the head or an internal pain in the skull, it should be treated with medicines that cool and calm the head. Then we apply the other treatment, which I have mentioned in treatments for illnesses of the head; without exaggeration, then the new migraines cautery procedure involves two methods: one is to use a cauterization with an acute burning medicine, or with iron.
When using a cauterizing medicine, you should take a dollop of alum, heat it and then apply the softened ends to both parts of the head. And place the location of the pain in the temple with a small needle where it was cut open, and leave the incision closed.
And strengthen over it with the stoppage of descent due to contraction, and release that by the spaces of three hours; then wash off and dry the alum, and leave the wound for two or three days, and place your hand on its back submerged in water until the spot turns red.
And heal that with ointment where it is healed.
And if you see this, do as I have written about some burning medicines in my treatise on burning medicines.
The cautery using iron is as follows: heat it to the degree of which this is the form:
And this is called ironing on the head, which makes the head appear like a thorn with some curvature, and in the middle part of it there is a small elevation.
And place your hand on the location of the pain, and rub it - so that you don't burn the skin which is left - and slowly rotate the small iron with speed.
And if the quantity that gets burned due to the intensity of the pain is more than half of it, raise your hand so that the artery which is left isn't burned, so that no blood flow occurs.
And then soak the cloth in salt water and place it over the area, leave it for three days; and afterwards place the moist cloth on water, and treat with ointment once it's healed.
And if you see this, apply the cautery at the end of the surgical blade according to the old method, and be careful not to cause an arterial incision in this new migraine.
Headache resolved for the fourth time.
Regarding the old migraines cautery treatment.
When you treat migraines with what we have discussed about the previous treatment and in the divisions of headaches, without exaggerating the treatment, due to this headache not being enough for what we have said regarding the first cautery with medicine or the cautery with fire, it seems that you should ignite the surgical blade until it becomes white, because place your hand on the location of the pain at the line of its length which is most relevant in our discussion or do so; and then rest your hand for a moment and press there while you incise the skin and go into the skull.
However, it is necessary for you to guard against the continuation of the jawbone which makes chewing difficult, and that the wound not be burned and the nerves that are sensitive to this, and that there does not occur muscle spasms.
And if it's about the custody and caution of blood flow from the artery that is cut, where there is fear at the cut, especially to those who don't know what they are doing and aren't studious and anxious; leave the operation as it was begun.
And I will recall here the regulation of blood flow in case of an accidental cut to the artery according to this method, in its place in this text.
And if you see this headache that doesn't satisfy this cautery and sees the skull tolerable, apply this cautery in the middle part of the head as we recounted, and treat the wound until it is healed.
And if you see, apply the cautery we have mentioned for the tip of the scab on the heel's surface with two needles, and this is better cauterization and more beneficial.
Head / top
Regarding the cauterization of earache.
When there is pain in the ear due to cold and other causes as I mentioned in the division, and if the pain isn't relieved by this cure, then apply fire to the cautery, and this is what we call 'pointed' cautery, of which this is the form:
And place the point near the heat source, and let it touch around the entire ear area like a wheel is turned, or in the circuit of any moments if the pain occurs anywhere. Continue with the ear cautery little by little until you have identified and tried the place.
And if the cautery hits all these points on the ear, and you find that place, then properly treat the areas inside where they are healing.
Head / sixth
Regarding the cauterization of back pain.
Back pain which is treated and in cauterization consists only of the species that I mentioned as causing pain due to phlegm, according to what we have discussed in sections on illnesses.
Avoid cauterization for the species that causes due to dryness or muscle spasm of nerves.
When you treat that species of back pain with dyes and head baths and sweat-inducing remedies, and if your treatment doesn't agree, then follow this method when you cauterize the patient: the first is for the ear, the second slightly less so, in its warm zone, and the third is for the junction of two lips.
And pause your cauterization on the opposite side of the back problem, where there's only a soothing effect in that area that turns healthy.
And the method of cauterization is to apply it on the tip side of the ear's end with a little above the corn of the head, and on the warm zone, its length according to the length of the said hand, and then pause your hand when the quantity corresponding to the species' essence is burned.
And this is how it's done with a cautery tool, which is a speciality of surgeons, the shape of which is explained on table. However, it's more subtle that you should do this with a few; and when the needle is in its superfluous thickness, just do a little.
And then treat the area until what was done in process turns healthy.
Head / seventh
Regarding the cauterization of old apoplexy (stroke).
When apoplexy is old and you treat it as we have said, but your medicine doesn't agree with the patient and they don't have fever, then cauterize that area with four cauteries: over all parts of their head; and on this head's side like we said; and also do it in the throat. The method of cauterization is done according to what has been mentioned before.
And when it's cauterized over the mouth of the stomach; and more towards the rear; and then treat with what is being done.
Head / eighth
Regarding cauterization caused by phlegm leading to forgetfulness.
And ensure that the patient is given large doses of dyes and pellets for improving memory.
And then shave the entire head of the patient and place on their chest the center part of the plaster described in the book about plasters.
And let that burn for a few times; this is the method of cauterization. Do this according to that order which I have already mentioned.
And if these heal well then; and otherwise, then do three cauterizations at the rear part of their head, which descend from the top part of the head down to the lower part of the neck. And pause between each cauterization for the duration mentioned; and then treat the area after what has been done.
And if you feel your tolerance for the patient increases, then do this cauterization in the middle area; and if your tolerance is greater, then do the cauterization over both parts of their head.
And treat that until it heals; and let this olive oil be used according to the method shown in front.
Head / ninth
Regarding cauterization and soothing of the entire body.
And ensure that you proceed with body purification by dyes and as we have said; then shave the patient's head, and then apply this cauterization method by doing it in the middle of the head, do it over both parts of their head, and do it at the rear part for them, and do three cauterizations on their neck spines.
And if it's necessary in the illness of body soothing due to too many patients and the illness is strong, then apply this cauterization method by doing it on both neck spines four times, subsequently do it until the essence of the medicine burns out from their body, and lift your hand. And treat that area until it heals; and this is olive oil cauterization.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
Regarding the treatment of epilepsy through cautery.
It is not the person with epilepsy who is treated with cautery, but rather epilepsy caused by phlegm.
And so when you begin to modify the brain of the patient at the onset of their years and in another cure which we have described in the division when the patient is sickly and tolerates the inconvenience of the medicines.
And if it's a child who doesn't endure the medicines, then he administers gargles and chewing stimulants to strengthen the brain modification, before that for several days, with the improvement of the food.
And then shave the patient's head, and then apply a cautery at its correct location on the head according to the previous method, and apply another cautery on the back of their neck, and over every hairline of their head they apply a cautery. And if the patient is strong and tolerates it, then apply the cauteries I've mentioned, while having a paralytic effect and body softening on the cervical vertebrae and the vertebral column of the back.
And an olive oil cautery as it is described.
If the patient is a child, then apply a subtle cautery according to this method.
Here comes the translation for "Capitulum XI."
Regarding the treatment of melancholy through cautery.
When the causes of melancholy are dampness corrupted and phlegm thick, then apply a cautery with the cauteries we have mentioned in anticipation for paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is excess declining to melancholy, and the patient's body is wet, then give them to drink what modifies their brain according to what was preceded in the division.
And then shave the patient's head, and then make a decent tortoise shape with it over the circle, and then remove that in the middle of the patient's head.
And when the patient is sixty years old, they should be treated from every part.
And then apply liniment; and it's more worth using an old sheep grease. And heat that over the fire for a warm heat to measure, which the patient should endure when it becomes more in them. And then place that in the middle of the patient's head in the circle, let the patient stay in until it cools down.
And do this for the patient every week once, under their other treatment until they are cured; or if you want, apply the cautery make small punctures according to what is best for them, otherwise keep your hand on a prepared cautery: this is the type of cautery that moistens the brain equally.
And then leave that cooked meat in wool grease or fat for some time.
Capitulum XII (Chapter 12)
Regarding the treatment of water descending into the womb.
When it is declared that the onset of water in the womb begins according to the symptoms I have mentioned in the division, then begin and give the patient to drink what modifies their head, and keep them away from all dampness.
And let that sugar dissolve in hot water for a few days.
And command the patient to raise their head, and apply a cautery on the middle of the head; and then apply two cauteries on each temple if it is the beginning of water descent in both wombs, or one if it's the beginning of water in one womb.
Let the cautery touch all veins and arteries that are left after cutting; and let the cauteries be in that length around the temples.
And guard against bleeding when it's being treated with cautery; and if you see the patient's bleeding, give them any medicine that is within your capability.
And I will come with knowledge about the removal of arteries and about removing those, as well as caution against bleeding.
And in some cases it is treated by applying cautery to the neck after the two bones have been cut with two successive cauteries.
Capitulum XIII (Chapter 13)
Regarding the treatment of old tears.
When the tears of the wombs are old and occur through veins and arteries which are in the visible location on the head outside, and it is confirmed that this is excess phlegm, then apply a cautery with the one we recounted for the beginning of water tears occurring in the wombs; and apply a cautery in the middle of the head and two cauteries at each temple where there are temples. And apply two cauteries on the neck after cutting the two bones. And if you suffer from addition, then apply a cautery over the entire length of the back of the womb on the tip of the eyebrow with a small cautery.
Capitulum XIV (Chapter 14)
Regarding the treatment of nasal odor.
When you are treating with what we have described in the division and your treatment does not improve, then prepare and give to the patient three cups of wine over night; and then shave the head of the patient, and apply an olive oil cautery on the head. And then apply a thorn cautery on each eyebrow, leaving a small space between them.
And protect yourself from the fire so that you do not burn that area.
And for this type of cautery, this is how it's done.
Chapter XV.
About the cautery treatment for the eyelids of animals.
When the eyelid of an animal is swollen or damp due to disease, then apply this type of cautery to that eyelid; and here's how it's done:
And if you do this, apply the cautery over both eyebrows for a short time in every part, and make them extend to the temples. And let the length of each cautery be according to the size of the eyebrow.
And do not press your hand too much onto the cautery, but according to how much of the eyelid's tip part is heated.
Chapter XVI.
About the cautery treatment for an animal's eyelid when its skin turns into parts within and around the paw.
When the skin of an animal turns into parts within such that it affects the entire body, two methods of cautery are applied to those areas: one is a hot cautery and the other uses burning medicine.
If you use a hot cautery and the animal's skin behaves as if it were being shaved by those who do so in the world, that is, until they are prolonged and made equal; and if you touch its birthplace, then strengthen your hands on their flesh so that no burn occurs before their skins emerge.
Once they are prolonged and made equal, then place the animal's head in your hand, and place your finger on their eyelid as if you were trying to see it, marking the spot according to the shape of a holly leaf, and make the beginning of the mark close to the skin.
And place your finger dipped in animal album or in pus from gallstones on the animal's body.
And heat the cautery like this, which is how it should be done.
And heat it up and apply the cautery to the marked figure, gradually and in small waves, until the surface of the skin appears as if it were a holly leaf, completely burned away.
And as a sign of the animal's health, you should see that the eyelid of the animal has already contracted and its skin is raised from the point where you made the incision on the animal.
And lift your hand and leave it for three days, then place your finger on its edge until the scab is fully formed. And treat that with ointment until it has healed.
And if there is any reason that affects them near their birthplace and the eyelid becomes swollen, then perform another treatment with the cautery over that area just as you did initially.
And if the skin is still in the eyelid after that, then apply the cautery until it rises to its natural place and becomes equal, ensuring that the skin does not hurt the animal.
And for the cautery with burning medicine, this is what you should command the animal to do: have its skin prolonged and made equal until it emerges, then make the mark of the holly leaf shape from parchment paper.
And take known soap and live vinegar to prepare this treatment. 1., Do this, and mix those substances well in water, prepare it quickly so that it doesn't cool down; spread this mixture on the parchment paper which is made in the shape of a holly leaf, place it over one animal or both; dip your hand in animal album and the head of the animal should be in your hand.
And place that over the medicine and press it a little but do not burn him while he feels the bite of the medicine, which is like being bitten by fire.
And when he continues to feel the bite of the medicine, then remove the medicine and place it in your hand; once the biting stops, then reapply the medicine with water; and then consider if the eyelid has already been lifted as it would be washed away by fire or incision, which is as you should do; and if it doesn't come back to the place of the medicine on the spot where no medicine was applied and does not descend until your operation is fully equalized and the animal's head has contracted.
And place your finger on its edge until the scab of adjustment is eradicated; then treat that with healing balm or another until it has healed.
And for this, you should keep watch over your operation with diligence to ensure that no medicine falls onto the animal's head; if the eyelid becomes somewhat swollen and causes any skin problems around it after some days, then apply your medicine again to that area where the eyelid is swollen, exactly as you did at the beginning, surrounding it until it heals.
And this is the shape of the holly leaf.
Know that the eyes of humans vary according to size and thinness, so your treatment should be done accordingly.
And do not hide the path towards rectitude for him towards whom this art is directed.
Chapter XVII.
Of the cautery of a fistula that is in the tear duct of the eye.
When you treat a fistula with what we've said in the divisions of illnesses and do not apply your treatment, then proceed to cauterize that according to this method: instruct the patient to hold their head on you as if it were a seat, and place someone's hand between your hands like they're supporting something so that neither is too heavy nor agitated under their head.
And place the point of the instrument in the pus in the eye or in mucus on the patient's nose.
And heat up the cautery with which this is done:
Which should be conquered, like a cane or reed of a bird's quill in shape, from one end where the cautery is made.
And if you see that it can penetrate to the other end. And if you wish, act in such a way as to test.
But whoever is conquered is better for your work.
And press the fistula if it has opened, and extract and dry out that which is from the patient. And if it hasn't opened, then open it and remove the pus from the patient.
And place on the patient the heated cautery which is slightly hot, and hold your own hand next to where you're going to apply the cautery to the nose, so that neither your hand nor the patient becomes agitated. Then pause the cautery over the gray area of the nose and burn it there.
And if during the beginning of your cautery it penetrates into the nostril, then that's good; and otherwise, then apply the cautery once or twice, as needed; leave that there for three days, and then place a point on that spot with a bandage around it, and apply drying ointment inside so that it heals.
But if it has passed ten days and is not healed, then place on the patient a corrosive acid medicine inside where the bone is exposed and scrape it according to what suits in their skull.
And there is another way of cauterizing a fistula that some earlier people described: hold on to the site of the fistula and make it there, then pause at that crack and place a fine point like that which suits: And in that place put an amount as large as one inch of melted lead; hold your hand there with good control, so that the patient doesn't feel too much pressure that the melted lead doesn't penetrate into their nose; proceed to pause on the edge of the patient's nose like pus in the eye or water, where the lead then sticks to the site of the fistula and heals it through marvellous treatment.
And if the fistula is healed according to what we have said about cauterizing and treating it, then that's good; and otherwise, then it becomes necessary to administer nasal drops and reduce the fistula into the nose according to where it naturally belongs.
Chapter XVIII.
On the cautery of a cut under the foot.
Redness and swelling often occur with cuts (fissures), especially in the labia of children.
Then, when you treat those cuts according to what we have said in the divisions and do not improve your treatment, then heat up the small cautery knife according to this method that suits:
And let its size follow the subtlety of the knife.
Then place that initial incision within those cuts where the cautery penetrates to the base of the cut.
And then treat it with bandages until it heals.
Chapter XIX.
On the cautery treatment of a fistula in the mouth.
When there is pus formation in the uvula or on the palate or at the tonsils leading to an abscess, and it bursts, becomes old, then bleeding occurs and a fistula is formed. If you do not improve your treatment for this, proceed as follows: heat up the cautery according to the amount received within the fistula, insert the heated end of the cautery into the pus-filled sac, place your hand where the hot tip reaches inside the fistula, and perform this once or twice at its rear; then treat it as we have said for treatment until it heals.
And if the healing is complete and it has healed, then that's good; and otherwise, then it becomes necessary to discover the location and expose the bone according to what suits its chapter.
Chapter XX.
On the cauterization of teeth and the soothing treatment of gums.
When the gums are softened by moisture and teeth are softened, when you treat those with medicines but do not improve them, then place the patient's head on your seat as if it were resting. Then heat up the cautery according to this manner, so that you pause your hand above the tooth and intervene there with the heated cautery moving quickly, and hold your own hand slightly inside where the heat of fire reaches the base of the tooth.
And then lift your hand, and proceed to apply the cautery several times as you wish.
And then the sick person drinks water with salt and keeps that for an hour, and afterwards he stops it, until the tooth pain is alleviated, the gums are softened and the moisture in the mouth is dried out.
Chapter XXI
On the application of a cautery to tooth pain.
When tooth pain is due to cold or worms, or if the treatment does not work with medicine, then apply a cautery to that in two ways: either on the edge of cattle, or directly on fire.
Applying the edge of cattle means you take a cow's horn and heat it in a forge, then hold it close to the tooth area, apply pressure and wrap it around the tip of the needle, then immerse that in the heated horn and place it over the painful tooth as quickly as possible until it is hot.
And then repeat this process several times so that the heat of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
And if you see that, soak wool or cloth in the hot horn above it, then place that over the painful tooth, and hold the glowing iron on it until the heat of the iron reaches the root of the tooth.
However, the cautery with fire is that you wait until there's a lump of ember or iron core, and if there are any roughnesses and the heat of the fire does not reach inside the patient.
And then heat the cautery to its desired shape, place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery is hot; do this a few times so that the pain lessens or by that day or the next.
And know that by the force of that cautery which the patient swells their mouth with good horn and keep that for an hour, then they drink it; this is the way to apply the cautery.
And apply the cautery to whatever you see that can be treated according to what is possible for you.
And this is how it looks like with respect to the catheter:
Chapter XXII
On the treatment of hernias with a cautery.
When hernias are due to phlegm and wet humor that don't respond to digestion through medicines, if you notice a slight improvement in their digestion, then heat the cautery according to this form: having two round ends so that the smoke from one end burns the cautery on the other, place the ignited cautery over the lesion once, or another if you need it until it reaches the root of the lesion.
And if the lesion is small, then place the cautery according to the amount of the lesion, and leave it on for three days and apply a heated cloth over it while the area has been treated by fire.
And then treat that with ointments, bandages, and cloths until it is healed.
Chapter XXIII
On the treatment of coughing and constriction in the throat.
When moisture invades the channel of the lung, especially when it comes from cold body fluids, know that the patient should be emptied at meals with laxative medicines, and then apply the cautery to the site of stagnation in the area below the throat.
And watch that you don't apply the cautery to the throat nor burn until the end of their pain, just a little bit.
And apply the cautery to another cautery located at the junction of the neck and lower part of their back. The application of the cautery for the arm should follow the previous method.
And then treat that with what has been described until it is healed.
Chapter XXIV
On the treatment of lung disease and cough.
When cough and lung illness are due to moisture, if the patient does not have a fever or congestion and it is an old cough, then apply two cauteries on the sternum at the sites of stagnation in the chest and back; and with another cautery in the middle of the belly between the breasts; and for arm cautery follow the previous form.
And if you wish, your cautery treatment with the cauteries called puncta follows the form described in the puncture of ear pain.
And make points among them; and then treat that with what has been described until it is healed.
And each cautery has three stages in which the treatment is done on that: you can do three applications of cautery according to this form:
Chapter XXV
On the treatment of the teat tip, which is the head of the teat.
When the tip of the teat is displaced due to lubricating moisture and does not return immediately upon its usual return time, know that you should first reduce the displacement, then have the patient lie on their back or on their stomach; and then lift the head which is at the beginning inside part of the teat tip, and raise the end that corresponds to your left hand's fingers from above those points of your left hand if the junction is displaced internally.
And then prepare two points for the cautery; this is how it works:
And then apply the cautery between where it enters that into the other side; and the figure of the cautery will come as from two points of cautery.
And sometimes applications are made according to this count, and for what purposes are the cauteries. VIII.
And then place on the cautery some salt powder, and place the patient on their back, and let them lie still until they are comfortable after some time.
And if the dislocation is above and below the knee or ankle, then apply cautery over the muscle at the cautery point or on bone points, where the joint is confirmed and moisture is reduced, and the patient is healed.
Chapter XXVI.
On the treatment of stomach cautery.
When cold and moisture enter the stomach causing an increase in its size and multiple swellings within it, and if you continue with the curative methods without improvement, then you will find that the patient is on their knees, and they stretch their hands and things, and apply cautery there for three points: leaving the foot at the size of a hand's length at the point of knee cautery, and at two points between the sides of the stomach cautery, forming the figure of triangular cautery; extend among those that are not fitting to make them fit.
And if the depth of the cautery is equal to the thickness of two thirds of the thickness of the intestines.
And if you want the figure of the cautery according to this form is added, and if you wish, apply large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form; here is a cautery according to the circular form as follows:
And apply stomach cautery at the point that is afraid of this cautery: and you place on the stomach point according to the amount you want with heat, and then apply cautery at this point; and treat it with treatment which proceeds until it heals.
Chapter XXVII.
On the treatment of bile duct cautery.
When there is pain in the bile duct due to coldness or moisture or excessive wind that causes it from exceeding its normal size, and the patient heals with what we have said and does not improve, then you will find that the patient is on their knees, and you place heat at three points according to this form over the bile duct halfway between the inguinal areas, in the position of a person lying down.
And let the space between each cautery be according to the thickness of a finger, and let the cauteries be according to the length of the right side of the body.
And do not touch with your hand on the surface of the cautery.
And if the amount of water that is absorbed equals the size of the intestines' swelling, and it's not adjusted; and if the patient is standing on their feet; and if they're not standing, then they should lie down, which has already stretched their limbs, and raise their arms.
And it's possible for you to apply these cauteries with surgical knives, when you have skill and caution in the art.
And be careful not to overdo the cautery treatment, and ensure that the swelling of all the intestines is absorbed so that it heals throughout the body and reaches into the intestines which are delicate; know this.
Chapter XXVIII.
On perforation of bile duct abscess with cautery.
When there is inflammation or abscess in the bile duct and you want to know if that abscess is within the bile duct tissue or outside of it, then if it's within the bile duct tissue, the patient feels severe weight and pain becomes more intense.
And if it's within the bile duct wall, the pain is severe and often times already tires out the doctors in treating him.
So you will find that the patient is lying on their back; and then mark the site of the abscess with heat; and then apply cautery where it resembles a rag, which we described in the previous page. And apply cautery at this point and within the entire intestine, until it reaches up to the liver, until you can see that it is healing.
And then treat it for curing other abscesses until it heals.
And do not use this form of cautery treatment other than that which is studied in the art of medicine and extended, and those who have knowledge of many maladies; however, some experiences may burn on these operations, yet you should follow this one, and it's better.
Chapter XXIX.
On the treatment of ulcers with cautery.
The ancient methods of applying cautery to ulcers were done according to this manner, which you should take from the rules of aristology. It involves taking a longish, dried out length of an animal horn found, whose thickness corresponds with that of your finger.
And then immerse that in oil and heat it at the fire, and apply a cautery on that spot which is between the continuation of the collarbone and the chest; and with two cauterizations place them diagonally, one slightly downward towards the area under the chin, and with two cauterizations there where they are diagonalizing between the fifth rib and the sternum, directing one slightly backward; and apply another cautery in the middle of the foot; and apply another on the stomach, and apply three cauterizations at the back parts; and place a cautery in that spot which is between the two shoulders, and apply two cauterizations on each side of the foot, making sure to direct the cauterization between the two shoulders.
And do not cover where you place your hand at the cautery, but show it in action to the patient.
And also, as some old doctors and the men of their time used to place a metal rod that looks like a ray and fire at this cauterization spot, they would insert it into this location between the ribs, until it reaches this wound inside, healing it, just as we have described in the wound of the stomach.
Fear not about this cautery hole, for it is not the danger that you are currently experiencing in the fissure where healing does not occur.
Chapter XXX.
On the process of cautery for the uterus.
When you treat the illness of the uterus as we have discussed for treatment in division and do not apply your own treatment, then when it comes to applying cautery to her, there are three methods, all of which are perpendicular. One method is to make three or four lines of cauterization along the length of the uterus according to the shape of the stomach's cauterizations, as I have previously described.
And between each cautery the thickness should be about one finger or a little less, and the method of applying the cautery is the same method we described for the stomach's cautery equally.
And do not let your hand touch the cautery; and place the patient horizontally on their back.
And there is another way to apply cautery, which involves igniting the cauterizer with two streams of fire, a method that we have discussed in the chapter about dislocation of the muscle, and raise the spine which is aligned with the course of the uterus so as to guide the patient's left side.
And your elevation is at which you raise the spine according to the length of the body, so that cautery lines are made according to the width of the body.
And then insert both streams inside, ignite them, in that space where the spine from the other side penetrates.
And then remove the cautery; and thus it is done four times.
And if you see fit, apply cautery using a three-streamed cautery.
And then you treat the healed cauterization that has not allowed bleeding for too many days; and more is to be considered than other previous causes in treatment.
Chapter XXI.
On the process of cautery for dropsy.
Apply cauterization not in cats, but properly to the limbs.
When you treat dropsy in the ways of treatment as we have described in division and do not apply your own treatment, then cover that area with four cauterizations around the umbilical region, and one on the stomach, and another on the abdomen, and another on the stomach. And place two cauterizations between the two hips, and a cautery on the right side of the foot, and cover another area on the stomach. And the depth of the cauterization should be proportional to the thickness of the spine.
And then smooth out the cauterization until it allows bleeding for a long time.
And do not discharge the patient of treatment near the cauterization as you would with someone who needs two consultations, and it is prepared for help in healing.
The shape of the cauterization on which it is applied to the belly should be a bow according to how that shape follows what was previous, and that one on which it is applied to both sides is an olive according to its previous form.
Chapter XXXII.
On the process of cautery for the limbs and thighs.
When the feet are swollen with water and filled with watery pus, then cover that you apply cautery on the back of the foot up to the point between the thumb and little finger, and raise your hand near the cauterization without twisting it; and then raise your hand, do not return that all at once as the watery pus drains.
Apply the cautery in this manner: And then make two cauterizations on each thigh, and for every part, make a cauterization at the tip of the blade. And make the cauterizations according to the length of the thigh: place one at the knee and the other in the middle of the thigh; and on each thigh, two cauterizations.
And keep the open wound treated for a long time so that some pus can drain from it.
And then treat those causes as we have described them.
Chapter XXXIII.
On the process of cautery for abdominal regions.
When abdominal pain is due to friction and moisture that harden the organs, it is the digestive and retentive functions, which are in the stomach and intestines. This is treated with methods of treatment, without causing any damage, and sometimes the patient suffers from a vertebra burning, then burn it vigorously on their stomach according to what preceded during stomach cauterization, including around the belly button and four cauterizations in the loop of the subtle iliac vessels, including a small keyhole cauterization; and cauterize above the navel for a while or apply two cauterizations.
And if you notice excessive moisture and the patient tolerates it, then burn that on the pubis and on the intestines, strengthening with two cauterizations around the stomach and near the groin, which is a complete cure of youthful illness without error.
Chapter xxxiv.
On the cauterization of ancient hemorrhoids.
When they are of a nature to produce ancient hemorrhoids or those from large humors or corrupted moisture, and they are treated as we have said in the division without damaging your treatment, then cauterize with three cauterizations on the pus left at both ends of the small and small triangular pieces. And apply a cauterization above the navel cavity for two dits.
And if you notice that the stomach of your patient is chilled and the food is not digested, along with swollen cheeks, then burn on the stomach with a large cauterization as it was done previously; and apply one to the chest, and another on his face. Apply a small keyhole cauterization, and allow the cauterization to cool open for some time, and then treat your patient until he is healed.
Chapter xxxv.
On the cauterization near the location of the appendix.
When you remove the appendix, then you apply the cauterization that resembles a ray's flame. Place the ignited tool in the appendix's location of removal, and finish your hand's movement so that the cauterization reaches the opening of the vein from which the disease flows.
And do this one or two times; if the appendixes are too many, then cauterize each according to what we have recounted, and treat those with your remedies until they are healed.
And if you apply a large cauterization on the bellybutton, it's more likely to result in illness during youth.
Chapter xxxvi.
On the cauterization of fistulas that are naturally formed in the parts of your patient.
If nature does not comply with the work that we have recommended in its place, and your patient is frightened by this, then they will be healed through cauterization.
So when there is some fistula in nature, and it is old, infected by healthiness and corrupted moisture, then that which is pus worthy of being covered should cover that with the small attempt, and you will know the depth quantity of that beforehand through the said attempt.
Place the cauterization tool that resembles a ray's flame. And then place the ignited cauterization tool in this fistula, and according to the quantity where the attempt has reached.
And apply the cauterization over that until those corrupted bodies are burned completely, once or twice or three times, according to the quantity of your need.
And guard against the burning of nerves and veins; or if the fistula goes to the bladder's body or to the intestine, then guard all those places. Do not do this unless the fistula is in a fatty area and you consider that it is not penetrating.
And treat the area until it is healed.
And if the area is sealed, and all materials have been removed from your patient, yet it still lasts for a long time afterwards, then know that it has been completely healed.
And if the materials are not completely removed from your patient's body, then you should know that it is penetrating or in some part of its organ, or originates from those causes which will bring recollection in its location.
Chapter xxxvii.
On the cauterization of ulcers.
When ulcers exhibit pain due to friction or large windiness, and the patient's cheek becomes reddened, then cover that by applying a cauterization on each ulcer with a small keyhole cauterization corresponding to the recall of its memory.
And strongly apply the second small area, so that three linear cauterizations will come about, and thus are more likely to occur during youth.
Chapter xxxviii.
On the cauterization of the bladder.
When it happens in the bladder with softening and moisture that makes the patient not retain urine, then cauterize it on the part of the leftover at the bladder opening, as it starts from the skin of the pubis, cauterizing with one cauterization on the right side part and another on the left side of your patient.
And the length of each cauterization according to the size of your patient's foot; and cauterize that with a cauterization on the lowest part of both sides; or do two cauterizations if it is necessary.
And apply small keyhole cauterizations as they are instructed.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
Regarding the treatment of the anus through cautery.
When there is venous congestion and moisture in the anus, and thus intercourse is forbidden, her menstrual cycles become disrupted and delayed in coming, causing discomfort during bowel movements. In this case, it's recommended to perform three rounds of cautery on the area around the navel, as we have explained with bladder cautery; also place a round of cautery on the spot opposite the anus, or two cauterizations if necessary, making sure that the cauterization is deep enough.
Chapter XL.
Regarding the treatment of dislocation of the ankle through cautery.
When moisture accumulates in the ankle joint and causes distortions to its location, indicated by a longer foot when compared side-by-side. And the site of the dislocation is found on the inside of the ankle.
Then proceed to perform a cautery on the ankle area above the ankle joint of the patient using an oval-shaped cauterization, once you have tested this method along the circuit as it is wound around, and so that the ankle falls into its proper position in the middle of the circle.
And similarly to the shape of the previous cauterization in the stomach treatment.
And if this cauterization is not available to you, then perform it with three rounds of large olive-shaped cauterizations.
And the cauterization should be done according to the intensity of irritation throughout the entire chain; and then attend to that part where it is being healed.
Chapter XLI.
Regarding treatment through cautery of the sciatic vein.
When pain occurs in the ankle joint, which is caused by friction and moisture, the treatment we have described for this applies to the patient without causing them discomfort, so return the affected part of the body to its normal state. In doing this, you should release the ankle from thick fluids either through pillowed fetid substances or artificial pills or similar treatments; then proceed to perform cautery on that area.
And the method of applying cauterization in such cases follows two methods: one using burning medicines, or cauterization by fire.
There are two scientifically recognized methods. The first involves performing three triangular cauterizations on that part of the ankle, as shown here, with good depth. And for the distance between each cauterization, it should be the size of your finger, using large or very large olive-shaped cauterizations.
Make some burns on the middle part above the ankle joint, resulting in four cauterizations.
And if you wish, perform a circular cauterization as described in the treatment for ankle dislocation, which should cover and burn throughout the entire chain.
This is how cautery should be performed when pain is localized around the ankle and not spreading within the foot.
But if the pain spreads within the foot, then perform two cauterizations on the foot near the spot where you have encircled the ankle that is causing the pain; and make one cauterization along the heel for four fingers down from that spot towards the inner side of the foot.
And if you use a knife-shaped cauterization, the depth of the cauterization should correspond to the intensity of irritation throughout the chain.
And if the ankle wraps around where pain is spread out in the foot area, then perform cautery here at the location you encircle with three points or four or more if necessary.
And if the ankle wraps around causing pain to be left out of the foot area, then perform a knife-shaped cautery here.
And remember that when performing any cautery, do not finish it to the point where you burn nerves or large blood vessels, because this could lead to damage or constriction on the ankle.
And I have seen one and another of those who perform cautery on the heel and conclude in the process, with the fire-filled bed that leads to swelling at the foot, burning through and corrupting the entire foot. And inevitably causes intense stomach cramps, resulting in death.
And if the pain occurs in two parts at once, cauterize each one according to this method.
And the wise ones say that in ankle cautery, this is how it should be done: make it resemble a circular iron tool where the circumference is as wide as your palm; and position its opening according to the thickness of a finger bone or roughly one or so.
And within that circle place another line; and the distance between them should be equal to your finger's width; and let those lines mark out two parts each; and the length of those marks should be one finger or two fingers wide, make iron grooves decently in those circles; and this is the shape you'll follow:
And light it in the fire until it becomes red and sparkles; then place it over the ankle area, making sure the hot part is touching the inside of the foot. And then perform three round cauterizations in one go on that spot.
And then leave that area smooth for three days; and after that, cover it with bandages and let the open wound heal over many days; and then treat that area with ointment until it heals.
Using Al-Bucasis: oh children, for this type of cautery we have used them in the examination of its patient, and because of these we found those that watch over it.
Suggestions for the pains caused by deep cauterizations in him who suffers them, and finds that place on him.
Suggestions for cauterization in medicine, it is that you make two circles on the arm with a perforated needle where the gallbladder's duct lies; let their length be as long as two walnuts or hazelnuts.
And if the space which is between each part of the said amount of fatness; and open them below and above, so that they contain themselves among them according to this form:
And if you place your hand on the part of the water where the patient is lying, on his back; and hold your hand on the part of the water. And take hot water from it and apply it between the two circles, and let its quality be like a small fire gradually, and keep that for an hour's worth, and allow the patient to chew and adjust - as if he were eating with fire - until the chewing stops.
And hold your hand near the instrument and remove all the hot water from the entire body with cool water.
And let him lie for three days and place your hand over that lump until the color of the adjustment is improved, and let him rest like this for some more days, and remove his fever; this happens in youth.
And treat that with ointment until it is healed.
And if the pain is spread throughout the thigh or the chest, have him stand where he contains water as is done in the equal water.
And this is the method of hot water, and I have already written about that in the treatise on the correction of medicines. Recipe of alkali and of the undying ashes of one part each, mix them together in a new wave where the part you leave is pierced by a small rod, according to the amount that fits into his skin.
And let him lie in the bottom of the wave another wave in succession, get on top of that live alkali and ash with lukewarm water which takes those by the inch, and when you compress them onto your own hand for good compression, leave the heat that comes from hot water on the part left on the heated wave.
And adjust all that water, and get it on another live ash and new alkali, which will have great strength soon, this is administered in movements of surgery and in the cauterization of other limbs, which operation involves fire.
And among some medicines which are to be cauterized like this, such as pungent ones and salted honey and ash in a moistened state that need to be mixed.
And this is the procedure that a man from antiquity used for surgery and treatment which heals water pain and sciatica pain, and make it clear this method is so beautiful, saying it does not require any other treatment, and when he is healed just like this, let him bathe and rest as instructed by you.
And if it is close to a vertebra dislocation, and if there is no trace of vertebrae, take a recent fig; and finely grind it with a little grey and place it in water where the pain is, or on the thigh, or on the chest, and bind him.
And leave it for the amount of three hours or until the patient notices improvement in adjustment.
And take him to bathe and when his body becomes red, insert him in the sun, for when the pain ceases and he is healed.
Know that it should not be used by anyone to cauterize with these medicines but only for the body's evacuation.
Suggestions that Escorides has provided that when there is an opening in the goat for the veins being constricted it's cauterized; let him become pale with this; and do the cauterization as follows: take wool, soak it in old oil, and place it between his hands and his knees.
And take an opening in the dried goat and seal it with fire until charcoal is made; then let him rest on the wool until he stretches. And repeat this process, and do not stop until the sensation of chewing reaches into the water and rests the pain.
And this method of cauterization is called cow's cauterization.
Chapter XLII.
On cauterization of pain in two.
Some pains in the two are due to various causes, such as by impact or percussion or excess evacuation, and through causes similar to those, by infusion of moist and gritty matter.
And only cauterization is done in this single type which is performed through the release of grinding material.
So you see, proceed with the patient's evacuation using pills that are similar to them, which are made on each side where pain is three lines according to the width of him, since signs are taken from every line or more, depending on the tolerance and virtue of the patient.
And perform cauterization using punctual cauterization.
And if you wish, apply three or four cauterizations with a medial spinal point according to this method:
Chapter 43.
On the transition from cauterization to bile deficiency.
Causes observed for this disease in infants; and the sign of its onset in children is that it affects their body causing distortion, leading to elevation and change in movements.
And in the lower spinal area of the back and on his buttocks, which is already beginning to rise above the other spines.
And when you perform this and wish to prohibit it, then cauterize that point with a cautery according to this method: let the cautery cover all parts of the spine equally.
And if you wish, cauterize on the spinal circuit with a point or two lines or three of the cautery. And let the points be placed among them.
And then treat the area where it is healed with what we have said.
May be cautious that a cautery not be administered in bile deficiency which is caused by nerve spasm.
Chapter 44.
On the treatment of gout and joint pain with cauterization.
When joint pain is caused by cold fluids that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
And how is gout treated when it's caused by friction in a manner of treatment and not by simply relieving the pain, then you apply cautery.
And what you do is to cauterize that area related to the joint's discharge in the arm region using point cautery.
And for this type of cautery, which is called olive-shaped, here is its form:
And if it's necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then you should apply a point cautery. And if the pains ascend into the thighs or to other joints, and you have these observations, then cauterize that area above each thigh with three or four cauterizations of all parts using this olive-shaped cautery.
And if the point cautery is necessary for these types of cauterizations, then cauterize that area without pressing too much with your hand before, just around the size of the cord.
And if the pains ascend into both thighs, then administer the cautery which we have said in its chapter.
And if the pains are only in the legs and it's called gout, then prick on the nerve circuit as it turns, prick those two lines.
And if the pains remain in the fingers, then prick on the nerve circuit over each finger and at the pulse point of the hand.
And if the pains ascend for a few days to the elbows or muscles, then cauterize all parts of the helpers.
And do not eliminate the illness from proper diet and medicine reception; if it is done properly with steam, elimination will occur with this cautery, may God help.
Chapter 45.
On the treatment of ruptures with cauterization.
When there's rupture in the intestines and speaking of hernias before the operation for the surgeon, when they start from that area, then it is ordered that the patient abstain from food on their day and use gentle causes so that the abdominal opening is healing.
And then have the patient lie between your hands on their back, and command them to keep their head in place so that the wound is healed or the hernia appears after it.
And then return that to your thumbs and test the rupture over the bones of the hip as you mark the extremity which is similar to half of a circle in the lower parts of the body.
And then apply the cautery with this form being its shape:
And let it be moist and emit sparks. And then return the hernia or the protruding part to its natural position, and place your hand over the area to prevent it from protruding again.
You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs and placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
Then place the cautery over that mark with your hand and apply it directly, take that so when you touch their hips into the middle of the body; repeat at that other spot if in the first attempt you have not succeeded up to the bones.
And observe wisely the movement of the hernia during your cauterization, do not burn that hernia for it should not cause death or any other great harm to the patient.
And know that when you have the cautery, do not touch the bones, do not confirm your operation.
And be aware that the child's cautery should be delicate according to their size and measure.
And then treat the area of the cautery for three days with ointment until the scab from the wound heals.
And then treat that with other ointments until it is healed.
And the patient should lie on their back for ten days until the area and the wound are sealed.
And make sure to regulate the nutrition according to the duration of the healing process which affects their abdomen, and ensure that the intestine does not protrude during the effort of recovery.
And when it comes to removing after approximately ten days, administer food properly, and keep him for another ten days.
And if he is working hard and consuming food and drink, along with strong vows, then when using this entire regimen of treatment, he will become healthy.
And I will say about the treatment of ruptures in other parts of the abdomen, starting from mealtime, and you should not delay. Then cauterize that rupture with a round pointed cautery according to his quantity, and let it be as drained by the chain thus like the tender part of him; and then treat that where we have said, and do not adjust it too much.
And already, some have said that the rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery according to this method, because it is handled like a test:
and draw a line that you make past the width at the lowest part slightly above the rupture, and another line on top; then place your hand on an oblique cautery, but the first cautery is softer and better.
Chapter 46.
About cauterization of torsion.
When the pain persists in some limbs due to impact or percussion and does not respond to treatment with medicines for a long time, then you should proceed to cauterize with pointed cautery.
And the size and shape of each limb dictate the type of cautery to use, considering its effectiveness and suitability for the patient. Also taking into account the location of the torsion and pain.
So if it is healed by the first cautery, that's good; and otherwise, then proceed with more rounds of cautery on him. For customary cases like these pains are punctured on the body at the part closest to the patient, so you should use these types of cautery until the patient becomes healthy.
Chapter 47.
About cauterization for leprosy.
Some leprosy cases require cautery treatment for a long time, especially when it is caused by the decay of phlegm and melancholy.
And when you want to cauterize that (leprosy), consider whether it is contagious and treat it with the method we said in the division and don't do this way, nor that one, fearing for the patient's health. Then cauterize over the head using various cauteries: on the middle of the head, and on the second slightly to the side of him, shave his forehead up until the hair; and both above two corns; and another behind, on the back or neck;
And finally place your hand with the cautery a little inside where he begins to exert in his mouth a small effort, and if his breaths are disordered, so that thick vapors can be expelled from him; and cauterize on the pimple according to what is needed.
And if leprosy has already spread over the patient's body and is manifestly visible, then you should cauterize that using those cauteries which we said in the head; and apply a cautery on the tip of the nose, and two cauteries on each cheekbones, and two on both shoulder blades, and five on the ribs, and one large on the hip bones near the buttocks, and one on the knee cap, and two on each elbow, and one on each elbow, and two on each knuckle, and one on each knuckle of his feet, and two on all joints mentioned including arms and legs, and on every single heel of his feet, and on the groins of his body.
And watch over the nerves which are above the foot, do not touch those.
Some treatments involve cauterization on the bone of the elbow and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the intestines.
And know that the more closely you fit the cautery, the more rejuvenating and effective it is; and know that the patient does not feel pain in the cautery as they do with needles, since his body is already numb.
And remember that the cauteries should be large or small according to the limbs and joints, as dictated by the nature of the tools.
And then treat the cautery with ermine skin powder mixed with honey, and apply other treatments until he is healed.
Chapter 48.
About cauterization for stupor.
When any limb is paralyzed or asleep and is treated with medicines or bandages but does not heal, then you should cauterize the paralyzed limb using cautery according to the size of the limb or its smallness.
And let your cautery penetrate only a little into the patient's skin. And then treat it with an ointment until it is healed.
And some cases require cauterization for certain paralyses that affect the arms and legs, as well as the shoulder blades, you observe the nerves leading to that limb, and enhance the paralysis.
Do not diagnose this without knowledge of body anatomy and the movement nerves throughout the entire body.
Chapter 49.
On the cautery treatment for boils that have burst.
When boils are old and do not respond to any of the medicines' ointments, then you apply a cautery on that place with a point for a little time according to the thickness of the boil's fluid within, until the whiteness and color of it is renewed and the color changes.
And then treat that with flour of ashes and lentils mixed with roasted oil and leaves of arnagrosa, or from the dung of a dove or from apricot leaves. From each take one part and mix them all together. And apply linseed to cover it until it is healed.
Chapter 50.
On the cautery treatment for carbuncles.
When ulcers start and you want to stop them, then apply a circular cautery around that area like it is revolving.
And the wise ones say that you should apply the inner part of the cautery in the middle area; however, I do not see this, fearing it might be an ulceration, and I have seen this in a few occasions.
And it is the inner pus that should be treated with a circular cautery around it as we have said, or with a point cautery.
Chapter 51.
On the cautery treatment for abscesses.
When any abscess takes longer to mature, and this is due to excess or the age of the patient, who is old and weak, with little strength, or due to time, and you want to hasten its maturity; then apply a point cautery around that area; and then let it continue to mature.
If you want to perform the puncturing of it with a cautery, then light the cautery in this shape: and place that in the middle of the abscess until it penetrates the pus.
And if you apply the cautery in that place where there is pus, because it alleviates the arm's pain; and then treat it until it heals.
Chapter 52.
On the cautery treatment for corroding (or eating away) conditions.
Corrosion is a spreading corruption in the limb, which eats away that area like a fire consumes dry wood.
So if you notice corrosion in the affected area that requires a cautery application, then light up the point cautery with small or large points as needed, according to where the corrosion is present.
And then apply the cautery across all parts until you eliminate all of the corrosion and do not disturb any underlying cause.
And then let that area rest for three days, and place oil on the previously treated spots until all scabs are gone and all corruption has been eliminated.
And then treat that with meat-producing ointments.
If within three days you see that healthy meat has grown in the area without corruption, then it is good. But if not, then apply the cautery again over the corroded areas.
Corrosion can be treated with some doses of acute medicine, which is half in a place where cautery would be applied. However, the cautery using fire is for small pus that is young and fresh.
And I have already mentioned the treatment with acute medicine in the section on division; therefore, take that when you have discernment about it from your patient.
Chapter 53.
On the cautery treatment for clogged (or stuck) conditions, and other similar issues.
Visible scars often appear in the parts of the patient's body where they are called 'claws', and this is a major cause, an entryway, which presses on the chest; applying cautery to those areas can be done in two ways: one is with fire-cautery, and the other is with hot water cautery.
Applying fire cautery is by igniting the tool shaped like a small cup, which is made of iron according to the quantity that contains the claw of every part, and it has fine grooves.
And then hold that ignition over the claw, and place your hand rotating on the cautery in the circuit of the claw until the cautery reaches to the depth of the claw. And let that rest for three days until arm secretion begins. And then cover that with bandages soaked in saltwater and let the bandage rest on it for a night, until that corrosion is eliminated from its roots.
And then treat the area with meat-producing ointment until it heals.
And if they are non-convertible and visible scars occur on the surface of the body, especially in the back and feet, then you should perform cautery with hot water on those areas. Take a small cup made of ream, iron or wood, place that over the claw; heat some water in the cup slightly, hold your hand, rotate it as if stirring while pressing the edge of the cup against the root of the claw, allowing the hot water to reach the root of the claw via this stirring motion. Have the patient endure the hot water dripping for about an hour and then remove that, until the claw from its roots is eradicated.
And thus perform those here and near the other into which you come over all of what is in their body.
And then treat those abscesses that are caused by the extraction of the claws, with remedies from which the flesh takes its creation.
Capitol. 53.
Regarding the treatment of tremors through cautery.
When one suffers from tremors due to rubbing of nerves or due to fever caused by rubbing, or for any other similar reason, then you should apply cautery four times or over each vertebra in the back; and at each vertebral area, place a single point of cautery; also on the feet of that person, and above the stomach, use an olive-shaped point of cautery.
And the tremors of that person subside, and one notices the improvement in their health condition caused by rubbing (of the affected area).
Capitol. 55.
Regarding the treatment of injuries to the heart through cautery.
When there are ruptures in the body, and pus-filled cavities formed from corrupted fatty materials; then at the beginning of their appearance, have them treated by applying cautery over every opening of the fistula with a fine-tipped cautery under mirt wood, where its tip is extended into the flame; or with long roots of restorative herbs; or with a lentil-shaped cautery.
And some burns are treated by applying cautery at the start of their expulsion following this method; they do not form ulcers and eliminate excess, doing so with those treatments, thereby healing them.
However, it is necessary that this be done near the discharge during bloodletting.
Capitol. 56.
Regarding the treatment of bleeding caused by a surgical incision through an artery.
When there is bleeding from an artery that needs to be cut, you should cut the wound where it is supposed to drain, or cut at the pus pocket or by applying cautery on the limb, and then similarly, making it difficult to stop that bleeding.
And when such happens with others, you should hold your hand on the opening of the artery, and place your finger in that spot to strengthen those burned wounds inside where the bleeding stops after you do this, and does not stop.
And then place the olive-shaped small and large cauteries close together, using several of them, and blow over those where flames are ignited.
And then take one small or large according to the location and injury where the artery has ruptured, over that vein blowing immediately after you have strengthened your action, and apply the cautery until it is stopped and restrained that blood.
And if the blood is expelled from the opening of the artery while you maintain your action and extinguish the cautery, then take another one from among the cauteries that are being prepared in the fire, and so do not stop doing this one after another until the bleeding is restrained.
And remember to avoid burning the nerves that are here, so as not to bring about another mischief on the patient.
And know that when blood flows from the artery, it is not possible to restrain the bleeding in those cases, especially when the artery is large, unless one uses any of these four methods: or use the cautery as we have mentioned, or if extraction does occur but fails to do so, then when extraction happens, its ends are burned and the bleeding is restrained; or bind it with astringents or tighten it through strong bandaging, or let them rest on medicinal substances whose virtue is to restrict bleeding; and they should be bound with lint in proper restriction.
Let that person who administers proper restriction on them with astringents and tightening with cloths or in the position of burning causes and similar circumstances not be satisfied except with small ones.
If such happens with others and the doctor is not present or medicine cannot be applied, then open as we have indicated over the opening of that vein like what we have said, and understand for a large bandaging on them until the bleeding stops from most of the wound, and above the artery do not let this strengthen; and on top of the artery spread with water rubbed with a great coldness until the bleeding is cooled down and thickened; then consider in which needs to use cautery or necessary medicine.
Regarding cutting, piercing, and punctures, as well as bloodletting and wounds, along with their various symptoms.
We have already discussed in the first chapter all illness where fire cautery is suitable and with burning medicine, and their occasions and causes, as well as the tools needed for these situations, and I have organized the chapters on the rising state of health within the body.
And I proceed in this chapter for that purpose, so as to relieve the one who requests it, on what has been requested.
And before I begin this, children, learn that in this chapter we are dealing with the continuation of what was discussed in the first chapter about cautery.
And be aware that for this you must exercise great caution, since in the operation of this chapter, burns caused by bleeding need to be treated with a substance that affects veins or cutting on pus pockets, or puncturing discharge or purging of wounds, or removal of arrows or cutting of tumors and their various symptoms. And from all of those come fear and trembling, and in their heart of hearts death.
I urge you to be aware that this does not happen upon you in the state where it resides, for sometimes certain observations force you to handle men differently from ways they are prone to illness. And some of them will die from their illness and for its mildness you should consider death to be upon them, and similarly because of the intensity of what they find in their illness, and also due to the length of their illness, and fear is associated with it which signifies death.
And among those is the one who gives you his account and speaks, you hope for that health, and their illness is harmful.
And therefore do not consent to what someone shows you about themselves in this manner; your caution should be greater than greediness and your appetite. Do not presume any cause upon it except for certain knowledge that verifies what you must know, and from which you can derive a plausible success.
And use in the treatment of all your illnesses with prediction and indication to which health is converted, for within that it provides you assistance regarding acquisition of fame and memory, praise and glory.
Oh, children, God inspires your true understanding and does not withhold direction and protection from you, for that is in His hand.
And I have organized this chapter distinguishing by chapters according to the chapter of cauteries, for the care of the head in relation to the feet, so that you will be pleased with what you inquire about and the needful regarding this.
First chapter.
On the treatment of water which is contained in a child's head.
Know that this illness, which is observed in children, belongs to childhood, and when the child grows stronger, its head becomes light.
And sometimes for reasons that are not apparent, there are some occurrences.
I have only seen this illness in children; and for all those I saw they were doomed to die, and because of this it is an observed outcome in them.
And I have seen that a child had a head filled with water, and their head was always so magnificated that it could not contain itself due to the size of their head, and more than the humidity increased within which there was death.
And this moisture either is added between bone and flesh, or it is added to the bones from above the skin.
Where the operation in that case when moisture is between bone and flesh and the abscess is small, then you should make an incision in the middle place of the head along a crack in the thickness, and let the length of the crack fall two notches where the moisture flows, and this is the form of pus:
And thus if the moisture is more increased and the abscess is larger, then these are two cracks according to this manner:
And if the moisture is above the bones, its sign is that you open the corners of the head from every side and when you squeeze that with your own hand inwards at those parts, water comes out, which is not hidden from you. And thus you should make three cracks in the middle of the head according to this manner:
And when you finish the incision, extract all the moisture; and then strengthen these cracks with bandages and wadding; and on the fifth day apply oil from above inside the cracks, and then cleanse the wound with lint and ointments, and strengthen the head with equalities; and feed the patient with dry food of little moisture until the member is comforted and healed.
And there is another way for the incision that you should consider according to the size of the abscess and the collection of water, where sometimes it is more in the occipital region, or at the front, or on the right, or on the left; therefore, pay attention to the incision where the abscess and the filling with water appear, and do this as best suits you.
And observe that do not cut the artery and let blood flows with health, letting the patient die due to that flow of blood instead of eliminating moisture.
Third chapter.
When there occur catarrhs or pains in the throat or stomach, and it is an old situation, and you do not rely on the treatment of medicines for this, then the principal cure here is the incision of those two arteries.
And thus when you want to incise where the patient feels their head, rub the area with coarse cloth so that the arteries are visible, and then strengthen the neck of the patient with some cloth; and consider where the veins are; and mark the areas above those which are close to the ears, not necessarily in all people.
And then mark above the artery with lint, and then incise each one where the cracks of the sharp parts meet during incision entering into the bone, and let this be according to the thickness of the head.
And if you want, insert the needle near your pulse point and twist it to where it touches the parts below.
And make the length of the incision two inches, for when any vein is cut, the pulse becomes weakened and the fainting starts to occur. It jumps frequently due to this.
If the artery does not appear in the groin, then measure from the elbow the length of three inches, and try to stab it, and then enter into the bone.
And whatever you want to obtain from the blood is an amount of blood itself. and take it strongly from the patient's arm or wrist, and all of this is according to the amount that appears from the condition of the patient and the fullness of the artery of the patient.
And then consider the wound, and if there remains over the bone any cause of abscess, then cut that out by itself to prevent an abscess from forming.
And then strengthen the wound with bandages and with strips of cloth, and properly heal it with ointment until it is healed.
Chapter III.
On the extraction of the arteries which are in the temples.
When some things happen causing old migraine or sudden headaches, due to humidity in farming and the quality of water in the temples, or an old headache that resembles those, and is treated according to the methods of healing medicine, if you don't agree with this, then we have developed these illnesses: extraction of arteries in the temples, or cauterization of them just as we have shown.
And the method of operation and extraction is that the patient raises their skin which is on the temples; understand where the artery is apparent in the temple area, as you can see it through its pulse, and it's hidden in few people due to the intensity of rubbing.
And if it's hidden, then strengthen the patient's arm with some cloth; and place a rough fabric or boil water in that area until you see the artery clearly. And then take the needle of which this is the form: And then you pierce the cord in that with ease until you reach the artery; and take it out with oil on your hand and extract that from the superficial parts; while extracting that from the cord, discover those of the tunics which are around it, from all parts.
If the artery is thin, then wrap that at the tip of the thumb, and cut off a part from it according to the amount by which its ends are lengthened and shortened; and do not allow any bleeding, for if they are not cut, the pulse will not rise.
And then drain out some blood. In three parts.
And if the artery is large, then cover that in two places with twice as strong threads or with bands tightly, and do not cut it before the wound heals to prevent any bleeding.
And then cut off the excess that is between two strips; and do this either at that moment or another time.
And if you wish, cauterize that with a cautery inside the bone and through the surgical knife until its ends are cut off, and remain in place of that half-done work.
And it's better if the patient has fever or is of a cold constitution; as cauterization helps in reducing the final stages of dampness, therefore it's better for youth.
And consider the extraction of arteries that you place at the same location as before, and be sure to let them rest on the patient's dry dust properly, and then treat them with dry medicines so that they bleed out and heal with heat until it is healed.
And if while you are working on another area, bleeding starts from the artery, then you restrain that bleeding either by bandaging or with a cautery, or fill in that spot, and hold your hand until that bleeding is restrained. And if any of those causes are not present to you at the site, then pause your hand on the spot until the bleeding stops, and cover the area with cold water until its heat subsides, and strengthen it according to what is needed.
And the most important thing in extracting an artery is to cauterize the vein with this cautery having two needles, because you have stabbed both areas from one point, and pause the ignition until they reach the bone and cut the vein at two points, so that it stretches what is between its ends, which are not completely hardened by this cautery.
And this is how the cautery should be used:
And let the heat of both needles be equal. However, if the heat of both needles is greater than that of two needles, it's better, as they will come close to every skin without causing damage and won't burn the flesh at speed.
Therefore, when there is some thickness in those, heat from the fire is kept in those and the flesh is removed very gently.
And this method is better for all works and even for smaller ones.
And the spaces between the two needles should be equal to the thickness of your finger.
The head quarter.
From the treatment of wounds caused by sharp and acidic tears in the stomach.
When they are acidic, and it is the wound of those veins which are above the head towards the front, and there is no reason to apply any remedy in this case through medicine, and sometimes the patient's face reddens and feels a walk on their forehead as if it were a procession of ants, the breaths of them being exhausted, moistened that they already have known, and their eyelids are scratched by the sharpness of the tears, the old people apply themselves to this treatment with endurance during this operation, and many consider this treatment as passing.
And this is what you order the patient to scrape the skin which is on their forehead, and then you proceed to cut three equal gaps in the forehead according to its length. And if the length of the cut is two inches: one gap should be equally distant from the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second according to an inch or so of the movement of the tears which are in the lacrimal area, and the third on the other side.
And take care of the beginning of the veins which are on two sides, and extend your hand from the continuation of both jaws. And if the space between any incision is adjusted to three inches in quantity.
And if you have a piece of sponge or dry cloth, apply them to the ones where the sweat dries.
And insert the point of two sharp ends, this is the form of the incision for them: which goes from the beginning of the heat inside to the second incision. Excoriate all that chain which is between two incisions at the cheek, which is above the bone, and make this from the incision to move inside to the second incision. And then scrape that point and enter in the first incision another blade of a different instrument which is called a surgical knife, sharp from one side and not from the other.
Place the sharp side of this knife on the attached flesh of you need to cut the chain, and on that side inside the bone, and place the other side within the jawbone, then insert that thing in between the gap that goes towards the gap opening, and remove all veins that descend from the head to the mouth.
May it be continuous with this appearance of the chain, and proceed like that in the gap towards the other gap.
And when there is a quantity of sweat flowing out, squeeze the places of the clotted sweat areas.
And proceed by stopping in each gap with a small cloth, and place on those ashes that are burned in vinegar and oil and vinegar mixture, and leave so it doesn't cause pus.
And on the third day untie the bandage and administer large quantities of hot water or tea, and proceed to treat this with balm ointment in oil among others until the wounds are healed.
The conclusion. V is likely an error or a typo and should be translated as "The end" or "Conclusion."
From the treatment of tears by catharsis and for those breaths that descend from the divisions inside the head.
When in one vein you remove the material and continue doing so, and sometimes the patient's breaths are exhausted, and already their observation is debilitated, and their eyelids are ulcerated, and from their forehead comes sharp toothache with subsequent extreme exhaustion, then you should be aware of these incidents that the materials and catarrh do not come only from the veins of the divisions inside but proceed from them.
And the best treatment in those cases is this: you order the patient to rub their forehead, and then proceed to cut a gap at the center of the forehead, about an inch wide (and start from the gap on the left temple towards the right temple; and let the incision go inside the bone; and extend your hand along the muscles where they are thick due to chewing), so that the bone is exposed.
Sweat all the moisture either with cloth or with dry cloths, and then fill between the two lips of the gap with a small cloth or with pieces of fabric. And proceed by placing on it ashes that have been burned in vinegar and oil, so as not to cause pus.
And when you remove this and see that the pus has diminished, then understand that he should rub inside the bone starting from his neck flesh, and proceed to treat this with desiccative regimens that make regenerate the flesh as if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of honeycombs mix them together, and prepare a poultice from them which is applied to these wounds as if they were born in flesh.
The conclusion. VI indicates that this might be the sixth part or section of a larger treatise or text, suggesting there may be further information following this point.
From the treatment of what affects the ears.
All causes that affect the ears are one of four types: it could be mineral gravel or something similar to gravel like iron and mercury, or it could be plant-based like clove or fava beans, or it could be a flow-causing substance like water or vinegar and things similar to them, or some kind of animal.
And when gravel is found in the ear or other similar cause of those causes that do not settle or grow in the ear, suspend the ear to the sun. And if you find gravel, then distill some oil that has been violated or sulfur on it, and proceed with its extraction, make someone sneeze while you are observing their noses for the occurrence of sneezing. And then place in the circuit of the earlobe several pieces of cloth or wool, and extend the earlobe to the parts above it, where swollen knots are heated by these remedies against such causes.
And if it is not heated, then administer extraction to him with the instrument called epigastric massage forceps, which this is the form:
And if it has been heated by massage, well done; and otherwise, then administer the extraction to him with a small incision from a lancet.
And if it is not heated by this, then make a thread and insert the end of the thread into the hole of the earlobe and seal around the edge of the thread with beeswax and oil to soothe it, so that it does not open except for the thread. And then extract with strong suction from your mouth, as you have seen in this manner that we have described.
If it is not heated in this manner, then take some powdered chalk or powder from ash onto which you put a small amount of water, and place that over the edge of the earlobe, and then cover that with a decently large piece of cloth placed around it. And then insert that into the hole of the earlobe with ease, and then remove the moisture from the earlobe.
And if it is not heated by all the causes that we have described, then you must cut out that part which will become a boil or cramp.
And the method of cutting that is as follows: at the beginning, you grasp the site of the vein's origin and remove from the cut according to the manner of its virtue, then make a small incision between your hands and convert the earlobe to the parts above it, then create a tiny fissure in the edge of the earlobe through which you guide the grease towards the spot that is pressed by it. And if the fissure is of lunar figure until it reaches the bone, and when the bone is hardened, stop that if you can with appropriate instruments; and then as fast as possible close that hole at once, and heal that within so that it gets well.
And if the cause found in the earlobe is one of those fats that grow and swell up, then administer treatment and extraction to it; but if you don't feel confident, then take a fine needle according to this form: And proceed with the removal of that fat which is found in the earlobe.
And do not do this when you think that it has been moistened by the vapor of the earlobe, place it on swollen knots, and then extract from them either through holes or through a fine instrument as described, which facilitates the extraction of it.
And in the water which enters into the earlobe cavity, make your nose use sneezing at the beginning, and fill his earlobe with a small piece of old cloth, and put this water on that part of the earlobe. If it is heated by this, well done; otherwise, then take small pebbles and stones according to its length, heat them in the fire for a little while, and let the patient insert one of these into his mouth and hold onto one end with their hand while they strike another stone against the stone which is inside the earlobe. Then don't stop at this stone until all the water has heated up.
Then don't stop at this stone until all the water has heated up. And as soon as the water is heated by this, take paper or wood instead. And place one end of it in the earlobe and extend the other end into the fire until its tip is burned.
And then put in another piece of wood and do this many times until all the water is heated, and extract that with a similar method as described of the extracting rod.
And in the extraction of an animal entering that earlobe, if it is small consider it larger and like him, treat it as we said in division; but if it's a large creature causing pain inside the body, then administer its removal with a tool and stones, and the reason for this is more minor than all other causes found in the earlobe.
And in the removal of worms bred in the earlobe, when you treat it as we said in division and in the distillation text, do not let your treatment go wrong. Then understand that you should place the earlobe under the sun.
And if worms appear here, then remove that with a tool or from a fine tube, but if no cause appears, then take a small pipe and extend it upwards widely, which is the form of this: And insert the small end into the earlobe according to the quantity that your hand can endure; and suck it forcefully through suction, and do this many times, until all the worms are heated.
And if you don't feel confident, then place and seal around the edge of the tube with beeswax as we have said; then administer distillations which have already evaporated the old ones in worm treatment, find this in the distillation text.
And if your discharge is such that you pour oils containing medicines into the earlobe with this tool, which has this form: And make that one out of silver or horn, leave it straight, in which there is a small hole, and place something on top.
And therefore let them be so as to enable what is in the cavity of the urinary bladder here where it might be necessary. And if you wish, take the rod and envelop it at the end of his descent with grease, and then pour oil into the cavity of the ear, or the juice from some herb, or whatever you choose from these medicines in the urinary bladder -- which is located in the ear -- , and insert the rod with the grease upwards and squeeze with your hand until the oil is expelled into the cavity of the ear and the patient feels the oil internally.
And whatever is inserted in the ear should already be heated by fire to a small extent. And beware that which you distil in the ear is not too hot, for the medicines of the ear do not tolerate this.
Chapter VII.
On the treatment of ear wax blockage.
Some children have small perforations in their parents' abdomens that do not go through. Sometimes this happens in some adults as well; ear wax obstruction inside the meat of the ear due to a lump or soft flesh; and sometimes this ear wax obstruction is done at the opening of the ear canal which does not reach the bottom, and sometimes it's outside the parts.
And the one that happens at the opening, which doesn't reach the bottom, is in the more difficult-to-treat situations.
And in that case where you can reach the bottom, simply take the ear of the patient to the sunlight and watch it. And if there is an obvious obstruction, open that with a delicate tool like this which forms:
If the end where it's small in width, has one part sharp and the other not; and the tool should be of two lengths on its own, so that it doesn't hurt the ear.
And if the obstruction is due to soft flesh within the ear or in its meat, then you use that one with fine needles and pierce it vigorously inside until all the flesh is exposed.
And if the obstruction is at the opening of the ear, then take a thin rod and heat it slightly with fire, and then place that in the meat of the ear.
And if you have felt obstruction with what the patient feels with ease, due to ear pain, relieve the pressure on him easily; and beware that you do not harm the nerves of the ear.
And then place an ear dressing on the ear according to the size of the hole in which you have wrapped it in Egyptian oil; and do this for several days until you are sure of the healing of the wound; or take something else and insert that into water, grind it into a paste and apply it; and if the ear is already swollen, then carefully remove whatever that was and replace it with another substance which you cover in wadding soaked in ointed oil, while ensuring that the abscess drains; and treat that until it is healed.
If pus comes out, then immerse a sponge or cloth in hot water and place it over the ear, and apply another treatment which constricts the flow of pus, which is described in the treatise on distillation.
Chapter VIII.
On the treatment of eyelid swelling that occurs around the eyes.
The eyelids (athezil) that swell around the eyes in some cases are wet, and in other cases are dry.
Then take those with tweezers or one by one, and divide each with a delicate tool along its length, and then place them on the affected areas into a paste.
If there is pain with pus coming out, then you cauterize those with a small point cautery.
And the best cauterization is to closely follow the incisions and make few small cuts, which allows the previously swollen areas to return when some cause remains among those cuts; and when they are cauterized with fire, those cuts get burned and do not return.
Chapter IX.
Treatment for large swellings that occur on the eyelids of humans.
Swelling around the eyelids of humans that occurs due to some cause which accumulates into large size in its strength and hardness; because of this large size it is called.
It's an accumulation of thick moisture on the eyelid, both inside and outside.
So, in their operation here is what you should consider if the swelling is originating from within the eyelid and is swollen throughout; and the cause of it is minor.
Then make a cut across it for its width, and then carefully drain it from all sides until you release the fluid, and then hang it with one end and discard that.
And if the figure (or area) is large, then adjust it with suture; and care for that until it is healed.
And if it's small, you won't suffer ill effects from that where his pain restores that and makes flesh.
And if the biggest one is declining towards the parts inside the eyelid you should remove the surface inside, then correct that and suspend the biggest one with an incision, another from which you start, press it from all sides. If the eyelid itself is elongated by this incision, it will not be noticeable in any case.
Then at the incision, wash the wound with salty water; and care for the area until it heals.
The sentence "Capitole x." seems to be in a language that combines elements of Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French-like syntax, but its exact translation might require more context or specific knowledge about medieval medical terminology and dialects.
The sentence "De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel" seems to be a line from the text that describes medical practices, likely focusing on eye or eyelid treatment.
Axcirnath is caused by something that's created in the layers of the eyelid, especially more so with infants. This aggravates their illnesses and affects their vision; they can't look at the brightness of sunlight because their tears get stuck to them.
And you should touch those several times on their faces constantly, and they sleep with the same. Their eyelids are wet over their brows, which have already been covered in puffiness, and there's an anticipation of conjunctival inflammation in their eyes; and when you press the area where your fingers are, you can feel swelling inside those.
And there is another way for surgery in which the sick person puts their head on your side and then you place a cloth over them and make an incision. You create a circle according to the quantity of pus found throughout that part, and then you put that above that and press with your fingers all around so that inflammation would be added inside this circle, and in the middle of that moisture you cut diagonally across the fissure by its width, and the fissure shouldn't be larger than the one made during a tubal ligation.
In the preparation phase, you should cut through the membrane completely until you reach pus, which occurs after white fatty pus begins to process in all the major positions via a wound according to the shape of white fat.
Then extract those with cloths which you have enveloped between your fingers at the protruding parts and mix them around with your right and left hands until they are dispersed.
And remember not to adjust within the wound itself directly because there might be pus that hasn't surfaced and you should avoid removing it.
If there is no pus in the beginning of the cut, then you should adjust inside the cut with a small tool so that pus can develop; and subsequently remove it as we have mentioned. And also submerge cloths from him in water, vinegar and add oil, then place them on the area and strengthen those with powder.
And in such a manner they spread salt and place it in the cavity of the cut because what remains from that moisture.
Then take care of it until it heals.
If you happen upon pus in the area, then treat it with plaster bandages until it heals.
The text "Capitole xi." appears to be part of a larger work possibly related to medieval medical practices or another discipline using Latin-based terminology with some unique linguistic features.
The sentence "De manieyras de tactimi del huel" seems to be in a language that combines elements of Latin and Old French, perhaps with influences from Italian or Spanish as well.
When there are natural red bumps on the eyes, and it's an old one, then those cause discomfort to the eye leading to methods of ocular illnesses like excessive tears and swelling of eyelids and tissue that causes damage to the eye itself, which is called blinding of the eye. The cure happens in four ways: or through cauterization with fire; or using acute medicine as was mentioned in the chapter on cauterization; or by performing excision followed by suturing; or with needles according to what I'm saying.
And indeed cover that you place the tip of the patient's head on your seat; then convert the eyelid of the old man to your left hand, and if it is converted, yes it is; and if not, insert a needle into the one where there is firmness in the beginning pus before leaving the eyelid, and make the needle penetrate through at that place above, and this must be - near the edge of the eyelid from which hairs are born - near the hairs, and pull out the needle to its ends on top of the eyelid, and convert it to a ray.
And indeed proceed within the junction of the eyelid leaving the hairs adjusted to the surface of the incident tear duct in the major lacrimal into the lacrimal gland; and indeed extract the needle and pause with the eyelid powder of sand or dust, and proceed over the eyelid by tracing a line, and this should be like the figure of a mint leaf.
Indeed, it is customary that the figure depends on the amount of deflation in the eyelid, which has already diversified among humans, and among those are the indigenous who cause a large amount inside the lid according to the extent by which the lid becomes swollen.
And indeed proceed along the surface of the two lines that you traced, starting from the major lacrimal into the minor lacrimal. And if your incision near the natural hairs such as that of a king's thickness.
And indeed place the needle in one of the two corners of the chain, and indeed scrape that completely, then adjust according to your cut the two lips at the mouth or with a fine wool thread, clean it off, and make them stick what is superfluous from the threads between two eyebrows due to certain causes that may happen. If you wish to do this way, otherwise do not care.
And indeed let the thread of the stitches rest inside for three or four days, and take care of this.
And if you wish, let the wound and its stitches rest, then take care of this by letting it dry out and shrink, which when the eyelid is swollen you must seal the wound and add to it; indeed do so as the ancients taught.
Indeed, with him there is concern about the patient, and it's a good operation, and not out of his fear.
And there is another way to consider it, and that's when you draw the shape of the leaf of mint on the eyelid, then indeed raise the eyelid with three nails separated and grouped according to this form:
Indeed, if it's not possible this way, use the nails instead, and that isn't equal, then take a needle with thread and place that in the middle of the figure, and insert another needle close to the major lacrimal gland, and another needle according to the minor lacrimal gland, and adjust between your fingers the needles to be equal, and indeed raise your hand to an elevation equal to that, lift the whole chain on which it's attached as we have recounted.
And indeed adjust both lips of the wound with stitches, and care for that area until it is healed.
Indeed, if an abscess occurs, you should continue with your operation or incision, but treat that abscess with bandages and resemble it, and apply with ointment.
And indeed there are some inflammations under the eyelid that their hairs should be converted, then remember to use in that what we have mentioned about operations; indeed stitches are more artificial in others.
Indeed, for surgeons, it's according to this form: And indeed, you should convert the eyelid and divide the figure which is inside according to what I have recounted; then make two canes or two fine needles whose length corresponds to the length of the eyelid and the width of them is similar to the width of the surface. And indeed you have incised at the extremities of each part where you have the threads.
And indeed add to the underside of what is superfluous from the eyelid of the old man, and tighten the threads of each part tightly, then let that rest for a few days, as the chain due to tightness will die and be rejected and it will decompose as it passes out naturally.
Indeed, if it's delayed, then break the stitches at the corners, and indeed care for the wound until it is healed.
Then when it's hardened, the eyelid will be lifted without hurting the hairs.
And this is the way you should make two canes as follows: And it should have the length and width of neither too much nor too little.
Chapter XII.
Concerning lifting the painful hairs on the backside when the hair is hard.
When they are unnatural hairs that are hard and prickly causing pain, the operation is to take a fine needle and place it on this fine thread of linen, then adjust its extremities in a very subtle manner without touching any part. And the length of the needles is as long as your palm.
And indeed you can prepare another fine needle from that, and pinch its extremities if you wish.
And indeed place the patient's head on your seat, and is near to the sun so that your work may be recognized, as it is a subtle and small operation.
And then insert the needle into the place where hair grows appropriately, making it penetrate the eyelid carefully while you remove it from the natural skin.
And then pull the hair inside and insert that into the follicle, and use one or two or three hairs but not more.
And then pull your hand into that place where the hair has been pulled out to the follicle in the eyelid on the natural skin.
If it is pulled out to the follicle and not removed from the skin, pull out the follicle in the eyelid on the skin. From that place, where the follicle was pulled out under the eye, you can proceed.
And pull it out towards the field of vision, whereupon you will pull out the follicle and that skin, and dig into every inch and clean the field, and leave the cuts for two or three days, within which the hair adheres to its place and grows back healthy flesh.
And if the hair is too short, then adjust a long hair among the natural hairs, and elevate it towards that, or leave it in such a way that it grows about to fill some space, and then you elevate that.
Title XIII.
On the treatment of eyelash removal, which occurs on the eyelid above.
When it occurs in the field of vision to remove an eyelash, and when the eyelid contracts against its edge, either on the right or left side, due to poor consolidation of scar tissue or cut edges or burn marks, it is called porcupine-like. This eyelash removal is either natural or accidental, caused by the consolidation of scars or cuts or burns, or by resemblance to their maladies.
The method of the operation for this is that you will cut through that consolidation and separate those tissues from it. You place a piece of linen cloth in between them where there was once a gap, and tie them together until they heal.
And do not forget to use your patient's treatment for the causes that dry out and constrict. If you do this, it will return to eyelash removal worse than nothing at all if left untreated over time.
Use remedies for those causes that moisten and soothe as fenugreek does, soaking it in water to which you add a bit of the cloth, or use camphorated ointment, which becomes liquid when mixed with some oil. Immerse the cloth in this solution and then apply it.
And the treasure of your treatment is that you puncture everything that is not yet consolidated according to the shape when it began.
And this operation that we have described is nothing more than a correction of eyelash removal, which does not return the shape of the area as it was before.
Title XIV.
On the treatment for eyelash removal which is performed on the eyelid.
This eyelash removal which is done on the eyelid below, known as vertical eyelash removal; it can be either a natural phenomenon or an accident.
An accidental eyelash removal is caused by scars, cuts, burns, or other similar conditions.
The method of the operation for this is that you should take a needle with two threads attached to it, place the needle in the skin, and then make it pass through the left lacrimal (tear duct) into the right lacrimal, ensuring that the thread reaches both ends of the skin.
And then extend the skin upwards from above towards the needle and hold it with the needle itself, and incise on a wide spot. And then, if the shape of the eyelid returns as expected, it is good; otherwise, take the thread and hold it in the cut area, and with this convert the eyelid, making the two cuts on the lower part of the eyelid.
And let the ends of the two cuts be at the two corners of the incision you have made between them, and form an angle with each other when they come together, making their figure.
This figure is the Greek letter: the lambda.
And then cut that skin by the amount that corresponds to the width of your lower eye, so as to flatten the eyelid.
And then adjust the separated parts and stitch those with the thread of wool; and then treat those using the medicines that moisten and heal, applying them in such a way that they heal.
And if eyelash removal occurs due to a cut, stitch or burn, then you should make an incision over the hair on the eyelid according to what has been done beforehand. And then separate with the paste between two layers as we have said.
In the overall treatment discussion of eyelash removal which is either above or below, it runs through your operation according to how it is prepared in terms of the shape of eyelash removal, and that comes in various shapes.
And all artisans are wise to prepare something in every manner that is possible for it within them to return the shape to its natural form, or close to that, and this patient according to what suits their operation and the tools in their most suitable arrangements.
Title XV.
On the adherence of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
When this consolidation occurs in many people, it is necessary that the eyelid adheres to more of the white of the eye above and restricts its natural movements and functions. Therefore, you should insert the end of your thread through the lower eyelid and elevate it there, or extend it up to the upper corner.
And then you insert the needle through a fine incision, which is not at the sharpness of the cuts, having blunt and small so that the patient does not get upset by the operation, and keep the incision that does not diminish the heat at its sharpness.
And make your incision so as to remove that adhesion in a way that the eyelid returns to its natural shape and the entire adhesion is healed.
And then, put the heat in salty water where you will wash it; or distill from junia dissolved in water.
And then separate between the eyelid and the heat with a soft cloth, place on the heat wool soaked in hen's egg white, and after use remedies for consolidation until it is healed.
Capitol Chapter XVI
Chapter 16: On incisions of the nails and prominence of flesh in tear ducts.
Know that a nail can be in two ways, one being nerve-related, and it resembles a hard, thin ciphac; or not nerve-related, resembling white damp that has condensed. The latter, when you touch it, makes the nail take on a single point, it is detached and the nail does not stick to it.
And both species do not begin until within the major tear duct, where they gradually expand covering the view and prevent light and heat motion.
The way to act in the incision is that the patient holds their head where you are, and then open their nostrils, lift the eyelid with your hand, and after carefully cut the nail from a small pebble duplication, extend it to the parts above. And then take a pin and insert it into that with a horse hair or cowhide, or from the same, or a strong dog, or gradually extend the tip of the pin and place that in the middle of the nail, then penetrate that with the needle, and fix to the nail; and extend that to the parts above, scrape off the skin at the edge of the nail which severs the pupil. And follow that into the hair inside the tail end of it.
And then insert the remaining part into the tear duct in a fine incision or with small slits, and makes the flesh of the tear duct naturally, such that through this incision there does not develop continuous flow of tears.
And some times the nail at the sun's edge is extended or on the heel, as we have said, and then it should be scraped out through this opening which has this shape:
And remember that in the incision do not touch the corneal epithelium and let it result in rupture, and that the pupil be pierced.
And the incision gets in the nostril a little salt water or made from vinegar, let that one inside for another day; and after that heal it with water that covers until it is healed.
And if the nail is not nerve-related and you cannot insert the needle, or it does not stick to that part of the nail, then these remedies for the nail are treated with medicines, and they are healed in this way as I have mentioned and recommended in the division.
And if you want to detach that, then open the nostril of the patient and take out a fine incision along with the sharpness according to this shape: in subtlety. And if you notice that it is becoming rarefied and mixed with the tear duct, then distill from your mouth in the nostril made from vinegar or from apple cider or from salt water, and pour the nostril inside for another day.
And then perform the operation on that until everything from it is removed, otherwise if the contrary pus ball is in the nostril, then you leave that one, and after healing the pus ball until it is healed.
And continue with your operation on that with reason until it is healed.
The prominence of the tear flesh, if you notice by great harm in the nostril, should be suspended from a nail; and cut that one part after another, and do not finish the incision for fear of causing continuous tears to flow.
And then distill on the tear duct with apple cider vinegar and make it from vinegar until it is healed.
Capitol Chapter XVII
Chapter 17: On incisions of the alveolar and what is born from adjusted flesh in the nostril.
Some in the nostrils of some people an odd flesh grows, and it is overgrown so that it covers the pupil, or approaches or strengthens near the eyelids, and squeezes the eyelids to the parts beyond and is assembled touching the back wall.
The operation on you is that the patient holds their head where you are; and then open all the nostrils of that one and collect all that flesh with suitable tools for water, or use forceps or spoons; and after that cut the flesh starting there until everything is finished through the incisors, and remember not to remove that part of it should be your operation.
And make your incision with which you cut those ones or through the gap that we have recommended in the incisions of the nails, or with small slits along which the snail collects as it comes to resemble this chapter.
When your operation is completed and the entire flesh has been refreshed, then fill the nostril with salt, or distill it into a powdered rue, resembling the powder of corrosive medicines, and place it above the nostril with a slice of raw hen's egg to ensure the protection against pus in case there's an abscess.
And if any cause of garlic burns the mouth and causes burning in the stomach, then place the nostril on the burn site with water until that burn subsides, and apply it continuously during this operation so that it is cured, similarly treat the adjusted flesh where an event occurs in the nostril of this spice.
But may you know that all healing of the nostril takes place naturally or accidentally through iron, and do not put your hand into these operations when that member is suffering this operation.
Chapter XVIII.
On the collection of garlic in the nostril.
Garlic has rosy veins that are stubborn in the nostril and prevent its operation, and heal the nostril over a period of days.
So it is necessary at the beginning that you consider whether the nostril with garlic is strong and in it there is no other ailment than garlic, then you remove that garlic.
And you command the patient to place their head in your direction, and suspend those veins with an onion or two according to your discretion; and let that onion be of fine double duplication as follows:
or if it's two onions gradually in one body as shown below:
And when those veins are removed with fine subtleties and subtlety, remove the smell immediately afterwards, while you observe those veins being refreshed by the garlic and turned over.
And remember not to let the garlic reach the ends of the nose; and if your operation is in midmorning facing the sun, ensure your operation movement that you only involve those veins.
And when you have completed, then distill in the nostril with green pepper or rue so that its sharpness corrodes whatever is refreshed from the garlic.
If it's not possible for you to remove everything at that time, then cover everything with what relieves your pain, and leave him for a few days until the pain in him subsides and ensure protection against pus.
And apply it continuously to you according to your mother's method so that you are cured.
And this is the form of the scissors:
Chapter XIX.
On reducing swelling in the nose.
When you treat swellings with a cautery or with an acute burning medicine as described before and it is not cured, then there is no need for you in it, but you must open the pus sac to accelerate its maturation, and drain all the moisture that is inside it, let alone pouring until the bone becomes exposed.
And when the bone is exposed and there's a corruption or blackness, then you apply to him with a stick of this form:
And it is named with a sharp tip, and made of iron inside, let the head be red just like that which is made pierced by the hole of an axe or finely drilled (just like in the following form).
And place that above the corrupted part of the bone, and apply rotate it between your fingers, and gently press your hand gradually until you know that this corruption has been removed.
And do it with some repetitions, and apply restore the area from drying and coagulative causes.
And if the area is hardened and in him there's a good flesh and it has been removed from the disease and garlic for forty days, and it is not renewed and there's no pus in him, then you know that he is cured.
And if not, then it's not in him but to reduce the fissure to the shape of the nose, and according to this manner: you uncover from below with iron or with an acute medicine, and when the bone is exposed, then take hold following this form:
Let the end of your iron be triangular, and let the shaft of it be primarily extended into the end just as shown here.
And place that above the bone, let it be close to the lacrimal; and extend your hand slightly in the nostril, and apply rotate your hand along the hold until all the bone penetrates, and let him feel the patient through his touch as he finds an exit when you use his hand.
And then restore the area with coagulative drying medicines, just like these ones are prescribed.
And when you observe that the flesh and the area are hardened, then the substance which was discharged to the parts goes back to the nose, so this is slight pus on the patient.
Chapter XX.
On reducing the prominence of the nostril.
When the nostril protrudes to its entirety and there's no pain or diminution during operation, then you have to guide the patient, and apply you make them breathe in through their neck on the scarification place and let it bleed well; and then apply rest by placing liquid liniment made from aloe and sesame oil and yolk of egg over the nostril with powdered plaster.
And the method of the powders is that you take linen cloths, and each cloth be duplicated into four parts; and make from those pieces.
And place those one on top of the other according to the amount that the patient needs. And apply firm pressure on those covered by the linen cloth until stiffness appears; and repeat the suction cups over wetness during scarification; and keep the suction cups in place and allow the body to stretch day and night.
If meanwhile the ligament is softened, then it should be stretched.
And continue to hold the ligament straight day and night as we have said.
And if the body has already been reduced, that is good, and if not, then continue with applying plaster over the powders and the stiffness, as well as suction cups until recovery occurs.
Chapter XXI.
Regarding the onset of the prominence of the uveal layer.
When there is disruption in the uveal layer, and subsequently it becomes prominent like a slight swelling of the eyelids, resembling a mild inflammation. The shape of the eye is distorted due to this, and if this situation occurs, then the procedure to be followed as we have advised you will be such: You should insert your instrument into the cleft of the uvea at the place left after removing it from above, and then insert another part of your tool near which has a double thread coming out of the lacrimal part. Make that thread penetrate and guide the first needle according to its position; then cut open the area of the double line and lift the portion of the uvea along with it in the groove of the instrument, and press that firmly.
And after removing the needle, place on the eye wool soaked in egg white and let it sit until the thread falls into the uvea.
And afterwards treat the eye with what will make that comfortable once the infection is healed.
And some inflamed areas accumulate around the entire circumference of the eye within the eyelid, increasing its prominence greatly. Then puncture it with a fine needle that reaches into the root of the eye, and allow the aqueous humor to drain out, and then return the eye down slightly.
And after that, strengthen until it is healed.
Chapter XXII.
Regarding the treatment of conjunctivitis.
This disease called conjunctivitis is nothing but inflammation that settles in the eye resembling water flowing out, and it's not that one.
The method of treating it is to have the patient sit on the prepared seat straightly and take hold of his head with your hands from both sides, moving him so that you can see where the inflammation reaches the parts left, then dry it without letting it go down and keep looking at the eye as you see.
And if it doesn't descend downwards, know that it's water.
And if the descent of the inflammation isn't prepared as we have said, then make the patient sit between your hands and take a fine needle to pierce it over the eyelid, cutting off just a small part of the conjunctiva on the uveal membrane inside the corona (in that place you look), letting the inflammation be exposed.
And once it's exposed, then you distill water from the eye into which you have mixed honey or water in which you already boiled fenugreek and honey.
And afterwards treat the other causes until it is healed.
Chapter XXII.
Regarding the treatment of water flowing out from the eye.
We have already discussed the properties of water in its division and which one suits to pierce according to the description we declared, then that one according to the health.
And you should have the patient sit between your hands on a mat and hold his head in place firmly.
And then place your right hand near the inner eyelid of his eye, if the eye with water is the left eye; or with your right hand, if the eye is the right one.
And with your right hand take up an almond, if the eye is on the left side; or with your left hand, if the eye is on the right side.
And then place the tip of the almond near the cornea through the fullness of the eye along the membrane of the inner tear duct, and then scrape the almond with its edge and turn your hand towards that.
And then penetrate into the membrane of the eye and feel when the almond has been drained due to visibility.
And you should have the length of the almond's path to the root as being the same measure as the space between the pupil and the end of the blackness, which is the rim of the eye; there you will see the pupil in your view of the eye through the transparency of the cornea.
And then place the almond in the area where there is water, and pull it down slightly once or twice. And if the water descends right away, then observe the patient so that you see his vision through the almond in his eye immediately, and leave the almond on his eye.
And then rest for a little while; if the water has descended, then you should wait for that slight moment before removing the almond so it doesn't get stuck.
And when it's thus and doesn't descend, then you extract the almond gently, turning your hand little by little, and dissolve a small piece of clear gemstone salt in water; and with that wash inside the eye. Then leave the eye covered or stop with wool soaked in rubbed oil and egg white, and let the eye rest.
Those of our time customarily place above that which has been torn in the book of ointment.
And if you do not resist the urge to push through the wound in the skin due to its hardness - which is true for some of those whose skin becomes hard from pus - then find and use the instrument called an awl, which has this shape:
And therefore pierce that joint, and do not finish your hand at the tendon, and do not let it if it does not make way for the finger in a delicate spot.
Then insert the finger as we have said.
And you should complete your work well, have the sick person prepared to sleep decently in a room where they can lie on their back in darkness, and forbid all movements.
And place yourself in the nature of the sick person so that their nature is linearized, and do not let their head turn to either the right or left side at all.
And let him lie according to his disposition within three days.
And then release them in that dark bed and unclog the swollen view, and show him some remedies, and soon return his body within seven days.
And don't let you do this during the hour of treatments or shortly after infusion. You must avoid doing this because the water could overflow slightly due to its great and strong pressure.
If an abscess appears in the wound, then you should release the pus before the seventh day, and correct that where there is pus formation.
Then you must observe the person's view and pause over their facial expression for their breath regulation through their nostrils for a few days, existing in the dark room.
And then let them get used to this dark room gradually and converse about its causes.
And know that within an almond, the disciple cannot see many defects, and thus you should be fervent about the operation.
And already has been reached by us from some of those who are in the Artach, and someone says to make fire in an Ayrac pot that is pierced through which water seeps.
However, I have not seen this perfectly in our land which has such water, nor is it legal in some of the books of the ancients; and this may be a new thing.
And these are the forms of the species of pots by which one is placed over those where that person does not know them:
And they should be made of iron or proper copper, and let the ends of them at this subtlety triangular, the sharp end also like that is the form.
Chapter XXIV.
On treating flesh wounds in the nose.
When in the nose there are various buried flesh lumps of which one cause is such that it assembles to a pus-filled spot or a land mass, and this sickness is called a polyp which resembles that land mass. And if the flesh of him/her is crooked, pitted, dark-colored; and there's the case where the flesh appears to be lion-like but not with a dark color.
Therefore in that which is among these lion-like flesh lumps that are not fraudulent or crooked, you should have the sick person stand between your hands and expose them to sunlight, and open their nostrils, and touch them with your tongue on those flesh lumps. And then remove that from the far parts, and carefully cut out what you have understood from those with a sharp, subtle tool between one part so you know all the flesh has been exposed; if there is any significant cause within them for which excision is possible, then use one of these finer instruments to facilitate this removal as it would not harm any significant cause. If there is itching or if an abscess appears in the wound, then you should pause on this that concerns; or it's about malignant abscesses, then you squeeze and cauterize that place where the disease has spread and all cavities are exposed.
And then let it heal in the nose near the incision site with water or wine. If the nose is opened and there's moisture inside the palate from this process, then you should know that it has been healed.
If the moisture does not penetrate as you expect, then you should know that inside him/her is flesh without pus under your nose bones which have not been subjected to excision.
Therefore you should insert faith into him/her where there is any lump, and drain the pus with the help of water, pause between each nut between one ounce or measure, and let the sick person stand and insert an end of the faith in their nose towards the ray or another cause which could be within them.
And after this is done, let him/her exhale its smell so it reaches the canals of their nose, and stand over his/her nostril area, which causes many defects in making these actions seem like what children do in schools, it's a slight reason to do that.
And then pause the two ends of the faith, one end that extends over the nose and the other which exits in the nose, and then manage flesh stitches on the nostrils that are within the faith, and do this knowing that the flesh is already around the nostrils of the faith.
And then remove the gall bladder, place in the nose near the extraction point of the tongue a spoon, and do this for three days or more until the ointment has dissolved all that is rotten in the meats.
And at the end of the cause, place a lead tube in the nose for several days until healing occurs.
If there is a cure that dries out, use that one.
And this is the form of the apparatus for head-venting which consists of distilling oils and medicines in the nostrils:
And make this of silver or copper, which looks like a small open lamp, as small as a little basin, and the mouth similarly.
And if you want, make a closed tube like a cane, and the tube of this instrument for head-venting is flat, open; there should be a handle at its back end, to which you place it when you heat up oil or whatever you want from liquids and fluids.
Chapter XXV.
About the nostril tips.
Reductions are made that the nostril tip exists in the extremities of the nose, and it becomes enlarged and inflamed for a few days during which its healing process is observed.
And so conduct that you introduce it at the beginning of the appearance of it, and remove all of it. And then place on the spot or with a cautery or burning medicine where there is a lesion.
If its introduction is delayed and it becomes enlarged, then consider if it has hardened, is firm, dark in color and lacks sensation; then do not touch this with iron which is pus. The reductions that lead to this pus indicate that the lesion it introduces causes a great malady over that on which it was situated.
And if the pus is leon in texture and not dark in color, and there are chances for introduction throughout this area, then evacuate the patient and introduce this sign with fear, and treat the lesion with things that dry out and restrict until it heals.
Chapter XXVI.
About the suture of the nose, lips and earlobe when continuity is dissolved by disease or resemblance.
Know that whenever you encounter the dissolution of continuity in one of these cartilages, there is little to gain from that operation unless it's for certain individuals.
And so proceed, when you approach any cause of those, consider if it's disease fresh on the tongue, then adjust the two lips of the disease with suture and treat it until it heals.
And if the lips of continuity dissolution are already separated, and any part is healthy, then proceed that you remove every part of its apparent origin until no disease escapes. And then adjust the two lips with suture and strengthen them, spread the tongue of a dragon's disease on them and mix it finely, place over that some dust of diafinicon or another of the consolidating plasters for three days or four, then remove that and replace that plaster until those gall bladders are removed by themselves, then treat with ointment until it heals.
The method for the suture is that you add the dissolution of continuity or with needles as we have recounted in the suture of the abdomen, or add the dissolution of continuity to the gall bladder as it pleases you and let it be known.
Chapter XXVII.
About the extraction of those causes that occur in the two lips within the parts inside.
Reductions are made that in the parts inside of their lips certain hard pus masses resemble fat from veins, and some are smaller and others are larger.
And so proceed that you convert the lips and each opening of those hard masses from every part, then prepare for their extraction by filling in the space with fine sand until the disease is strengthened, then wash them with warm water and treat the area with a stictifying agent until it heals.
Chapter XXVIII.
About introducing the flesh adjustment in the gums.
Reductions are made about the flesh adjustment in the gums which the ancients called albus, then proceed that you suspend that on a nail or have it hanging from your fingers and introduce that by its own force, then let the healthy blood flow or the disease run.
And then place on the area with fine sand or other coagulating or drying powders.
And if that flesh returns, then introduce it again, and cauterize it; which after the cauterization will not return.
Chapter XXIX.
About tooth extraction with iron.
When on the surface of the teeth in the parts inside and those at the front, as well as between the gums, there are sharp, jagged ones, some reductions have blackened and turned into citrines or vertebrae so that the gum appears through this corruption, and the teeth appear.
And thus guide that you place the patient between your hands and position their head on your shoulder, and bite into the teeth where those gums protrude causing such pain, and let the resulting taste of blood and yellow color as well as other colors within them cause changes like sand in which nothing breaks down, do this with respect to the darkness and the yellowness and among others they should be transformed.
And if that is enough for what's in the beginning of digestion, then it's good; otherwise, you will continue with the food on those other days and the second day and the third until it reaches the desired outcome in what you want.
And know that teeth have need of refined metals in various forms and of different shapes according to how they are prepared for your operation. And for knowing which razor to use for the tooth that is being prepared inside is different from the razor used between teeth in other forms, and these forms of razors should be prepared by you as you will see shortly:
Chapter.xxx.
On removing teeth.
And that you heal the tooth from its pain all through the operation and take your time in the complete extraction of it, so that there is no reason to replace the loss when it is extracted, which is a substance that causes inflammation during the extraction of the tooth.
And when the patient feels that tooth needing to be extracted, you must confidently certify which is the painful tooth, because different inflammations cause pain and drop into a healthy tooth, and then you extract that one, but the pain doesn't subside until the maligned tooth and causing pain is removed, which we have seen already during the operation of barbies.
And when you must certify which is the painful tooth, and knowing this well, then you should scrape in the area of the tooth with its gum where there might be any defect, so that it dissolves from the tooth's gingiva all around, and then you proceed to cut at your touch, or with fine blades starting small gradually until that defect is eliminated.
And then cut with strong gripping force for good conversation or impact strength, and place the head of the patient between your hands so that you have to not let it slip, and proceed to remove the tooth according to rectitude in manner so as not to damage it, nor give more pain to the jawbone.
And if it is not easily removed, then take one of those instruments, and hold the patient's hand from all sides with ease and make the removal as forcefully as possible, just like at the beginning.
And if the tooth is embedded or corroded, then you should fully cover it with a cloth and tightly hold onto its slender extremity so that it doesn't get stuck during your tightening around it with your hands.
And make your incision precisely during the scraping of all parts of the gum and preserve your strength so as not to damage it and break a part of it, and return over the jawbone for its sharpness to be more than the first pain of it.
And be careful not to do what some ignorant barbers do during their rashness and impudence in tooth extraction, which they don't administer as we have recommended; because various inflammations bring about severe jaw pains that are more difficult to remove, and all the razors of them become dull or some of those ones, or you extract that one through certain bones of the mandible as we have testified.
And after removing the tooth, wash the mouth with vinegar or add salt to it.
And if you need to remove pus for this purpose, just like in inflammations, then apply a small quantity of garlic and sprinkle it over the wound, and if that garlic doesn't work, cauterize.
The shape of the forceps and delicate tongs by which teeth are grasped at the beginning is long extremity, with a short handle and thickness, so that they don't bend when working on those.
And they should be such as thick handles between which when you straighten them with those, they are not bent, and their long extremities are short.
And let them be made of Indian iron with straight long extremities, and in the extremities of those are teeth that one fits into the other and extend by gradual thickening, and some inflammations have the form of a beak of a pelican which is called a stork, so it's strong grip, and they have a strong constriction.
Chapter.xxxi.
On tooth extraction and bone removal from the cracked jawbone.
When you need to extract a tooth that is stuck due to some reason, then you should place your hand over the spot where it is located by one day or two until the area softens; and then use your fingers or grasp with your tongs which are assembled in the beak of a pelican called stork or gloves, the shape of forceps:
The extremities of them should be made inside like a file or an axe.
And if you don't comply with your judgment about these forceps or tongs, then you should dig into the gum and scrape all the flesh, and insert an instrument called an atali, which is a small lever whose shape is like this:
And whether it's a large or small extremity, don't let it cool down so that it doesn't freeze.
So if the remedy is to be pierced, yes it is; otherwise, help yourself with these other tools of which these are the forms: the form of the first tool is triangular at the extremity in which there's some thickness:
The form of the second tool is that it be triangular and have a particularly subtle extremity.
And now help yourself with this tool having two ramps, of which this form is the one nearby: and among other tools which are used in tooth filing; when this youth is made with this tool which resembles a large cat, and this is its form:
From the triangular, twisted or short extremity, which has some thickness, don't let it cool down so that it doesn't freeze.
And know these tools for tooth removal are similar to the other tools.
May the artisans be skillful and subtle in their art, find what suits them according to what it means for their operation and various diseases; among which are the diseases to which the ancients neither described nor used any specific tool, due to the various species' forms.
May the bone of the mandible or other bones of the mouth be frozen, if so place your weight on that at its spot according to what is convenient for you among the tools and the forceps which we have said in removing tooth roots, and help yourself with this gesture, having this form:
And if there's any thickness, remove it gradually little by little, and bind or hold the mouth to prevent swelling or escape until all the bone is removed; then restore the area with suitable medicines.
And if there's a small pus pocket in the bone, then remove that along with its darkness, and treat it from within until it is healed.
Chapter xxxii.
On the treatment of distinguished teeth over others.
When teeth are eminent not according to their natural course as in those cases, especially when it's prominent among women and even more so among elderly revered ladies; thus consider: if the tooth is very close to another tooth, and direct extraction or application of a salve for it is impossible, then you must leave that one alone. However, if it is not attached to another tooth, then proceed with this tool which has this form; it resembles the removal of pork fat, made from Indian iron with an extremely sharp end.
And if your incision is on the part where you would have to remove that tooth after days due to the hardness of the tooth, and it's not the same as another tooth.
And if it is an eminent tooth that needs to be filed down, then file it with Indian iron inlaying tool which has this form:
And it's all made of Indian iron with the groove where it is used to make punctures like when filing using nails which grind teeth gradually over soft days, so that no other tooth gets damaged and falls out. And then draw it at the end, and cut that with some small razors.
And if it's a tooth where one part is frozen and touches the tongue, then you should grind that area until the roughness of that portion is eliminated and leveled out, making sure the tongue doesn't hurt or confuse words.
Chapter xxxiii.
On restoring teeth that have fallen out, using gold or silver fillings.
When teeth are lost due to percussion or impact damage, and the patient cannot hold up against what they bite on, you have treated that with stiptic medicines, but your treatment hasn't worked. Then for those that remain loose only in gold fillings and not silver ones should be used, as silver corrodes over time and might take several days to apply, but gold never changes color.
And let the filler be of such subtlety and density according to how much it can enter between the teeth; as for the process, take the filler and hold twice that amount between two healthy teeth. Then allow both ends of the filler to grow outwards until they reach the thread on the sound tooth from the other side. And then repeat the process into the part where you started, strengthen your hand with skill and knowledge so that it doesn't get loose.
And when tightening the filler, ensure you don't damage the teeth that you're treating.
And then use forceps or pluck them all out from the excess ends of the filler. Add those to every spot with your gesture and mix them between the healthy tooth and the loose tooth, ensuring it doesn't harm the tongue. And then smooth that out like a Roman would do.
May if it's slipped or broken, strengthen that or those with another filler in such a manner throughout its entire time.
And this is the form of teeth and the figure of restoring two healthy teeth and two loose ones, as seen in these instances tied together:
And when it's done to return one tooth or two in their respective places, and they've grown back as we have described, and that they grow.
And do this only if skilled artisans and wise people are involved.
And some sores are suitable for certain causes of the bones of cattle, and it is made from them in this form like a tooth, placed in the location where the tooth fails, and it is strengthened just as we have said, and remains and serves there for a long time.
Chapter XXXIV.
Regarding the tongue disease which manifests in speech and forbids speaking.
This ligament which leaves the tongue with some sores or is natural in which one is born, or accidental and happens due to illness which has already become established.
And the operation for them is that you open their mouth, at its original opening in their usual position; and lift their tongue, then proceed to cut that ligament nerve according to the width within which the tongue's recent size fits.
If in that there is any hardness or obstruction, and this has become established due to illness, then you cut one and divide that along the width within which you have divided the ligament and dissolve the obstruction.
And make sure that there is not a cut made in the edge of the flesh and that you divide here carefully so that no pus flows out.
And afterwards, wash the marks of the incision with warm water or with vinegar or with soap; and place your tongue back in its usual position; thus, you have to ensure that the patient's tongue remains in every night so that it does not become hardened into another sore.
If pus should come out, place over the spot a glass cup; but if the blood flows, then apply a pointed cautery to that area which is suitable for this. And treat that cure with the other causes until it is healed.
Chapter XXXV.
Regarding the extraction of a cyst on the tongue.
Some sores occur on the tongue resembling small blisters, preventing the tongue from its natural operation; and the swelling becomes magnified as it fills the mouth.
And the procedure for them is to open the mouth of the patient facing the sun, and inspect the cyst.
And if you find it of a dark color or black, hard, which the patient cannot feel, then do not touch that lump as it is movable.
And if it is of a whitish color, where there is moisture, then you insert the knife in it, and cut that with a fine point, and cut all around; and if pus comes out during your operation, then you place over it a glass cup, as a kind of glass, from which the pus can be drained.
And proceed with your work until you have treated it properly for him, until it is washed with vinegar and salt; and treat that with other remedies until it heals.
Chapter XXXVI.
Regarding the extraction of cysts from both ears and that which is contained in the parotid gland, as well as other cysts.
When you encounter in the parotid gland, they are glands which are woven with fat, and which occur outside, known as the two ears, and when you treat them as we have said in the division and if they do not heal, then you should consider whether the cyst is hard, of a dark color, without much sensation, then do not touch that with iron.
And if it is of reddish color and the root is thick, then do not touch that with iron because of the pus flow; wait until it softens by itself, then either you pierce it, or it will break on its own.
And if it is of white color, soft, and the root of it is fine, then that is one to be cut.
And the procedure for them is that before your operation you consider whether it has rested, after being cauterized and a complete rest period, or if there has been some diminution due to any diminution; then have the patient facing the sun, his head in its usual position, open their mouth, and take their tongue forward with both hands while they hold an instrument of noble form, which this is:
And it should be made of silver or gold, and should be fine as a thread.
So when you press the tongue and show him the cyst to you, if you feel it with your fingers, then take the knife and place it in the mouth, and pull it outwards as much as possible from all directions. Or when you pull on any cause of the membranes, then proceed to cut that with the tool which has this form:
Or when you pull on any cause of the membranes, then proceed to cut that with the tool which has this form: It is similar to forceps, however the extremities of it are curved, so that each one's opening is in front of the other, sharp tools made of iron.
If this tool is not available to you at the moment, then cut it with a fine point, not sharp on the other side.
And after you have cut one seam, cut the other according to this method of incision, and afterwards let the incision dry with soap water.
If you encounter pus coming out, let it dry with the decoction of spinach or rue leaves and resemble that in the remedies for stopping bleeding where the pus flow can be restricted, then proceed to treat it until it heals.
Some healings occur in the gallbladder and other blisters under those two ears, and you introduce those according to what I said in the instruction for treating two kinds of illnesses equally.
And I had treated a woman with a blister which was located in her gallbladder, that blister took on a dark color and had little sensation, it had already filled up the gallbladder of her, and the woman was breathing very heavily, she had also been forbidden to eat or drink water from then on, and she was already close to death if not relieved within one or two more days.
And the blister had become so large that it contained two months' worth of intestines which were passing through two wounds.
So I treated her surgically and had her lie down on one of their elbows, then I pulled out that (intestine), and removed the large portion from her. Then I introduced that which corresponds to the other wound, and placed my hand over her mouth, and compressed her tongue, and I positioned the elbow above that blister.
And then I removed a large part of it, only some small bleeding was coming from her. So the gallbladder of that woman was completely healed, she began to drink water immediately, and shortly after started eating food again. So I didn't stop introducing medicines into that blister for a long time, and then another blister formed in place of it, which continued to grow as that one did.
So I put it in and cauterized her gallbladder, from then on she recovered; and later I walked around wondering what God had done to me after this.
Chapter XXXVII.
On treating a swollen area when it is blistered.
When phlegm accumulates in the uvula, and it is blistered and long, then it is named perpendicularly; and if it's located at the thick and round part, then it is called a lump.
When it has healed as we have said in the division, and your healing does not agree with this, and since the blistered cautery is already finished for you and it is subtle, then consider that you should introduce that which was added round; and if it's along that length, and it bleeds, of dark color or black, and is not at your fingertips, then consider trying to start introducing it, where there is fear on the throat.
And when you do it according to the method I have told you about its whiteness and length, that you check the throat and press on her tongue with an instrument of which one's form can be understood, then place your elbow in the new position, pull that out downwards and introduce that along one of two instruments as mentioned in the instructions for treating two kinds of illnesses.
And consider that you should not introduce that but what is adjusted over the natural end of your addition, for if you introduce too much from it, you will injure his speech.
And at the end of the introduction, use that which we have recommended in the instructions for treating two kinds of illnesses, and care for it so that she/he becomes healed.
And if the throat was frightened by the introduction of it, consider using iron in its cauterization to alleviate his/her fear, and the method of cauterization is simply with hot water. So you place your head on her/his throat, then press her/his tongue with the instrument we have mentioned, take that water which we have mentioned in the cauterization chapter, spread it alive over there, hold it neither thick nor subtle, and fill the cavity of that instrument whose form is as follows:
Let the extremity of his/her cavity be where the medicine is placed just like in a vessel, and place the instrument over her/his throat so that saliva or saliva-like secretion from her/his mouth occurs due to the intrinsical medicine, so that it does not cause any harm to his/her gallbladder and heals him/her.
And place your hand on the medicine, and squeeze it over the uvula for about half an hour until you see that it has darkened and calmed due to eating the medicine.
And if you want, take out and wrap it around the end of the thread, immerse the thread in the medicine, insert the thread into the hole with the thread above so that the thread sticks to that tube, and do this as many times until you achieve what you want from the cauterization of the uvula, then leave it until it dries and falls off around three or four days.
And if you need to reapply the medicine, do that, and after the cauterization, clean it in the uvula circuit with a chewed thread, change what is inside that circuit of her/his medicine, and wash it with water rinse, and treat externally with embrocation, and internally with remedies until she/he becomes healed.
And this kind of treatment is safe that one who heals avoids fear and remains long.
Some healings are done to the uvula with that which is more subtle than cauterization and introduction, which is healed through subinhalation in this manner: take calamus, hyssop, origanum, ruda, Arabic gum, camomile, butter, and similar from those herbs, adjust all of these causes or some of them into one vessel, let them be submerged with strong vinegar, boil; and the decoction should be strained well, and there is a tube in the middle of that vessel on which an aram-made siphon instrument is placed according to this manner; it can be made of silver or gold.
And immerse the extremity in the mouth of the patient inside where the steam rises to the uvula over the eustachian tube, inside where the uvula is moved and obscured.
And repeatedly apply heat to those dried spots within which it dries, and be careful not to perform this treatment immediately after the appearance of pustules, as it could exacerbate in the pustule, and do not allow you to do this way, but rather announce the presence of pustule with caut.
May it not be that you present this instrument, then take a stick and make a wick in the extremity of the patient, so that the mouth of the patient can breathe freely, as the wick of the hemp prevents steam from burning the mouth.
And this treatment is good for health.
Chapter XXXVIII.
Chapter XXXVIII.
Dried spots adhere in the gallbladder or thorns of leaves or some other cause.
And when you remove what is obvious there, over which your eye sees, because you press the tongue against the instrument in front of yourself, so that it becomes clear to you what is in the gallbladder.
And what is not seen and is hidden in the gallbladder, so you should make the patient vomit before food digests in the stomach; because a strong cause connected to the gallbladder causes vomiting; or get the patient to swallow a spoonful of water or grated lettuce or a mouthful of dry bread; or take a piece of dried marine sponge and tie it firmly with string, then make the patient swallow that; and when it reaches the place where thorns are found, so that they are extracted. And you take a wriggler and drink it in the tied string, until it enters your mouth slowly and is extracted; or take a spoon and carefully put it inside, then carefully bring it out.
And if they have not become evident through those causes we mentioned, then use a lead instrument according to this form:
And let it be as thick as that of a small one, and within its extremity is an opening which you insert into their gallbladder for ease.
And let the patient raise their head upwards, and be careful not to touch their throat bone for fear of damaging it or causing that which covers the bone or thorn to move, or what the doctor places with their hand.
But let the patient that one insert honey, according to their knowledge of the location of the related cause and push it down, then pull their hand towards the instrument, all this as per the amount prepared within them so that it is extracted.
Chapter XXXIX.
Chapter XXXIX.
When treated with the medicines we have discussed in the division of treatment using medicines and they do not work, consider this for the gallbladder of the patient in front of yourself, because you should press down the tongue of the patient with an instrument which we recommended to you.
So if you twist the blood vessel, extract it either as a small dot or in finer details carefully.
And if it is not possible to extract it from there, then take a concave cannula and insert that into the gallbladder of the patient, and place in the concavity of the cannula a red-hot iron, and do this as many times (while the blood vessel is dead and comes out of the gallbladder) and keep the patient away from water for the whole day.
And take a gourd full of water to drink, and open the mouth of the patient in that, and wash the mouth with that; and do not swallow any cause from that, let her drink water for an hour after another on her own hand, as soon as she feels the water.
And if it is not extracted with what we have recommended, then fumigate the patient with cinnamon or with asafetida using the instrument which we recommended in the fumigation of the uvula.
Do this, and let it take effect where it falls.
And another method of operation in fumigation is that you take a burning coal and place it inside a container covered with a cloth in the middle of which there is an opening. And place the end of the instrument inside this opening; and proceed to fumigate above; and have the patient hold their mouth at the end of the cannula, then close their mouth so that the fumigation does not go out until you know that the fumigation has reached the blood vessel, as soon as the blood vessel falls.
And if it doesn't fall, then you should repeat the fumigation several times, and keep the patient from drinking, eat salty foods and herbs, and don't drink water. It's essential that this regimen be carried out properly.
And this is the form of the instrument by which blood vessels in the gallbladder are treated when seen; and it resembles forceps as well, except when it's curved within them: Which is flat against the gallbladder, and its extremity resembles the beak of a stork that's been polished with emery, because when you grasp any cause, it won't slip.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
In this, the whole speech is concerned with regard to sores and in sections about them.
The sores are special spots, of various shapes, according to their memory, from any in this free.
And they are different in piercing and section regarding them by two ways, of which one is for the peculiarity of sores within themselves; and thus we acquire from humidity.
And the second way is towards the places where accidents occur in the body, for when an abscess occurs in the head it is another of abscess occurring in the buttocks; and abscess in the fleshly location is another from abscess occurring at joints; and each one's method is by operation.
And some of the abscesses are those which, when not pierced, but rather mature under treatment in those or completion of them.
And other abscesses are those which rupture when crossed, and do not mature according to their completion, such as abscesses near joints, for when an abscess is near a joint, its being extends within it thus what is in the circuit of it, and strengthens the ligaments or nerves of that joint, causing a contraction of that limb; or it is abscess near the main member, and if you delay piercing it until it matures inside the main member; or it is near the buttocks, therefore perforate the un-matured one; and do not pierce the cross-ruptured ones due to incomplete digestion, but the one near the buttocks, so that you don't weaken its force and make it extend into parts deep inside the buttocks, making a fistula; or when done in the terminal part of it which is not healed. It suffices to know the time for piercing the abscess, and this is when it matures.
Know that it matures when there is a cessation of pain and the disappearance of fever, and approximately a reduction in sweating and pulse rate, and the sharpness of the abscess tip, and other signs.
And when you know how to pierce in the place of pus left by the abscess and pus coming from the cure of the prominence.
Pierce at the right length in the flesh or body, when abscesses are located on parts of the chest or feet, and on spots of laceration, cords of nerves, arteries; and later, in all equal places that do not reflect light; for those that are reflected, use piercing according to that limb.
And when the abscess is in a fleshly area, it suffices to let the piercing of it happen after confirming its digestion according to completion, as we have said; for if you pierce that one before this, it extends the course of pus and of stubborn matter, and strengthens the swelling around it, and its depth.
And such abscesses are pierced according to the width of the flesh or body depending on necessity, or according to what the limb needs.
And know that you should administer small piercings, and in large abscesses, a large piercing or wide sections according to the variety of sizes of the abscesses.
And other abscesses are those in which you should return the lumen to its cavity and have it sealed up when done thus with bread and done like that until completion, as occurs in many cases of galls and boils.
And of those that are incised to the section have three corners; and of those that is done like a snail's shell shape, as with abscesses in the limbs.
And of them there are those that have round sections and lunar sections, and resemble them.
And for the one without a hole like those of superficial lion abscesses, it suffices to pierce it with superficial piercing, or flatly only.
And when the abscess is thick and has already collected pure matter, pierce it without worrying about removing all the pus in that moment; after extracting from it one part, then return the abscess inside another day, then extract a larger part, and proceed with drained spots according to graduation until it becomes perforated.
Especially so if the body is cold and vital force, or a woman in pregnancy, or a small child, or an old person in decrepitude, when the animal spirit's vitiated matter is resolved with the expulsion of pureness, and strengthens the body, then you open them.
Take great care of this chapter, and when you pierce in which you are piercing these abscesses, know that you cleanse the wounds and consider whether the pus of the abscess is little or a flat section; then administer what belongs to it or its opposite. And if the abscess is large, and the cracks from the piercing are spots, then know that you pause at each point so they pass in time.
And if in the abscess you removed part of the lumen or made it concave in the channel, then know that you complete it with old wax or a thread sewn from the skin; as when you are sifting pans or ashes, remove moisture; and strengthen it on the third day; then proceed with that and cure whatever comes from the ointments until it is healed.
If it happens that there is bleeding from the veins during your operation, then you administer cold water and vinegar to them. Place a linen cloth under several of these, and pause that over the site of the blood flow in the veins for a while.
If the bleeding persists, then continue with your treatment and care, and use the powders I have recommended in specific locations of this our book and division.
If it's during winter, and the site of the abscess is a location of nerve points, then cover that with vinegar and oil in a poultice, and place those over the areas.
And if it's in summer, and the sites are fatty, then cover that with poultices made from ground powders in water or oil mixed with vinegar and oil, and let all of this be rubbed for an entire day as we have said, and then cover that by releasing the abscess and cleaning it off, administering care according to what suits him until he is healed.
And thus is what is necessary about the knowledge of treating abscesses universally, but according to the path of distinction that I have said for all abscesses in how they should be treated through individual chapters specifically.
Chapter 41.
Section on abscesses which occur in the chain of operations.
In the chain of head operations, small abscesses occur, which are special cases of lymph nodes containing tunics that are part of their structure; and these various aspects are their nature.
And about their pus, and those are the ones that contain a moisture-like substance similar to lime. And of those which contain moisture resembling dust, and are like them; and of those which are hardened, hard.
And in the section of all, and in the extraction of those, there is no fear, just as with the extraction of those does not cause a dislocation of an arrow.
And the operation in the section of those is that you insert an instrument of its shape into them as closely as possible, which is called a probe, so that you know it contains.
If what it contains is moisture, then split that along the section according to length in a superficial section following this form:
And begin at the section of line .B. between the line of .G. Thus as moisture is evacuated, then you scrape off that skin which contains that moisture, and do not leave any cause thereof, for if there remains any cause it will return after a while.
And then immerse it in Egyptian ointment if there is any, or instead with water and salt; fill that wound with this concoction and let it rest until another day, when you scrape off everything that has eroded from that skin layer.
And then repeatedly apply this ointment on that skin with Egyptian ointment the second and third times if you need it, so trust that there is no remaining cause of that skin layer; then treat the wound with ointment until it is healed.
And if an abscess contains fatty lumps, then you should cut into that according to this form: in the section have a cross-shaped form, and make cuts between both sides of the section and go all around with it, and apply your strength in extracting the tunic which contains that.
If an arrow causes resistance when pulling it out, then do what I told you to do at first.
And similarly do this for the hardened abscess in section and treatment according to what we told you; and the section over a hardened abscess is mild pus, which has little blood and little moisture.
And some of these abscesses are cases from these types which occur in the head in certain men where there is not much moisture; this cause is that I split on an abscess at the top of a female elderly person and crushed the abscess like a dumb hard white, which could not be punctured, and if it were touched by any, it would inflame that area.
And in other abscesses that occur on the head, this is not within this chapter, such as abscesses that come from the ears of children, you must understand the reasons for the ear lobes; but these sections are superficial sections.
And stop the perforation of those from the lowest part of their body, so that it relieves the body from the parts with lower pus.
And then treat those according to what suits for their treatment process.
Chapter 42.
Section on the condition of scrofula, which occurs in the neck.
These abscesses are seen in the neck and armpits, as well as under the chin; some occur in other parts of the body.
And these that occur in the neck are lumps that are produced internally between them, and all scrofula of these is within their own tunic, just like with lymph nodes and abscesses on the head, as we have recommended.
The types of these scrofula are lumps which some contain hardness, and some contain moisture, and the malignant ones do not yield to treatment.
And in that one where you have good judgment in the Palpation, whose color reveals shows as akin to the color of the body and is present throughout the area, not attached to neck nerves or veins, nor to arrows, not being round, so when you insert into it on a dry superficial part above the part below your neck line between lines G and B, and burn it all around, spread both sides of the body from this with oil or with onion if you need those as we have said in abscesses of the head, and extract that little by little.
And more care than not to damage the vein or nerves.
And if the knife is not too sharp, that it does not hurt you as you cut or causes discomfort to the patient, and that you avoid cutting what is unnecessary; so if you were to cut a vein or artery and stopped your operation, then pause in the inflamed wound with soothing powders or other substances that cause drainage, strengthen the wound, and leave it there until the inflammation subsides and the wound softens, thus beginning to heal. When the infection is removed.
So resume your operation while you have achieved it.
And then inquire about any reason for the other small lymph nodes according to your diagnosis, so cut those and clean them.
And if it's in the location of the lymph node that has a large vein, know that you should not cut that lymph node from its location. Before you operate, ensure that the one being operated on is lying flat and that it remains in that position so that its body can accommodate the procedure.
And then fill the wound with old wax which you have already submerged in Egyptian balm, and then attend to it.
And if you cut the lymph node completely, then ensure that you adjust both sides of the wound and leave a little pus that does not cause any swelling or excess.
Perhaps if there is excessive swelling due to the size of the lymph node, ensure that you understand where to cut its location, remove that and administer suture according to what has been said.
And for those lymph nodes containing moisture, puncture that through the surface of your location where it appears in the patient's body, pause at a puncturing point of what has drained from the bottom of their pus, as we have said.
And then, when you perform the puncture, use ointment and something similar for it, so that it can erode whatever is rotten from the infection. And when you operate on the wound that has already been cleaned, then treat it with generative meat balm until it heals.
Captulo 43.
From the section about the pocket of pus inside the gallbladder.
The ancients treated this section in the appendix, and no one I know of has ever done that in our land.
And this is the record of the speech about those things.
Perhaps in people who have corners, ensure that the removal of the appendix is avoided, as thus it should not be done impulsively for fear that all the veins and major vessels of the body are here.
Perhaps in those who have lymph swellings in the mouth or gallbladder or behind the ears, when the illness is not in the tooth, use this section of the appendix to avoid the danger which is caused by puncturing.
So when we want this, cut the appendix leaving three circles of the circles of the appendix, or four at a smaller section by width in that which is between two circles for quantity, so that the section is in the muscle, not on the cartilage. This location is suitable for sectioning as it lacks flesh and the blood vessels of their body are there.
And if the surgeon is afraid, know that he should extend the gallbladder's string to the kidney, then make a slit in the string until it reaches the duct, but avoid any blood vessels if you see one of those reasons.
And then cut the gallbladder according to what we have described; and it means on the section of the duct by the inflammation which comes from that exit to what is of their disturbance, and by the rupture of the bile duct.
And leave the wound open for some time.
And so when the time is ripe for the puncture to be made, add two layers of the skin from the wound's string, and leave that alone until it reaches the cartilage.
And then administer medicines that cause meat to grow while it heals.
And Al-Bkr that the sum of our speech which we have described, is nothing more than to see that some of those lymph nodes have already swollen in the gallbladder of the body, and the body has gone into death, and his soul left its place, and others would cut open the epiglottis so that the body could breathe on the location of the wound for a certain breath, thus saving them from death.
And for this reason, we command that the wound be left open until the malevolence of the illness is consumed; and the malevolence of its body lasts three days; and then from there we command thus on the wound, treat it while it heals.
And what I have seen with my own eyes is that a servant placed a cot in her gallbladder and cut part of the lung canal there, and I was called to treat him, and it responded just like the cry of those who are dead, and discovered the wound and found the blood which was stuck inside the small wound.
So I confessed that it did not cut a vein or artery, and the wind was coming from the wound, and treated that until it healed.
And nothing happened to the servant except maybe in her bile, and some days later returned to improving her health.
And now let me say that in the section of the inguinal region there is no fear.
Chapter 44.
Regarding the section on abscesses that occur outside the groin area, it is called a hernia of the groin.
This large abscess called a hernia of the groin changes color according to the body's color, and moves in women.
And it occurs in two ways, either naturally or accidentally.
And in the natural case, there is no need for treatment.
And the accidental case occurs in two ways; one is like fatty lumps, and the other way is like an abscess formed by blockage of an artery. In that case, there is fear (meaning concern or urgency). And it should not be assumed that the lump feels like iron without being small. And you should test that (the lump) and investigate it as described. If you find something resembling fatty lumps, not hanging on any of the veins, then you incise it like a node, extract it up to where it is contained within the skin and subcutaneously; otherwise, thoroughly examine its entire nature, and treat the area with what promotes healing until it is healed.
Chapter 45.
Regarding the section on the types of lumps/nodes.
The types of lumps are various, and I have already described all the types in the division.
And remember that I will describe this difference between a lump and an ulcer to avoid confusion.
So I say that for ulcers, there is a heat and fever and violent pains within which quench the boiling of excess; and the process of putrefaction is completed when the fever, pain, and heat cease.
For lumps, there is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and within that is a white pus which is peculiar to the lump.
And according to the body's color, its onset is like a boil and it develops similarly to a cavity, whether large or small. They are divided into two types; one that is fatty and contains humidity, and the colors of humidity are varied as I described in the division.
So when you come to the treatment of lumps, extract it and inquire about its beginning with a cause which is called an incisor, according to how its form will resemble this chapter.
And this is the method of inquiring about abscesses and all lumps; you should take this incisor and insert it into the pus-filled wet area you find in the abscess, and gently turn your words inside bit by bit until you know that the incisor has penetrated the membrane.
And finally, place your hand according to the size of the abscess, and then extract the incisor and consider what is left in its wake.
And if the humidity is removed, regardless of its color, then you should incise it at the superficial section as I have said in other abscesses.
And if there is no humidity left in the wake of the incisor, then you will know that it is fatty.
And dry over it at the superficial section has the shape of a cross according to this form: Like this instruction, suspend it on the handle, and scrape away the membrane from all sides with ease, and preserve the skin or sack if you can over that, then extract that healthy part from the lump.
For if it breaks during the operation, it is not possible to extract that healthy part, and various scabs may form under this, and then you extract it in pieces so that nothing damages it.
And if any damage is done to it, whether a little or too much, the lump will return according to the manner.
And if you notice that part of it has been damaged slightly, then complete the wound with some corrosive sharp powders and strengthen the wound, place a cautery over that which is prone to abscesses, and treat it otherwise until it heals.
And if the lump is large, then you cut both lips of it and treat what forms inside.
And if there is a pulsating vein against it, or not, then you clean and heat the area of that torn skin which resembles glass and smooth that stretched skin for two days or three until the wound heals up; then return to incising what has hardened from the lump.
Chapter 46.
Regarding the necessary forms of an incisor in sections and puncturing.
Among those are the forms of incisors, which are of three species; some are large, and among them is a slightly smaller one, and among them is a small one.
The form of the large incisor is this:
The form of the small incisor is this:
They should be made of iron, aluminum, or the ends ground appropriately to ensure they penetrate into abscesses.
These are the forms of experienced incisors, and they are called needles; one of them is called red.
They come in three varieties, which include large, slightly smaller, and very small.
The form of the large experienced one, it looks like this:
The form of the slightly smaller experienced one, it looks like this:
The way of experiencing it, the form of him:
It concerns those abscesses and ulcers, fistulas and swellings where within those are from the bones and from other causes.
And they make round cuts, large ones, like lions, similar to big needles with which the ulcers are sewn up, and they are made from emery, or from stone, or from iron, or from silver. And the best ones are those made from emery.
And they make them the experiences of black feathers, which are remembered that for those there are opened fistulas in the cavity where reflections take place, that are reflected on their lightness onto those reflections.
And they are of three types; some of them are long, and of others it is midway, and of the others short, according to the amount of size of the fistula and the constriction of him.
Form of the great lead experience:
Form of the midway lead experience:
Form of the small lead experience:
The forms of the knives are special spots, which among them are some simple ones, where there is only a curvature, and they are of three types: large, few, and midway.
And their knives are sharp, and they are of three types.
And among those are two curved knives, and they are also of three types.
And their have three curves each, and they are of three types.
And all these are necessary in their place.
Form of a single small knife, form of him:
Form of a large curved knife with two curves: Form of a midway curved knife with two curves: Form of a small curved knife with two curves:
Form of a large curved knife with three curves:
Form of a midway curved knife with three curves:
And these are the forms of the scalpels with which they sever and destroy the glands and abscesses, and they are of three types; among them is large, midway, and small.
Form of a large scalpel:
Form of the mid-sized scalpel:
Form of the small scalpel:
The ends of those where section is made are sharp and the other ends are non-sharp, and they are not held in such a manner but rather that the fear of vein or nerve incision during the scratching of glands remains, and through them the patient finds relief and gains tranquility with some adjustment which causes you to find the scraping of the abscess.
And these are the forms of pins, and they are of three types: large, midway, and small, like arrows.
They are made from iron and resemble rays in which alcohol is applied.
And it's at the tip where there is a pierced end hidden under the skin and within that there flows towards both inside and outside directions, whenever you want, as seen.
The forms of the spatulas, which are hidden between your fingers, you should puncture the abscesses and not feel the patients, and they are of three types: large, midway, and small. And these are the forms of those:
The forms for suction cups from which the blood flow is removed, and they are of three types: large, midway, and small; these are the forms of him:
They are made from emery citri, round with some length, and they are fine.
And choose these types of suction cups that are large, midway, and small for when you need to remove blood flow at speed in necessity, and then when your first remedy fails.
However, do not use those to remove blood in every part of the body, and only use them on fatty areas; like those in the greasy spots and thighs, and in the bumps of arms, breasts, nipples, belly, testicles, and resemble those in the fatty greasy bumps.
Some operations are done with those instruments or smaller pieces resembling needles according to this shape; when blood is removed through phlebotomy, or for incision of vein or artery.
Some operations are round and done in accordance with this shape:
Capitol .xlvii (Chapter or section number 47)
Regarding the treatment of male breasts which are assembled by females.
Some operations cause swelling of the breasts of some male patients when they start to become fatty, and then these breasts are swollen, resembling female breasts, and causing them to be distant.
And for those who experience this, know that you should incise those at the lunar section according to this shape, from the line of .B. into the line of .G., and then scratch off all the roughness, and fill the wound with medicinal matter, and adjust both parts of the wound for sewing, and heal it internally once it has been healed.
If the nipple is lowered to the parts and relieved by its size just as it happens in women, then it should be cut into two sides of pus there, each with two sections resembling a lunar figure, with each contained within the other. The longer line must contain the shorter according to this form of .B.'s and .G.'s lines. Then scrape out the seam which is between two lips of the lesion, keep back the swelling, and administer the stitch procedure and powders necessary for treatment during recovery until it's healed.
And if you don't follow the instructions to apply this remedy due to anxiety about the patient and the discharge of pus, then you should smear the lesion with a cut and submerge it in corrosive ointment, letting that part be corroded by what dissolves fat, and treat that area until it's healed.
Chapter 48.
Regarding the puncturing of abscesses that cause pain in the hands.
These abscesses that cause pain in the hand are of the species of scrofulas, tubers, which have a layer that is to be removed.
And of those that contain moisture; and of these that contain moisture, you should puncture them according to a lunar section as shown in this figure: from the line of .G. to the line of .B.. Once everything that is inside the pus has been evacuated, then you complete them with a cut and let it heal by the other day.
And after that, keep treating the area with suitable ointment until it heals.
And if the abscess is of the species of nodes or tubers, then you should cut over it as we have said in the section about tubers equally.
If the lesion is extended to such an extent that pus leaks out all around, then administer the cautery according to what we have mentioned before.
Chapter 49.
Regarding the section on abscesses that occur due to surgery or through a vein.
When the incision is ruptured and the seam is consolidated which was on that side, then pus forms causing an abscess. The signs to identify whether inflammation and abscess are due to an artery or a vein: when an abscess is due to an artery, it extends for a long time in the preon of the body; and when you press the abscess at your fingertips, you feel stridulation in that area.
And one that is due to a vein appears prominently throughout the body.
And if this abscess is a mistake, especially in those with symptoms and around the elbows, in the neck, and in localized body pains; it's very large, so you should avoid its treatment with iron, and that one on the extremities or at the head should be avoided.
About the one that is due to inflammation of the incision of the artery, cut along the seam in the long direction; then cut across with scissors and approach the incision, freeing from the tunics until it's discovered.
And afterwards handle that needle and have it penetrate into the other side, strengthen the incision with thread twice in two places -- which causes you to feel in your skill when extracting two arteries which are among the templars.
And after that prick the area that is between two ligaments in the chest until all pus that is there leaks out and is dissolved by the abscess.
And after that, administer treatment in which you create pus so that the ligaments fall; and treat that with suitable ointments until it's healed.
And if it's an abscess due to a vein, then you should know how much there is of the pus from that place on your hand compared to where you have your hand on your head, and after that insert the needle at the spot that you've been holding in your hand, and have it penetrate; then cut through the thread twice so that you extract that one from the other side, and treat that by tying the abscess with a ligament according to what I've said to you about the ligament of an apple which is divided into two parts at both ends of the string.
If you fear that you will extract the thread, then insert the needle at that needle where all pus should be cut off from the first needle position, and strengthen your threads in four places.
Approach to dry the abscess in its middle where when what is inside it is settle, then cut off the excess of the seam and let that which comes out from it be bound.
And after that place over the powder you have immersed in vinegar and oil, and proceed with treatment which is done with cloths and ointments until it's healed.
Chapter 50: Regarding the abscess that occurs due to twisting of nerves.
In the same way that abscesses occur in arteries and veins, similarly abscesses occur in nerves when they are injured during percussion or due to excessive work, and thus.
And the procedure for this is in the places of the ligaments or at the wrist, or everywhere where joints swell.
And the abscess is heavy, has the same color as the rest of the body, occurs in major areas of their disposition, and when it's stretched under pressure, one feels the patient as if they were stunned.
And it does not form a clot in the heart, and by itself it breaks the chain, and he is hurt on all sides and does not go to the parts in front or behind.
So concerning those that are in the joints, it is not iron that should be enclosed in them, but a strong force that will counteract contraction.
It may be in the head or on the forehead where the chain binds with pus. If it is a small clot, then you have it in the lungs and remove it from the cause of illness.
And if it is large, then you suspend it with a string, scrape off that which is causing the illness, and properly place that part; then suture the wound and treat it until it has healed.
End of chapter.
Regarding the section on gangrene that occurs from eating what causes illness in the abdomen.
Dealing with various swellings found in the abdomens of those and other parts of the body of those, which are called fungal because they resemble fungi, where their cause is subtle but their head is large; already the lips of these are swollen, it's from those that are small, and it's from those that are greatly magnified.
And I have seen one, where in the belly of that person there were two parts resembling fungi, and there was no difference between those white ones, of very little illness.
And the lips of these would be inverted and split open, moisture flowed continuously from that area.
So I inserted them and examined each one in a person whose weight was eighteen ounces. And the other weighed six ounces.
And for the operation during their insertion is to consider if the patient is wet, and if the color of the disease is white, wet, with a subtle illness; then you insert them in pus laterally, and place them in front of you under heat, the swellings that are formed should be removed from the area; and if you find the infection, cauterize it.
And if you see the patient is fearful and trembling, guard against inserting it with iron; rather take a lead that has been recently made, and strengthen that disease, the method of which is as we have said; let that alone for two days.
And adjust to the constriction of the lead thread; therefore, do not cease strengthening large lead in this part until it is scraped off and falls by itself through its work.
If that part is from severe illness, then during its insertion there is some cause for fear and trembling, especially in the case of those located in the abdomen.
It's possible that you might scrape off its essence, and then cauterize it so that it doesn't return.
And afterwards treat it until the wound has healed.
And remember that you should not presume to insert a part of dark color, with little sensation, under careful observation, for such is inherently cancerous.
And I will return to further reflection on this matter soon.
End of chapter fifty.
Regarding the treatment of the navel prominence.
Navel prominence is caused by various factors; or due to fissures on the abdomen, which is above the belly, and you see the skin or intestine according to what happens in other ruptures; or through infection that flows from a vein or artery as was previously mentioned, or due to constricted wind within it.
If it's due to a tear in the crotch and skin inflammation, then the color of the clot resembles the color of the body; and there is intense pain, and you see various locations. And if it's due to protrusion of the intestine, then its location is in that place from what we've recounted, with greater intensity and diversity. As you press that onto your own fingers, it disappears, and then returns; the strength lies on yourself so, and a great effort should be exerted for this introduction of balm and intense work.
If it's due to moisture, then there is pain and it doesn't disappear when you press with your hand, nor is it constricted, nor does it swell.
And if it's due to infection, then these signs appear for the clot turning black and fading in color.
If it's due to flesh alone, then this is a heavy, large, hard clot that develops according to an amount.
If it's due to wind, then the sensation within it is intense.
And for the operation in this case is that you need to consider if the navel prominence is due to artery infection, or vein infection, or wind; then it must be avoided treating it, because there is fear and trembling just as we taught in the chapter about clots from arteries and veins.
And if the navel prominence is due to the intestine or the membrane, then you should command the patient that they should have their head elevated and be lying extended. Then test along the entire circumference of the navel, and command the patient to lie with their back against your hands on each side of their body. Then surround it laterally with pus inside the circumference around the area you tested; then extend the clot upwards in parts using a large string or rope, and tie it tightly or loosely according to the tying method.
And then pierce the expanded abscess opening onto the membrane and insert your finger into that location; and if you have found or guarded it through the membrane, then you extract it immediately and push the contents of the abscess back into the abdomen's internal parts.
And if you have found the membrane, then take it with a thread; and incise out its excess parts.
If it is contrary to your artery or vein, then surround that area, and return to your operation afterwards. Take two needles and insert them into those two points with strength, and place the needles in the circuit you created around the abscess in a criss-cross manner, allowing them to penetrate. Then reinforce the abscess in four parts over the needles.
And if you wish, hold the needles and lay the spot where you can extend the flesh and let it fall by itself; or incise there when it is thinning and lets go, then proceed to cure that area with what comes out from under the bandage once it has healed.
And if the belly button is soft or due to moisture, then drain the abscess in it as we have said earlier and remove the flesh or the moisture, which you find there; then proceed to cure that area with what comes out and consolidate the site.
Chapter 53.
On the treatment of children.
As we have said in the division, about the specific types of children and how they are treated with medicine, and that healing is done internally for those who do not become ulcerated; and we have mentioned diseases born from the carelessness and management during the treatment of children.
And it was said by the ancients that some childhood ailments can be eradicated from their location, such as in the head which is on the nipples or on the cheeks and similarly with parts of the body allocated to remove all of it, especially when they are starting out small.
And when it is old and large, do not try to reach into it yourself, which I cannot heal from that place nor have I seen another way to do so, nor has it been transmitted in this manner.
And the operation in such cases as we have said is that you proceed and let the patient bleed and cleanse from black fever some sores, then proceed to lance it if found filled with a clear discharge.
And then prepare the patient for surgery in the preparation leading up to the operation, and proceed with caution using incisions that lead to that area; and create a good concavity from all sides inside which does not damage any source of his illness. And let the pus flow, do not lightly remove the abscesses, and press out the places, and cleanse away the large pus with your hand or tool, which are within reach among the tools available to you.
And if you find opposition from large pus or from an artery or vein, then apply cautery inside where the flow of pus has ceased, and proceed to cure that with the other treatments until it heals.
Chapter 64.
On the treatment of dropsy.
As we have already recounted in the division, about the different types of dropsy from water and the symptoms for each type, on the treatment with medicine for them.
And that which is cured internally is only the type of mild swelling alone, and it should not be subjected to internal treatment for the types of tympanic swelling or dropsy due to putrefaction, which are fatal.
And when you have treated this type of water-filled swelling with medicine and it does not confirm your treatment, then consider this: if the patient has already received debility or if there is another ailment related to dropsy elsewhere like in their chest or similar locations, then refrain from treating it internally because there is concern about this.
And if you find the patient is full of vigor and in them there is no other ailment but water-filled swelling only, not pregnancy nor old age, then the method for operating on it is that you lift the patient between your hands, ministering to them as closely as possible making them expel their belly with your hand, push out the water from the remaining part of the pelvic cavity and take on a spine instrument according to this form:
It should be of two long sharp parts, with an acute tip like a spine; however, it is better if it is somewhat shorter in them little by little, so that during the operation you do not go into the intestine and let the patient bleed.
And then consider if the production of dropsy is from the intestines, then you should have the section away from the belly button by an amount of three fingers to the parts remaining, in the right side above the pelvic cavity.
And if the production of dropsy is due to a kidney ailment, then your section should be on the left side of the belly button by three fingers.
And if the production is due to milk, then your section should be on the right side.
And do not have your section over the side where the patient wishes to bleed, because pus will not flow towards that location.
And then pierce the instrument through the entire thickness of the skin, proceed to insert it in that section, lift your hand over the spine and the scaphoid, and scrape off that area; and if it's as much as a fingernail or slightly more.
And then I pierce the bladder so that it reaches the desired location, this is the place of water. And then remove that and insert an instrument with this shape: It is similar to a fine silver cannula; it's made of silver or copper or lion's bone, at the lower end of which there is a small hook, and on its sides are three hooks: two from one side and one from another; and its extremity is cut like a feather according to the method, just as sometimes:
And at the top of its extremity there is a ring, which when the instrument reaches the water, immediately presses on it, thus expels some amount of water in the middle part; if you evacuate more from this than necessary during that time, weaken the patient through dissolving their animal spirit, or they may suffer from an apoplexy that leads to death.
Evacuate from that according to the virtue's quantity and according to what you interpret from the disposition of the patient regarding the virtue of their soul, as well as their goodness.
And then remove the instrument, and contain the water which causes it when immediately held back by the knot which holds the hook that is on the bladder from which you have pierced it according to that manner.
And then repeatedly use the instrument on the other day if you observe that the patient tolerates this, and extract a small amount of water, and do this for several days with fearfulness, and be careful not to let any water leak out rather than little.
If you fear for the patient, and let out a large amount of water, then treat that area by burying it in sand, washing with sweat in warm baths, and waiting under the sun for a long time; and treat that with drying medicines until they are healed.
And apply cautery to the stomach, and prepare the table and process near the extraction of water, according to what I have recounted in that which precedes this.
Caput. lv.
Regarding the cure of children whose kidneys have not been perforated for the passage of urine.
Some of the child's urine flows out from the mother's belly and the tip of their mixture is not perforated (or is straightly hooked or not in its place).
Therefore, it must be done to perforate the child immediately when born with a delicate needle according to this shape:
And then place a fine lead key in the hook and hold it there, and let it for three days or for four.
And when they want to urinate, relieve them to urinate; and then return that (referring to the key).
And if you do not hold the lead, it is possible that the urine which goes over the place does not close this clamp.
That of which the hook is straight must be treated with a lead key as we have said, for too many days within which it becomes larger.
Those in whom the hook is not in its place are cauterized, which causes that of those, the one that is born and the hook should extend to the end of the penis so it cannot urinate from the inside parts, within which elevates the penis up to the inside parts above; and this is not for reproduction, because their semen cannot reach the mother according to straightness, and it is a defect in movement.
The method of the operation on him is that the patient be seated between your hands, and then extend the tip of his penis with your left hand with vigorous extraction, and cut the tip of the tip of the penis at the spot of the prepuce under the foreskin, just like a feather incision or if you do not touch any part, so that half of his skin resembles the tip of the penis and that the hook falls into the middle place according to how it proceeds.
And remember that in your operation for blood flow, what kinds of sweat may occur; pause you to him with this which cuts the blood, and treat the wound until it is healed.
Capitulum 56.
Regarding albatard (a condition) that occurs in the prepuce at the tip of the penis and inflammation, discoloration, and adhesion of the prepuce at the tip of the penis.
Sweats often occur in this albatard condition on the skin, and it is an indication of bodily harm.
And of those, one is malignant and the other is not-malignant.
Not-malignant, you must suspend with a fine thread and cut that place until all is gone; then apply a clot under it to the bottom in Egyptian ointment; near this, treat with this ointment called diafinicon until it is healed.
And if albatard is malignant, you should note the color, then proceed to apply cautery near the incision of it and its proportion.
And if the albatard is in the prepuce at the tip of the penis for uncircumcised individuals, where one part of the albatard is inside the prepuce and another part is outside, then you must remove the albatard that is inside until it becomes consolidated; and then you treat the outside part, when you treat this period of the prepuce, it cannot be guaranteed that it will not be irritated.
And it also happens in the testicles and prepuce with discoloration and corruption, so you must remove everything that has already degraded or is about to degrade or that has already been corrupted; then draw a line over it close to this one made of honey, which is applied with flour from crushed poppy seeds and finely ground white sugar.
And then treat that alongside the other treatment that makes it healthy.
If there is an attempt at bloodletting due to inflammation, then apply a lunar cautery according to this form:
A juvenile cautery is done in two positions at once, that is, during bloodletting and when the wound is corrupted.
And if the head of the penis is corroded and all of it is destroyed in the process, then make an incision into the meat of the foreskin with a lead catheter so that the patient can urinate through that.
In the adherence of the foreskin to the head of the penis (this adherence happens only in cases where the foreskin is retracted, and circumcision is not required for this; over it there is no excision; and when adherence occurs due to a wound or abscess) you should make an incision until the pus is drained until the ligament dissolves and the head of the penis is released from all sides.
And if it's difficult to drain those thoroughly, then make an incision by pricking some points on the head of the penis and foreskin, and this is what happens when the foreskin, being delicate, is pierced lightly due to its delicacy.
And then separate the foreskin from the head of the penis with a thin thread, which already has been dipped in water to prevent it from sticking again.
And then treat with astringent substances until it heals completely.
Head 57.
Regarding the purification of children and treatment for what happens in cases of circumcision.
Circumcision is not a solution like other wounds: rather, it's specific to our operation and will, and more so in children than with others, it is necessary that we commit to the best operation and process that minimizes losses for health.
So, it's said that the ancients did not practice circumcision in certain free states, where they don't use these laws, but rather because we have acquired this knowledge through experimentation. The reason is that I've found that most artists and barbers use circumcision and purification on the penis and on testicles; they use ligament on the foreskin and excision on the nail.
And I have tried all these methods and found that purification with forceps, with ligament on the foreskin that is similar to nail cleansing, prevents pus from spreading further, which separates two tunics in the foreskin, and leaves the inner part exposed, making it prone to other excisions and secure pain. And in purification done with forceps, which is manual and used by butchers, it's not secure to make excisions at the extremity of the male member, as it can easily enter into his wound.
And in operation with nail, even slightly, you would mar your operation. And a child's foreskin is short by nature, and cuts are made in such a way that it doesn't require purification, I've seen this.
The purification done with forceps and ligament on the foreskin, its goodness, an experiment that was revealed to me. The forceps have similar excisions in proportion, so their sharpness is as such like the sharpness they leave; and when you press your hand, there are two proportions of sharpness, cutting according to a comparison in one time; this results in compression of the foreskin into a figure containing the foreskin from all sides, with which no error occurs.
The first way of the operation is that you make the child stay longer if they are those I understand to be small, that you do nothing but tie the foreskin on the penis just there and let it be until another day.
And then make that joyous in every way possible for what is within your capability according to his understanding. And then place that preparation among your servants so it's well organized, and don't use too many; hide the forceps in your hand or let them be on your person, so the child doesn't see those nor any other tools.
And then place your hand on the penis and blow into the foreskin, pulling it so that only the head of the penis is exposed, and then purify this as what's added to pus.
The shape of the forceps for purification is as follows:
Let the first end not be sharpened and the others be pointed, so that no part of the thumb is exposed, and let the length of the two sharp points be as long as the length of two penises equally.
The mistake in purification is when you easily remove all or part of the intrinsic foreskin, or you should make an incision.
Then you should extend that of your hour to your elbow in front of the knee of the patient and mark it according to equality.
And if you cannot hold it at your elbow, then remove that up to the wrist and incise it.
If it has passed three days, and if the swelling remains, let the doctor examine that at the knee joint, then when you press into it so that the pustule under the skin softens, and excise it with ease, and incise it according to your preparation.
And watch over the knee joint, for not let that towards you, it belongs to him.
And then treat it with the powder that we have recommended in the chapter on powders of the treatise on powders.
And if it has been incised to the bone and follows measurement, follow the sections above, do not let that belong to him.
And then treat it with what we have said until it is healed.
Capitol: 58
Of the treatment of retained urine in the bladder.
Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by an obstruction caused by gravel or a clot, or by blood or pus, and it resembles those we have described in the treatments for the methods of treatment in the division.
And if it is not dissolved according to what we have said and the reason becomes severe on the patient, then you should have them perform an extraction from him using a tool which is called a syringe; this is its form: It is made of silver and it is thin like a lion's claw, similar to a needle of ausel with thinness about as long as two palms, at whose tip there should be a fine tube.
And the method of expelling urine through this is that you take the tip bent and bind it with wool or cloth for good adhesion; and insert the ends of the tip into the opening where the syringe was, and cut any excess from the fabric if there is a cause, but insert it into the cannula with force. And then push the syringe upwards and towards the patient's stomach.
And have the patient sit on their buttocks, and bathe the bladder and knee area in eucalyptus oil, olive oil, and water.
And then push the syringe gently until it reaches the knee joint; and then fold the knee upwards towards the lower abdomen area; and then push the syringe inside; and then push that further until it reaches the bladder, and make sure the patient is facing forward without any obstruction, and do not follow this order if there is any twisting involved, but instead choose the position where it goes smoothly.
And then extend the tip gradually with the thread little by little, for urine soaks the thread.
And then remove that and do treatment for urine using the syringe, don't stop doing this and continue using the syringe until the bladder is emptied and the patient feels relief.
Chapter 59.
Of the quality of bladder irrigation with celandine and similar instruments which should correspond to this.
When an ulcer or abscess occurs in the bladder, or there is a clot inside it, or if something constricts pus, and you want to distill waters and medicines in that area, then this must be done using an instrument called celandine. Here is its form:
If the tip of it is blocked, then the end becomes closed. And in that there are three parts: two on one side, just like that time.
In the beginning is the concave place where that which is inserted goes in, and according to the amount you push it, it adds up, so when any cause is pulled by that from the humidity, it is pulled out, and when it is expelled, it is also pulled towards it, and when it is expelled long, according to how celandine does it in battles at sea where naphtha is used.
And if you want to prevent humidity in the bladder, insert the tip of celandine into the humidity, and pull that which is pushed towards the upper parts, for the humidity is pulled into the cavity of celandine.
And then insert the tip of celandine into the knee joint as we have recommended in the syringe; and then push that which you are pushing with it, for that humidity reaches the bladder immediately, and the patient should be facing forwards.
The form of the delicate crus under which the bladder is inflamed, and that is its form:
It should be made of silver or lead, of which the tip resembles a small feather, and let him hold it inside them.
And take the bladder of motion, and place it in that humidity you wish to inflame in the bladder, then join that between two pieces of iron that are twice as long, and heat that humidity over the fire.
And insert the tip of the crus into the buttock.
And apply your hand to the bladder with the humidity in the descending structure within which the patient is lying, as that humidity has already reached the bladder.
If you do not have a bladder present, then take a piece of pork and make it into that circle; and puncture it throughout its roundness; then insert strong iron in those cuts, both when they are turned over; and add the circle as it is also added with fat, so that you place your hand on what you want from that humidity, soak it and water it.
And apply that in the instrument and do it like you did with the bladder, and place your hand within where the humidity reaches the bladder.
Climax. LX (sixty).
On the extraction of bile.
We have already discussed in the division of the species of bile and its treatment with medicine, and the difference between bile produced in the intestines and bile produced in the bladder, and the signs of that one.
And we have said about bile during my operation, and sectioning.
And the bile produced in the bladder is precisely that which is formed inside the bladder.
And I am explaining that with clear exposition and abbreviation.
Therefore, it's said that bile produced in the bladder mostly goes to children; and the signs of this are that urine that comes out of the bladder resembles water in its subtlety, and appears in that sand; and the patient rubs their buttocks, greases their anus, and is soon dressed; and on that way passes through the anus in mud from those.
And it's quick to heal children of that within which they have attained fourteen years; and healing is difficult in the elderly. And among the young, it may be divided by this that is between those.
And of that from which bile is greater and healing is much quicker; if it's little, it's contrary to that.
And how do we reach the healing of that, we apply to the beginning of that which modifies the patient at the crus which extracts the entire opening which is in their intestines; for that opening sometimes prevents the flow of bile by means of inquiry for them.
And apply the patient to their feet and make them stand upright for themselves that bile may descend to the origin of the bladder, or escape from anywhere else or some movements.
And apply that censer between your hands prepared, and let the patient's hands be placed with their things, so that the entire bladder may be made to descend to the places they are lying.
And then make sure that all of that is done.
And if you feel the bile in the space, then you quickly cover it with a section over them.
And if you do not feel everything with your touch, then cover with oil one of your finger marks on the left hand, if the patient is an adult, or the middle finger if they are a full-grown young person, and insert that into their anus. And make sure the bile is inside them with your finger. And convert that little one gradually into the neck of the bladder.
And press on that with your finger, and force that out through their parts outside from the area where you have covered it.
And command the servant to press the bladder with their hand; and command another servant with their right hand to extend their thighs at their parts above, and with their other hand pull up the band which is on their thighs, in part of where the covering is done.
And apply a fat rod that this is the shape of: and divide in it that which is between the anus and the thighs, not in the middle, before the left side of the buttock; and let the covering be on that bile and your finger is at the anus, and made transverse covering, so that the covering outside is wide and inside strengthened according to the amount that comes out of the bile towards them, but no greater, for strongly we hold your finger which is in the anus the bile must conform to this covering, and it does not get lost in its use.
And know that there is some bile which has angles and margins, because its passage out of it is made difficult by this.
And from that one which resembles lion dung, and is round, and it makes its passage quicker because of this.
And if it's that one which has angles and edges, adjust in the crack.
And if it is not like this easily accessible, then cover over that one, or strengthen over that in a decent way, the tip of which is like a file on which you strengthen over the bile and do not escape from it; or insert your tool with curved end which is subtle.
If you cannot operate in that area, then widen the incision a bit more, and if you see blood flow, cut into it with a strong blade moistened with vitriol.
If the stone is bigger than one, then at the beginning you push your hand into the bladder's opening, and proceed to cut on it; and afterward place a small object near there; and similarly if they have stones larger than two.
And if it's a large kidney stone, then the lack of knowledge is that you cut in an area that's too big, causing one of two things to happen to the patient: either it becomes stuck or obstructs their continuous urine production, so that the location isn't fully consolidated.
Take care in administering the expulsion within you until it's out, or design the surgery to fracture your patient with a saw inside, extracting that as pieces.
So when you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with aloe and dragon's blood, and strengthen that. And place over it a cloth soaked in oil and vinegar, or in ground oil and water mixed, for the sake that the boil's pus will be drawn out.
And afterward have the patient lie down on their back, and do not move the stitch for at least one more day.
And once that has been removed, wash the area with water and a bit of oil, and then treat it with ointment diafinicon and with ointment diabazilicon until it heals.
If pus and corrosive substances appear in the wound, adjust them and proceed to extract. If they resemble this when blood is frozen within the bladder (and this is known as bleeding urine), then intervene with what I've instructed in the wound and remove that blood, which if Roman causes the bladder to inflame the bladder and its decomposition.
And then wash the wound with vinegar and water, salt, and against all types, with what you should apply to it for healing until it heals.
And throughout the entire healing period, handle both thighs and adjust the medicines that are applied to the area.
And if the stone is small and located in the middle of the scrotum, and urination is prohibited, then treat it with what I recommended beforehand until you reach an area; this area is often passed through during this treatment process and is recognized as an exit point. And I have mentioned this, and thus you should take a pointed iron needle, which has this form:
It has a triangular tip, sharp, fixed on the shaft.
And then take a thread, tie it around the scrotum, leaving the stone there so that it doesn't return to the bladder.
And then insert the iron into the scrotum, piercing it in such a way that the needle reaches the stone. And rotate the needle with your hand in that small stone, gradually piercing it until you make a hole from this side to the other; as soon as urine is relieved.
And then press your hand against that which is hard from the stone at the exit point of the scrotum, when it's broken and opened by urine, and the patient is healed.
And if this treatment doesn't suit for any cause that prevents that, then leave a thread with the stone, and another thread above the stone. And then cut into the stone in that scrotum between two threads. And then extract that (the stone). And then remove the stitch and eliminate the frozen blood, which is formed in the wound.
It's not necessary to leave an iron thread with the stone, but only so that it doesn't return to the bladder; and the other thread above is for when the needle is removed close to the exit of the stone, then the infection returns to its place and affects the wound.
And for this reason, it's necessary when you have the needle above, that you raise the infection to the parts above, or if you should intervene again, and affects the wound like we've said.
Chapter LXI
On removing a stone from women.
Stones in women occur less often.
And if you see a stone among those, then treatment is difficult for her, and it's prohibited by various surgical methods.
One of them is that the woman's uterus elongates the vagina.
And the second is that you can't find a woman who knows how to give birth without showing it to the doctor when she's pregnant, or for women who have given birth.
The third is that you can't find a woman who knows this art, especially the operation with her hands.
And the fourth is that the location of the exit point above stone in women is distant from the location of the stone, so you need a wave-like incision, and there's fear at that point.
And if the need arises for this, then consider taking a pregnant doctor who knows, as few are found.
And if you are lacking that, then consult with a nearly subtle doctor, or present a woman midwife well versed in the work of women, or a woman who has part of this skill.
Then make that presentation, and command the patient to do everything you instruct them, from the examination of their urine to the meal; this is because they should check if the woman is pregnant, then direct them to insert what she says into her husband's mouth and desire the urine.
Then if you find that, restrain it, place your hand on what she says, and then command her to lie down on that.
If she is not pregnant, then command the midwife to insert what she says into the woman's womb and inquire about her urine, since place your left hand on the bladder, and compress that well.
Then if you find that, then gradually make it so that she drains from the opening of the bladder to your hands in a position where her strength is entirely within you as it reaches the level of her hips.
And place your hand on that location of the woman's mouth at the level of her hips from whatever part she is standing and center the urine in that position; make sure the man's statement does not get contaminated by the urine when you restrain him.
And the section should be brief at mealtime; then place your hand on that section, and if you hear the urine, then adjust to the section according to the amount in which she knows that urine is being excreted from that.
And know that the particles of urine are grains: those among them are few and large, sharp and rough, long and round, with a scent that is offensive.
So you know how many species there are of yours for this reason that you will signify about what you want.
And if you wish to stimulate urination, adjust in the spot of the bladder and let her do this for an hour before removing the urine, then proceed with your operation when the urine is completely out.
And prepare for yourself the tools that are mentioned in the extraction of urine in men, so you can be helped by them during your operation.
And if you wish to stimulate urine flow, and you know that the expulsion of urine occurs from the artery that is incised, then cover with powder on that spot and strengthen it with powdered and constricted descent; do not continue this. And let the urine out without forcing her, for should she force it, the woman will die. And then treat the wound.
And when the heat of the urine has diminished over several days and the place is cooled, then you should proceed with your operation when the urine is completely out.
Title LXII.
Title LXII: On positioning for hernia treatment.
Hernia aqueducta is nothing but an addition of moisture in the white pipe, which contains the testicles and is called the pipe. It is named aqueduct hernia.
And sometimes it occurs in the proper scrotum which nature has provided for urine at the location of urine flow when already there is another urine. It's the conduit of the genetic between the white pipe that we have mentioned, and it is not this but rather a hernia.
And the generation of this hernia is due to obstruction which affects the testicles, so it pours this material into those, and sometimes injuries occur from beating done on the testicles.
And this moisture has various colors; the color of which can fade to yellow or become bloody, or reddish, or be black and sticky, or be watery white, and this is what is mostly seen.
And the signs by which one knows where this moisture accumulation occurs are: if it is in the white pipe that we have mentioned, then the swelling appears to extend from slightly long like a picture of urine, and the testicle appears, as the moisture contains it from all sides.
And if the moisture is in the proper scrotum, then the swelling appears at the location of urine flow and thus we estimate that there is another urine.
And if the moisture is between the conduit of the testicles and the white pipe, then you measure from that center.
And if you want knowledge of the color of the moisture, then you express the color of the moisture in the swelling at the entrance that has a preceding shape; and according to what is established in the trace of the entrance, judge about what is inside.
And when we come to treating her with iron, then direct the patient that if this is possible for you, they should urinate and make their body full.
And then have her lie down on her back for some reason or another, and place your hand under her wet sheets.
And then sit on the left side of her, and command the attendant to stay behind her, who extends their hand between the two sides up to the testicle conduit and the belly button.
And then take a lateral slice, divide the testicle conduit through the middle location longitudinally into the inner thigh.
And make the incision according to a straight line equal in distance from the line you should follow on the skin of the testicles, so it reaches into the white pipe containing.
And scratch that, observe it, and take care so you don't go in too far; your scratching on what is scratched by him reaches down to where it hangs from urine more and you carefully inspect the scratching according to how much you can manage.
And then pierce the bladder full of water through an ample hole, and remove all the water.
And then separate between the two labia of the section with threads, and extend the bladder to those parts above; and do not touch the pubic bone encompassing the genital area, and cut the bladder in that manner as is possible for you. And then cut it entirely or in pieces, especially its delicate part. If you do not examine the incision thoroughly, there is no certainty that the water will not return.
If the patient moves during your operation, as when you have completed the section of the bladder, go back inside, and adjust the two lips of the pubic bone's genital canal with stitches, and treat that area as you would other wounds, until it heals.
And if you find that the patient is infected by another illness, then cut open the vessels that are under the suspensory ligament, and remove the body, and treat it in the way we have said.
And if the water is divided into two parts in each occasion, then know that these are hernias; therefore, cut that part according to what you have done in the other equally; and if it appears to be an operation, then you do it.
And then you cleanse the wound, and between the sections lay in wool soaked in oil or in rubbed oil; then place another piece of wool that you have soaked in vinegar and oil, spread this over the genitals and the belly's miracle; then place blankets folded on top of powders, and cover all of this with a material according to this shape:
And then let there be holds for two blankets and have them filled with absorbent wool according to this resemblance; let their ends be placed where they are pressed against the buttocks or wet wool, let them be added to the structure in the crotch of the undergarments, one end takes up the anus inside the other, the other end goes to the opening of the thigh, and two ends on each thigh leave two others over the knees, and all the tension must be adjusted in the crotch of the undergarments.
And in some cases this hernia is artificially treated with a cautery instead of surgery on that section. And you take the surgical knife and cut into the genital bone, and ignite it according to our recommendation until the white bladder containing the water is revealed, then you proceed with the cautery as follows: And it resembles Greek letter.
And then pierce that bladder, and ignite until all the moisture is expelled.
And then extend the bladder with threads, scrape it with threads, and scrape it with a heated fine cautery; cut it according to what is possible while removing all of it; be careful not to let the water touch the flame.
And know that this operation is safer and further from wound discharge than an operation in the section.
And if you find that an abscess forms after the operation or during the cautery, or wound discharge, then know how to treat whatever condition this causes for you, applying its treatment according to what is said.
And if the patient is weak, and does not anticipate a second operation due to its horror, then perform an incision according to what I recommend here; and it's when you're certified that, based on what we said about meanings, that this hernia is watery.
And you know to place the patient on some elevated ground, pierce the abscess at the lowest part of their body with a straight incision, and make the incision according to the length of their body.
And let the incision be wide enough that you can drain all the water.
And then place your hand on the spot and cover it with something soft, so that you can drain the remaining water. And then treat that area until the wound is healed.
And if the condition is against the removal of water at that time, you make that incision: this procedure is not done unless a white pannicol in the opening of the wound causes an issue and prevents the excretion of water. Therefore know to put into the wound a sponge or tool with which water from the hydrophilic glands is extracted, the shape of which should be preceded; or adjust on the pressure of the wound a small one.
And know that the water returns, and is soothed approximately two or around those months; and when it's added, then it should be pierced according to that manner, so the patient will pass their days this way.
Capitol .lxiii. (This likely refers to a section or chapter number within a larger work.)
On excision regarding fatty hernias and their treatment.
And know that in the section regarding this hernia, there is a fear of losing nutrients through larger openings; so for me it seems to be better to relieve you and save you by that means.
And I recall the operation in that case and the specifics of the abscesses.
Therefore, state that abscesses occur in the bodies where the genitals are composed, and this is done by various causes: or due to intense acute overproduction which accumulates in the genitals, or through trauma.
And it's the color of the abscess according to the color of the body, and it is not found in their pain, and it is a heavy abscess.
And light pain is from an absorbed abscess, of which the color is dark, and there is no fever in them.
And some swellings occur due to the clogging of the veins, and by this swelling they already perceive the memory of it, or by swelling of the veins.
What occurs due to the swelling of veins is known by the dispersal of pus when you press that area on your finger; and do not lift it until it touches.
What occurs due to swelling of the vein does not disperse from them for any reason, you must press it on your finger.
And it is possible that on this type section can be made cuts and not on other muscles; it's because you cut the nerve of the genitals, then place your hand close to the parts above them, and extract that from the white fat, and release the suspension of vessels, and tie them, and cut the pus sac that you release from every part of the parts of the hand.
So if the hand is already under those hardened muscles, then you need to lift the hand and cut that.
And if there is adhesion between any of the fat tissues, or between what's in between the layers, then you need to release all that adhesion and cut it with a round incision.
What if the origin of the flesh is in the area of the adhesion which is behind it, then you need to cut all that belongs to them, and lift the hand as we have said.
So once your operation is complete, then fill the wound with wool soaked in oil and vinegar; and then treat that like any other treatment until it heals.
Chapter LXIV.
On the treatment of hernias caused by worms.
Worm-induced abscesses are enveloped by some kind of covering resembling a bud with softness around the testicles, making it difficult to perform physical exercise and ambulation on the affected body part.
And in the treatment of this ailment, one should be wary as it is preceded by its memory.
However, proceed to perform the operation there according to what I first described.
And say that you should have the patient lie on an elevated table; then pull down the suspensory ligaments to those parts left; and place your hand over the nerve of the genitals on your finger near the pubis; and keep all other assistants with you, and stretch them out as far as possible.
And then, make a long, sharp incision through the middle section across the arteries in which you can see the veins.
And then, cleanse all parts as we have said in extraction of nerves which are found in the temples.
And then insert a needle with a double thread into those places where worms occur, and stitch it in the first location among them where worms are found, and stitch another place at the last of them. And then cut those in the middle location along the diagonal according to the length of the body, and extract what is added by the putrid and corrupted humidity.
And then treat the wound with treatments for other wounds where you want to be healed by what falls off the blood vessels which are different than one or two nerves, which is not a bad thing.
What if worms occur throughout the muscles, then you should have the testicles extracted or cauterized around them, because this affects the blood vessels, depriving them of all nourishment due to cutting of the blood vessels, until they are destroyed, or because it doesn't affect those in general.
Chapter LXV.
On the treatment of intestinal hernias.
The occurrence of this hernia is due to a section that tends to stretch under the fat over the belly from parts of the abdominal muscles, so when protruding the intestines go into some of them.
And this rupture can be either of the fat or from within them, and it happens to these two types due to various causes: impact, or by jumping, or through shouting, or due to the influence of some heavy cause, or because of certain signs.
The sign of this, when it's due to an extension of the fat, is that it occurs gradually over a long time, and does not happen suddenly, and there is pus equal within the space where the fat compresses the intestine.
The sign of it is when it's due to a section in the fat, at the beginning causing sudden intense pain; and there is different pus apparent next to the nerve that seems near, and this occurs due to compression of the intestine, and his body towards the parts above the fat.
Some swellings are left on the surface of the intestine, and this is called intestinal hernia by the people.
Some swellings are caused by wind, some swellings go into the intestinal hole and stay there, which is a great disease of the body. Some swellings cause bad pain that becomes much worse when pressed.
In the treatment of these types of this disease, there is fear that should be avoided in that area.
The method for performing the operation in this case is to command the patient to push the hernia back into its cavity with their hands at the inner parts of their cavity when it responds to returning, and then wrap it around their shoulder between your hands, and lift their legs.
And when you have cut the cord which is tied to the testicles in their upper parts, and opened the testicles' tube all along; then make two incisions on that section according to your needs, for opening the section among those.
And if you have the quantity, as is possible from that, make a hole in it to get rid of whatever needs to be removed.
And then remove those warts which are left of the testicles' cord, while it is uncovered, until you find the white hard lump in each part.
Then you proceed with your tool in the area where it severs the testicle, in the place between the white wart, which is left of the sperm duct, and secondly, remove it from each lump on that connection behind the penis.
And then hold the testicles' cord in front of you with your hand, and extend the white wart on it while holding onto that with your left hand, lift the penis towards the wart in that part; command the assistant to hold the penis outwards from there and you dissolve the adhesion behind until completion.
And with your hands, ensure that there is no reason for the intestine enclosed in the hard white wart to be present. If you find any cause for it with him/her, then you peel that out from the belly.
And then cut into the remaining part of the sperm duct, for a section that flows with pus and health as we have described it in what we have said.
And then apply wool soaked in oil, and place it on the wound; then apply the bandage as we have recommended (and a few warts of white wart are burned, which was mentioned nearby the location of his/her sexual organ's pus flow, where several bands are applied there) and smooth out the bandage so that it falls by itself.
If his/her healing is delayed, then let hot water be applied there, and place it on the area as we have said where it falls.
And then treat the wound with another healing method for wounds until it heals.
Chapter LXVI.
Regarding ventral hernia.
In this hernia, none has been seen to have been burned under the healing process of it.
And the first ones would say that it is done in this way as we have described for the hernia at the anus; which means you tie up the blood vessels near that section towards it; then dry out the middle area around that, applying an abscess there where I do that, so that the blood vessels fall.
And treat the wound as we have said until it is healed.
Chapter LXVII.
Regarding the disorder that occurs in the gullets.
Some instances of rupture occur in the gullets as we have said, and lift up the area.
And do not worry about any cause of hernias for the patient's health; and if they do worry about it, it is very little; return to that in all situations.
And if the time lasts with that, there is a cut in the skin where it comes out of the hernia into the skin; and this happens due to the extension of the skin which is present in the gullets as we have said, which cause is that the skin extends, and then that area becomes inflamed and gets an abscess and lifts up.
And the treatment for him/her is with a cautery as it was followed by the description of that.
And some cases are cured with iron according to this method: and that the patient lies on his/her back between your hands, then dry up the area of the abscess rupture lifting it up for the width according to the size of three fingers.
And then strengthen the white wart that is below the cord, while it is uncovered.
And then take the thread and place it on the prominent part of the wart, and press that onto the belly button area.
And then pinch the two prominent areas at the end of the thread on the wart, and adjust one of those to stitch it with the other.
And then extract the extremity of the rib, do not pierce through the skin completely, nor stretch the muscle, nor cause any other harm as I know that should be avoided during intestinal hernia treatment.
And then attend to that in the treatment of wounds, and when you incise the flesh, clean it out and restore the wound within so that it becomes consolidated; where the skin is pulled tight and the edge of rupture is not adjusted.
And cautery is better in this place, which is close to health.
Chapter LXVIII.
On the treatment of softening of the chain of the testicles.
Observations on the chain of the testicles in some men it softens due to this issue where the muscles that are within that area soften, and there is a need for vigilance regarding him.
Therefore, it is necessary for the one treating him to have him lie according to his side, and incise all the chain which softens over the natural chain; and then adjust two lips at the suture.
And if you wish, cut in the beginning the excess of the softened chain at three or four places and make a firm suture.
And then incise between the stitches; and treat for the healing of the other wounds so that he is healed and his muscles fall back in place.
Chapter LXIX.
On castration.
Know that castration in our law is forbidden, but due to my duty as a physician I remember it here; and there's no need for me to recall this except for two reasons: one, when asked about someone who has undergone castration within the medical field, they must know how to treat them; and the second reason, we sometimes have to perform castrations on other animals like our young horses, as well as cows, pigs, and similar beasts.
And thus I say that castration is done in two ways: either through atrophy, or through a rupture leading to necrosis.
And in the case of that performed through atrophy, the way to perform the operation is that we cut off the animal in warm water so that his testicles soften and hang down. And then take those into your hand until they are resolved and do not leave any marks behind.
And in the case of castration done through rupture and necrosis, you should have the animal and press on the chain of the testicles with your left hand.
And then locate the suspensory ligament and incise over any muscle until two muscles are affected.
And then incise those abscesses that you have found in each area. And do not allow any cause over the muscles near the skin, but rather a subtle muscle which is under the veins.
And this method of castration is better which is done through atrophy as it leaves no effect on the testicles that make the animal want to copulate.
And then treat the wound so that it heals.
Chapter LXX.
On the treatment of hermaphroditism.
Hermaphroditism in men is according to two ways: the first is that he appears with a gap in the chain of testicles, it's like a male in which there are hairs.
Some observations on that they pass urine where it is in the chain of the testicles.
And in the females it is a special case: that the female's sex on the scrotum is like two testicles of a man somewhat smaller at the front part, similar to a man's penis and two testicles.
And the treatment is for three types: two of men and one type of females. And this involves incising those tightened muscles so that the blood flow of that area can escape, and then treat those with the treatment for other wounds.
And in the second type of men who pass urine where it is in the chain of the testicles, there is no treatment or operation for him.
Chapter XXI.
On coughing and prominent flesh due to female causes.
Persistent coughing is adjusted to natural causes until it subsides and requires regular observation; some observations show that in certain females, it expands like in men and extends during intercourse.
Therefore, you should have the excess of coughing in your hand or on a stick and cut it.
And do not conclude with cutting, especially at the base of the throat, because it may lead to bleeding.
And then treat that in the treatment of wounds so that it heals.
Prominent flesh is the flesh that appears in pregnancy inside where it fills that space, and generally located as if in front (thus some of the firsts called this condition "tail tail"); therefore you should cut like how you would with coughing, and treat that so that it heals.
Chapter LXXII.
On the treatment of erysipelas.
Erysipelas is when the skin of the female is not pierced, or it is a small bruise. And it's either natural or accidental.
Accidental is due to a malady that preceded, and such happens either because of flesh not being well-adjusted or through the action of a subtle and thick humor.
And it happens in the womb's region, or on the patient's ribs, or from excessive pus within them, or from pus below them. I forbid abortion and coitus and childbirth, and strongly forbid menstruation.
And the knowledge of that comes from observing the pulse; if the illness is obvious, it's closer to the surface. More so if it isn't obvious, then you search for that under your fingers or along the body.
More specifically if the pulse is due to subtle humor, and it's close to the two lips (of the patient), then you puncture and release that.
And you place your fingers over the two lips of the patient's body, and then place your thumb and index finger under both breasts.
And the woman should be on her back, with her legs extended, and you then extend both lips until that subtle humor is broken and the pulse becomes open.
And then take wool and soak it in oil, place that over the cut area, and hold there throughout the day to prevent the incised place from healing.
More specifically if the humor is thick and viscous, then you should cut that with a sharp blade or with a mint leaf.
More specifically if the illness is due to wind, then suspend it above a flame and cut that area.
And use the remedies that help stop the flow of pus and reduce inflammation, such as pepper, dragon's blood, and ashes, adjusted with a hen's egg white.
And then administer a wide lead cannula so that the wound does not heal immediately.
And keep that for several days and apply camphor to it.
And then, using another method of healing for consolidation until it is healed.
And sometimes events occur in the mother's womb for other parts of the body, and then you should cut according to this method. More specifically if it's due to pus formation, for the pus-filled lump within the mother, avoid using iron in any way.
Chapter seventy-three.
Regarding the treatment of hemorrhoids, tail inflammation, and red boils that occur in the uterus of women.
Hemorrhoids are the result of blood flowing through the veins in their locations continuously; and once old hemorrhoids occur, they recur in this manner.
And I have already explained in the division of those types and their signs, as well as distinguishing those that receive treatment and those that do not receive treatment.
Therefore, if hemorrhoids and boils are in the womb area and do not appear to cause discomfort, then there is no treatment with iron for these.
And those that are in the openings of the womb on which you feel a sensation, are those that are cured.
And you should have the woman in a state of cleanliness and wash her, then spread out flax or with hard cloth on her underparts, and cut those areas.
And then apply the powders that reduce the flow of pus from one of the internal powders to inflammation; such as pepper and similar ones.
And then soak her feet for an hour, and then have that placed in hot water.
And if the pus flow persists, then make that person drink a decoction of sumac and decoctions from elderflowers and marigolds and similar things.
And then take flour of ash, mix that with honey and wine to make it thick, and apply this as a poultice on her back.
And if the inflammation is gone, then it's good; otherwise, make it stick with two plasters, and on the nipples do scraping.
And then take wool and soak it in the juice of comfrey or in the juice of arnical or in vinegar mixed with water, and make it stick to the area. And then treat that place with ointment until it is healed.
And treat that until it's healed.
Chapter 74.
Regarding accidental perforation in the womb.
Various types of abscesses that occur in the womb, such as pus formation, kidney stone abscess, ulcers, swelling, menorrhagia, drainage, boils, swellings, and other abscesses. And I have already explained these diseases and their types along with their symptoms and treatments in the division.
And you should know that I explained in this treatise about the surgical treatment of abscesses that are in the womb when they are due to healthy conditions, and if you want to know how the operation is performed with iron.
So consider if the pain from the abscess at its beginning is sharp to touch and feels slimy and feverish, sometimes it turns red and if you feel something over it, then there's no need for you to suspect a perforation in it, treat that with what helps towards maturation until the intensity of the accidents ceases.
And then carve out the female over a groove that has two grooves; and recline on her back and adjust her feet to the beginning of the belly, and her thighs spread out, and place her hands with their elbows, and tie them firmly in such a way as is convenient.
And then let the midwife follow along the right side and apply the tool to where it has opened the mother's aperture, which shape will come about in those causes that will happen nearby.
And when you want to administer this tool, fix it at the level of the mother's opening in the female, so that what enters from the tool does not exceed the mother's opening and leads down the thigh. If the tool is larger than the mother's opening, then you must place powders on the texture of the mother's opening so that it prevents all instruments from entering the mother's opening.
And you should place the substance that moves in the tool slightly above and ensure that the administrator holds the tool and rotates the substance until it opens the mother's aperture.
And when you feel the contractions, and it is touched by hand and becomes strong and wet, then you should dry that which you must place on the head of them with a damp cloth.
And when the sweating has stopped, then you should place on the wound a poultice submerged in rubbing oil or castor oil containing some medicinal properties; and place the foot on the spot at the mother's opening.
And remove the mother and over the navel, place clean woolen cloth submerged in water in which are boiled maroons.
And then treat it for about two days with grease that fits into such an extent that it is healed.
And some sores are washed by the mother and the wound with vinegar that is mixed with water and honey, and then returns to the water in which iris root or horse chestnut is boiled, and then returns to the grease.
And if the wound is inside the pregnant mother's abdomen, then you should refrain from treating her with iron, instead treat it according to what we have said in this section.
Title: 75
To teach midwives how to properly medicate the fetus when it deviates from a natural figure.
A necessary cause is for the midwife to understand the natural figure of labor when it occurs through signs on her. When you see a pregnant woman being squeezed from all sides and she wants to smell the air, and this gets heated by what happens during labor, and promotes fetal expulsion, then you know that this part is according to the natural figure, and it is the expulsion of him over his head, and the second one either hanging or suspended under the navel.
So when you see those signs, then you should understand that the belly of her is compressed by itself so that the fetus descends lightly as when it goes over its head, make the second one to do this for her, and wash off those excesses with good hygiene.
That which is another like this part is not natural and unmanageable, when the fetus expels over its feet and her body is expelled in front of her head and her feet, and one hand of her, or at her foot., or has her head expelled and her hand, or at her belly, and it is forcibly turned on its neck, seeming like unmanageable figures.
A necessary cause is for the midwife to be knowledgeable and discerning in all these matters, so as to avoid error and deception.
And I am showing all the figures of these, and which means are in them by themselves to be interpreted and what state they should be on.
When the labor is expelled over its head through natural expeditiousness, and that is vigorous on the woman and made to her difficult part, and wears out her strength, then let her do this, or what pregnant women should do for her, and evaporates her sweat with fennel seeds and with wet oils.
And then let the midwife insert her hand between her buttocks and small opening towards the second one, or dry that with her elbow under where runs whatever has moisture in it. And presses the belly of the pregnant woman so that the fetus descends.
If it does not descend, then you should have the pregnant woman fumigated with garlic and fennel oil.
And then instruct her to have a hot bath and make her sneeze with mustard; and open her mouth and her nose for an hour, so that the fetus will come out quickly.
And if both parts of the fetus are expelled at the beginning, then you should reduce those gradually to facilitate small expulsion little by little. If it does not respond to the treatment, then place the pregnant woman on a bench and lift her feet up, and move the bench over the ground; and make sure the pregnant woman is held so she doesn't fall from the shaking.
And if the parts are not being turned inside out and the fetus is being expelled, then insert those and extract the membranes of the fetus or tie the belly to her hand with a cloth and extract that in equality, so that it will come out quickly.
When the fetus moves on their feet, then you should push those towards it, and gradually make the movement of the fetus smaller, and adjust that position, and take one of its feet and spread those slightly at a time.
When the head is situated inside the thighs, then you command it to be expelled, and make it vomit under control, which would be a natural process if God wills.
And if the expulsion is not happening as planned, then you gradually return the fetus back inside until it takes on a natural position, where at that point it would naturally be expelled more easily through the next stage of delivery.
And if we are prohibited from using all that we have recommended, then take up the bandage of silk and of dissolved gum, and crush it all in the mortar with good pounding, and apply a line at the woman's abdomen, under her belly button, at the lower part of her belly. And then have that catheter be immersed in hot water so that it reaches the hips.
And when you notice the parts around the patient start to harden, then have them undergo a mild fumigation with myrtle and keep that treatment for them. And after the one-hour fumigation, then have them sit on a stool, and make her sneeze and extend her mouth, remove from that position, and press lightly on the lower part of her belly, so that at some point it would naturally be expelled.
Position of the fetus hanging diagonally with one of its hips. Guide her in the reduction of her hand, but if you cannot reduce that, then lift the woman and let it go.
And if it cannot go on its own, then have her lie down on the bed, and vigorously move her thighs in a shaking motion, and administer remedies that I mention and recommend for fomentations.
And if the childbirth has come about, then have her sit on a stool, and study over the reduction of her hand, and make the fetus take on a natural position, and make her sneeze and command her to push herself until it is expelled.
Position of the fetus hanging over the head, spreading her hips, and the skin around her is two times that of her mother's. Make sure the midwife holds the head of the fetus and gradually rotate it little by little, so that it becomes easier.
And when it's equalized, and once it is made even, then pause on her chest with that which we have recommended using oil and fomentations.
And then command her to push little by little, and when you've done that, have her sit on a stool and command her to lean over to the right side of her stomach, and then command her to push; and make her sneeze under control. Examination of the prepared fetus from the side.
When the horror of the mother occurs according to this method, consider it, and then you should immerse the second in your thumb until the humidity is evacuated.
And if the fetus is hanging on her face and neck, then you should immerse that of the belly, so that it's not held back and suffocates.
And then push the fetus towards the parts inside until you guide that according to what's considered, and command the woman to push herself several times, and it would be expelled in a shorter delivery if God wills.
Examination of twins or multiple fetuses. Know that twins usually occur naturally, and some may take three or four times, but this is unusual and quite rare; most of these are due to natural causes, and not living organisms.
Count them, whether they are multiply, one second, and separated by the umbilical cord, distinguishing these in each of their ligaments. Some may be expelled as if it's a fetus through natural birth more easily, and others may be expelled as if it's not possible to prevent this way that we have recommended.
And if some of them are difficult, you should proceed with the childbirth and ensure that it's like what we've said about the non-natural figures, then treat these as we have recounted.
And if the midwife is skilled and performs as it facilitates and with subtlety, and in delay, being guided according to every figure according to what she has been prepared for by her expertise leading to health.
Remembering that which forms in the womb from embryos and aborts.
Some swellings are formed in the majority one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and more than ten, and you should verify that a woman who aborts yields one, and another ten formed ones, which is caused by measurement of the glorious sages.
And all this is covered in the science of midwifery where they judge by what she bears a resemblance to that, and thus hold themselves to that which covers it.
Title: 76
Regarding the extraction of the fetus when it is dead.
When you care for the dead fetus with what we have discussed in the division of medicine and it does not depart immediately, then decide whether to use an operation with your hand, you must consider if the woman is healthy by nature and not at risk from some accidents through which her loss might occur.
Then consider that the woman is laid on her back over a mattress, and that her head is tilted inwards and her thighs are raised.
And the minister should hold that from both sides or be tied on the mattress so that the woman's body does not extend beyond the fetus extraction.
And then you moisten the mother's mouth with oil, salt water, and mustard and fennel seeds.
And then anoint the midwife's hand with those oils and mustard, and insert her hand in the woman, and position it at the location where she will find the umbilical cord in the fetus.
And it is convenient in this: then consider if the fetus is prepared that descending on its head, then you place the umbilical cords at his heels, or at his neck, or in his mouth, or in his palate, or leave him with his chin, or at his sternum, or in the locations near his ribs, or leave the flanks.
And if the descent is on his feet, then at the navel, or in the middle of the back.
And consider that the umbilical cord is in her right hand, hold the curvature of him at that spot which is between the last fingers of her left hand, and insert her hand comfortably and place the umbilical cord in one of those locations we mentioned, so that it reaches to the lowest point.
And then hold and place it at the position of him again, or another one if necessary, so that there is equal traction, and not extension according to his straightness only.
And may the effort be throughout the entire part, so that his expulsion is as relieved as it is done in teeth during their extraction.
And consider in him what is between them that the extension may be softened; and if any part of him is being held back, then you must consider that the midwife should oil some of her fingers with oil and insert those expertly and revolve in the oil that is being held back.
So if the part of the fetus is removed, then you should place the umbilical cords at that spot which is more inside; and do this until all the fetus is removed.
And if the hand is inserted in front of the other one, and it's not possible to reduce that by compressing him, then you should consider wrapping a cloth around that; and extract that until all is removed, and incise it or at the junction of her hand or on her side.
And do this also with the other hand and both feet.
And if the fetus's head is large, or it happens by compression during extraction, or water is found in his head, then you should insert between her fingers a thorned rod and cut open the head and drain the water, or discover that with an instrument which is called "the pick", whose shape will resemble the shapes of the other tools near this one.
And similarly do this if the fetus is large by nature: then you must consider piercing that with hemp, or take that as we have said; and then extract the bones with forceps.
And if the head is already extracted and compressed at the sternum, then it must be cut open until the moisture in his feet is dispersed.
And if there's no complication, or it doesn't require extraction, then you should cut the head as soon as that suits you.
And if the contents of the belly are ruptured or in his hydrocele, then you must perforate that where there's moisture in him.
And if the fetus is above his feet, then the traction of him is slight and the direction of him towards the mother's mouth is slight.
And if it's compressed in the belly and feet, then you must extract that with cloth which will envelop your hand, and cut open the belly and feet until there flows what is within those.
And if the other limbs remain and return the head, then the midwife inserts her right hand; but if the mother's mouth is open, then she inserts her hand in the nostril area, and around that the head, and pulls him with her hands into the mother's mouth, and then she inserts one or two umbilical cords, and pulls him towards those.
And if the mother's mouth is reddened by an abscess, in which case she should not be excessively heated; first prepare to cool her, then administer an infusion of fatty cold substances. And apply bandages; and continue with treatments that soothe and moisturize the patient.
And if the injury is on his side, then ideally, it should be stitched up; and what we have said should be administered in a living wound.
And if that is not possible, then it should be soaked in bandages, and removed afterwards.
And make sure to remove any cause from the inside during the second stage.
And when you have completed all your operation, then apply what we have said about the treatment in the abscesses that occur from the mother.
And if there is bleeding, then apply in damp water and proceed with the other treatment.
And I have seen a woman with a dead fetus in her belly, and another fire was started near that, and the other fire was for the dead fetus. A long time ago an abscess occurred in her abdomen; and it became inflated inside that servant's belly, and they began to sweat.
And I was called to treat her, and treated her for a long time, but the disease did not heal.
Then I applied some strong-sticking bandages to her and immersed her in water several times, and after passing through these days, I immersed her in another time; and I was very surprised, because there is no bone inside.
And then I thought that they were from the bones of the dead fetus.
Then I heated the wound and removed bone matter from her, the woman existing in such a disposition of her intestines, and I had already seen this method for such a long time, she began to sweat slightly.
And I did not find it strange, but rather that there is knowledge and assistance in this for the doctor to administer treatment to heal.
About the forms of the tools necessary to remove the fetus.
The form of vomiting in which the mother is opened:
This is the form of strengthener in which they equalize the free ones, to which equality two vomits at the ends of two fetuses. But this vomit should be made with a more subtle instrument of squeezing, and done either from bamboo or cane.
And the width of any rod is two fingers and the edge of each side is one finger, and the length of each is a hand and half; and in the middle place of two rods are two adjustments for those wooden sticks which are already tightened, from which the length is about a palm and slightly more, and the width of each is equal to two fingers, or slightly less.
And these two attachments should be inserted into the mother's mouth so that they open when you turn those prescribed vomits.
Another form resembling that, more subtle and lighter:
It is made from bamboo or cane according to the similarity of forceps. But at the end of it are two attachments like this, and the length of those attachments is about a hand, and the width of each is two fingers.
And when you want to open the mother with those, then you should place the woman on her back with her feet hanging down, open that which is between her thighs. And then open your hand with the tool as you would do with scissors, evenly according to the amount that you want of the opening of the mother's mouth within which the meter does what you want.
The form of vomiting that was said by the ancients:
The form of the pusher in which the fetus is pushed:
The form of the (assistant) in which the large head is turned.
And it resembles forceps with teeth at the end like this, sometimes, and some operations are done long like this according to forceps in this form, like this, which has teeth like those of a prong where they are dipped and turned. The form for the (assistant) few:
The form of a hook having one spine:
The form of a hook having two spines:
The form of a spatula having two ends, in which the head is severed:
The form of two spatulas laid out:
All these instruments are practiced, and when you have multiplied the species of them and they are prepared by the artists, as much lighter for your operation and more appropriate do you find men according to their quantity.
And do not use those instruments if you can help it, for the need of those is not excusable.
About extracting the second one.
When the second one is retained, you should give birth to it, then order that the mother retain her breath, and make her sneeze in the condition, and strengthen your hand on the mouth of her and on her nostrils, and if she does so outwardly, good.
And if not, then take a needle and make a puncture in the cover through which you hold onto a spoonful of herbs to moisten the mother's mouth, like a calamus and rudis and anethum and camomilla, sciscidos arabic and cassia lignea and santua. All these herbs or some of them are submerged in water in the spoon, and hold that above the fire.
And place an aloe vera catheter in the mother's mouth, and have that inside so that the vapor comes to the cavity of the mother.
And make her sneeze as we have instructed, and the second one out comes with speed.
Let this treatment continue until it is effective if you do not find any improvement, then command the midwife to submerge her left hand in saffron oil or in a hyssop extract, and immerse that into her stomach while you encourage it out, and take the second one as soon as possible, and when you have found that, then take it slowly by small amounts if it sticks to the mother's stomach. Then put your hand in according to what we advised, and when you find the second one, extract it little by little according to correctness so that the mother does not fall back on her vomiting forcefully. When this process makes her feel relieved in both her right and left sides with ease.
And if the mother's mouth is constricted, we have already recommended this treatment with sneezing and using herbs in the spoon.
If it is not relieved by all the causes we have recommended, then keep in mind not to overdo it with repetition, but rather observe that what leaves the patient's body goes into her thigh, and apply a balm and tetrapharmakon; for which this will soften that around several days and dissolve and be expelled.
When it heals, it raises bad odor to the head and stomach, and this makes the illness disappear; then observe that they should be given sub-vapor treatments and things suitable for this.
As with the ancients, these sub-vapor treatments involve using ash from burnt myrtle and dried figs.
The form of the device for which the woman is sub-vaporized must prevent the retention of her periods and secondarily, that of the afterbirth:
It should be made of wood or reed.
And the subtle end is placed in the stomach while the wider part is above the fire, and the sub-vapor treatment should be placed over the flames of the fire.
And have that inside so that this vapor treatment is consumed and repeat another one.
Regarding the cure of an unruptured infant anus.
The child is in distress and its anus has not ruptured, which is small and full. So observe the midwife that she punctures according to her instruction that small anus; and if not, puncture that with a sharp needle, and make sure it doesn't touch the wound.
And then place over that wool soaked in vinegar and oil; and then treat that with grease so that it stays moist.
If you fear it is full, then place an indwelling catheter for a few days, and leave it as long as the child wants to defecate.
And if there is constipation in the anus due to inflammation or abscess; then observe that this consolidation should be undermined and treated with what we have said about treatment and lead.
Regarding the cure of fistulas that occur within you.
The fistulas that occur in the lower passage, causing pus and coarseness are those which develop near or outside the anus or in the space of one of the passages.
And it is a fistula or marks.
And when that swelling has hardened and is corroded by the watery white humidity or pustulation, sometimes some occurrences are of these fistulas penetrating them.
Those that penetrate are known by what leaves them through excretion and wind release; and some of those cause illness in excretion, and forcefully causes the departure of worms.
And some of those fistulas occur in the space penetrating into the bladder, and into the flesh of the penis; and some of those penetrate into the junction of the thigh, and into the socket of the buttocks.
And in that where the known penetrable fistula enters into the anus and does not penetrate, it is that you insert your instruction endic into the anus, and immerse a subtle tip of reed or iron into the fistula when there is no tortuosity.
If there is tortuosity in that, then immerse a subtle lead or horsehair tip into it until you feel the hair or the lead in your instruction.
And if you do not feel that at all nor process any cause of expulsion or worms or wind as we have said, then understand it is non penetrable, and proceed with the treatment.
And when the fistula penetrates into the bladder or into the flesh of the penis, then it signifies urine discharge from that and prohibition of which means that the place where medicine is applied should be consolidated.
If it penetrates into the joint of the thigh or inside the bone causing pain in the circulation, then this is a sign that the attack has entered here if there is not a blockage inside the bone and causing pain in the circulation at the start; and that it flows constantly over time; and that such medicine isn't effective, nor does it harden through application.
And in all those fistulas that penetrate it isn't a cure for everything, and the cure of those is hard work and diligence on the part of medical surgeons upon which they rely.
And in that one that isn't penetrating and isn't old, healing with iron is expected according to what I will tell you, and this which I already have and approve.
And it is that I place you between their hands under their chest, the thighs are inclined towards your belly, and introduce the lead or mercury if there's a blockage in the fistula, so you know where the attack penetrates.
And if that is your belly around the kidneys, then cover what you instructed to be done in the kidney area.
And if the pain is in your instruction it has already naturally revealed itself penetrating, then whatever you feel between your instructions and that ulcer or flesh, then you will certainly know that this is penetrating; and from then on do not work on that area, because there isn't a cure for it, as we have said.
However, others might say that certain things are healthy in some people's cases.
And concerning the treatment for which youth is expected in you, it's that you use a delicate cauterizing flame according to the size of the fistula, as previously described, and introduce this flame into the fistula until it reaches around the kidneys; then repeat this process two or three times until you know that all those muscles attached to the fistulated areas resemble feathers from the wing.
And then treat that with warm wraps in which all those muscles that you've attached can heal, and also treat that with medicines applied to the flesh generating and hardening it. If it is healed, well then it's good; and if not, then this isn't healing within a reasonable time for another treatment.
And if the pain enters and doesn't penetrate into your instruction which is in the anus, between this and the soft flesh or ulcer that's gradually appearing, and there's an opening in the fistula where it affects the surface of the belly-button, then dry out the belly-button from the beginning of the fistula, and you see if it dries up, and it's inside the fistula until the drying reaches the spot where the end of the pain penetrates, and the pain is relieved and disappears.
And then make those fistulated muscles resemble the reed of an old bird and don't damage any part of this, as there's no cause for that.
And if there's a flow of pus that comes between you and your operation when these muscles are present, then let the amount be moderate and with the least pus use a smaller instrument to cauterize with fire or with acute medicine; one should apply fire to those pus accumulations: this is the healing of those attached muscles, and eradication of pus through drying up of moisture.
And then treat that with warm wraps or in a slightly moistened state until the affected area gets better, and then from there treat this wound with hard flesh medicines generating and hardening it.
And for these medicines which contain tightening and drying effects; once this is done, it's restored and already healed, you don't fear repetition.
And if the fistula has already penetrated into the prostate of the anus and is extended from your body's surface, then you introduce your instruction into the anus and inquire about this.
And thus if there are cents and between you and it is gradually turning into flesh or flesh, and it's advancing towards penetration, then this isn't an operation in you but rather according to the path of trust and hope.
That cause can be administered in him in one of three ways: or to cauterize that as we have said; or to dry up that until you achieve the cavity's recovery so that it is possible for you to introduce those and the healing progresses; do not interfere with the drying process so that you don't enter the containing the kidney, and let your intention be on the belly's return in the passage of sex; then treat that with what we said where strength is necessary for health; or extend that gradually and drain the pus that dries up inside close to the anus, as we have said, or through pain or with another sharp instrument, then dry those fistulated muscles which are in the drying area until you can pierce it; then exert yourself to restore the entire wound with drying, and if there's pus above not being consolidated, and continues the opened fistula at the entrance of the anus, only a little pus flows from the belly. And some times the fistula ends according to this method: when you introduce the pain into the fistula, and it's near the anus on the surface of the body in the belly button area and around the anus, then it takes on the appearance of a perforated end like a needle piercing during the preparation of veins in this manner:
And introduce into that fil wrapped in filaments or around these; and then introduce pain into the filament inside the fistula until you achieve its cavity.
If it penetrates the margin of the buttocks towards the inside, then you remove the feces from that track as long as you insert your finger into the anus; and you extract the end of the feces and adjust both ends at once, strengthening each one, and leave this for a day or two. And when more fecal matter penetrates into the flesh, strengthen it in the place where those tissues are penetrated by fecal matter which is between the two ends of the feces that fit together.
And take care of the wound once it has been consolidated and healed.
If the fistula openings are not penetrating, then make them penetrate in whatever manner you have prepared, but rather than being inside the preon, which is not for you to do this so as not to damage the muscle; and take care of it once it has been healed.
The way to shape the spine-like thing which is split by the fistula: make its edge sharp and the other part blunt, so as not to damage what isn't necessary, just like that.
Regarding stitching hemorrhoids in which there is bleeding during their introduction.
Hemorrhoids come in two ways; some are like charcoal in the buttocks, or they resemble that which is like fat of raisin. And those are small and large ones, and the bleeding from them varies over time and is constant, it's dirt, and it's inside the buttocks, and at their ends.
But those that are inside the buttocks are according to the few wet conditions, of which there is yellow water or a little blood in continuous body color, and according to the color of the body.
And the treatment of that one inside the buttocks is to command the patient to lie down and squeeze until the buttock swells and the hemorrhoids appear to you. Then take care of it yourself and use your fingers or whatever you have those at your disposal, and then proceed to apply those forces.
If the nails are not at those due to their moisture and softness, then take them with a hard cloth or with cotton or wool flannel, remove those with your fingers, then apply that to each of them near the introduction, so they replace that instead of cautery; or cauterize them according to what is explained in the chapter on how to perform a cautery. And take care of those with the other treatment once they are healed.
And if the buttock does not allow evacuation, then anesthetize the patient with an injection of a small bite, and wash them with what is in the buttocks that allows for slight expulsion when pressing on the patient.
If the hemorrhoids are outside the buttocks, then the cause is minor, so take care of them with your fingers, or take care of them with a nail, apply force to them, and then take care of them with what we have said once they are healed.
And the one who feels pain during introduction, then understand that you should administer stitching to them according to this manner: take wrapped thread and insert it into the needle and proceed to remove hemorrhoids from their sides, and make the hemorrhoid penetrate through the needle on the other part, and enclose both ends of the thread around the side but leave the needle's width; and strengthen the hemorrhoid with strong tension, then take away the thread and pull out the needle.
And do this to all of them, and leave one without tying it, so that the excess blood can flow from that one.
And place over the buttocks a cloth soaked in rose oil or on wadding; and place that over the buttock and command the patient to lie there. And take care of that so it fits; and when healed, treat those with balm or another treatment until they are cured.
And since they have aged and are not useful in that medicine, then understand that you should squeeze those with the tip of the spine or with your finger so that they become wet, and cleanse them from the pus above which prohibits their consolidation; and take care of those once they are consolidated.
And you should stop those with a strong amount of pus, the first time when they bleed and become irritated; and take care of those until they are healed.
Understand that abscess formation is the key, and not just notice red spots resembling a piece of a needle throughout the body, and especially on those parts below the feet and hands, and for those pains you should apply heat.
And understand that what is introduced into the circulation of the needle should be inserted, and it should be kept with the scissors or with tweezers, and its root should be removed; and then take care of that.
And if you wish, cauterize it according to what was explained in its chapter.
Veruca is a small prominent pimple-like ulcerated round spot on the surface of the body, and ulcers are common in children.
And the treatment for this is to stretch and incise that area, or to tighten that area with a cord or inside a bag. And if you wish, cauterize this, as we have said, with fire or with acute medicine.
A flea bite is a small prominence or ulcerous swelling on the body surface that moves around inside it. When one touches this, it feels like being bitten by a flea, and it occurs around the body.
And the treatment for this is that you take a pipette from frog blood or chicken's heart blood, and it should be strong. Place this over the flea bite inside the circle of your fingers; then move your hand inside the pipette as to incise where it feels like being in the circuit of the flea, and place this under the skin in the area of the bite, and eradicate the flea from its nest.
And if you wish, do this with a pipette made of horn or iron according to this method:
Take the part above the pipette tube that holds subtlety, silently (it means not perforated), wrapped around it such that its appearance is erased and the movement of that thing.
And if you wish, cauterize the flea as was mentioned in the section on cauterization of thyme in the head of the cautery.
Regarding the form of the instruments that are used to give baptism.
Some administrations give baptism using silver or tin or melted horn or hammered metal; some are done with small and large instruments according to those used for administration, so that the one being administered is small during the treatment of small children; and from those whose buttocks are firm or painful, the baptisms of these should be small.
The form of the large and few baptism:
The mouth of the pipette above where the bag is tied should be wide according to this manner; and there's the separation towards which the bag is tied, so it happens in that way.
And the end of this bag, which enters the anus, should be silent (meaning not open) with a slight bend; and in one side of its waist there are two teeth, and on the other side one tooth, and the width of the tooth according to the thickness of the rays, being wider ones a little larger.
And let the bag in which the medicines from bladder of beast or sheep skin are placed, be as long as your palm.
And let it be pierced with teeth like those that are twisted; and if the space between the teeth is as large as what was mentioned.
And insert into those teeth a thick piece of raw honey wax that is as wide as ten fingers or approximately that size; adjust it to that bag; and when the bag is placed in him, stretch it along the length of the baptism between two points with strong constriction, and baptize each tooth: The quality of baptizing with this is that you fill the bag with medicine, which should be heated according to the tolerance of the patient; and remember not to make too much or too little wax.
And let the patient lie on his back, elevate their feet at this height and place them on someone or a stool; and apply the tip of the cautery with oil or with hen's egg white or with fennel or garlic jelly; and insert that into the anus with ease, then have the administrator hold the bag and squeeze that in two parts with force so that everything from the baptism is evacuated inside the intestine; and remove the baptism and let the patient lift their feet to the wall.
And if the medicine causes him to urinate forcefully, use as much as possible; and if he sleeps with that for the whole night, it is better later in adolescence.
And if you baptize that in the stomach troubles and the patient's urination, then you iterate the cautery until he is cured.
And if there are hemorrhoids or boils in the anus, then let the baptism be subtle and twisted, like the baptisms of those who are baptized as children.
Regarding the treatment of the sores.
I have already said in the division of the treatment of the sores that it suited the free, and I say this way too about their treatment with me and medicines according to his capacity.
So I say that sores are diversified according to what type of sores they are made and according to the place where the spots attack.
And the causes for which small stones are made to cause sores can be as follows such as stone formation in bile, or incision of space or vein, or hitting with a spear, or with a stick, or with an arrow, or from those causing stone-like causes.
The sores that are in the body parts can be as follows such as a head sore, or on the neck, or the feet, or the belly, and so on with those of the members.
And I recommend treating some sores by pausing this reasoning and principle about the others.
And I begin with simple head sores, for which the recall of combined ones will come at the beginning of the next chapter.
When an ailment occurs in the head causing simple pain and not a fracture, then consider: if it's due to pressure of phlegm or similar, and has been drinking the medicine only and is severe head pain and you fear for that patient's possible formation of pus, then you drain and bleed the cephalic region immediately; don't delay this treatment. And extract from under the wound according to the quantity of his virtue if not any cause forbids bleeding, especially if the pus that comes out of the wound is little.
And do the bleeding in the opposite part of the afflicted area; and watch over the patient for fullness, excesses of food and heavy meals.
And if there are any prohibitions due to the diminution of food, then reduce the diet and do not allow meat or drink.
And place over the illness, if it happens that there's pus, apply a hot compress in olive oil rubbed or in a drink where is a agent.
And if you are sure of the pus formation, then place over the illness, if it's fresh at their wound and the air has not changed that powder which I would recommend to apply slightly.
And if the air has already changed, then place on some ointment inside until it heals.
And if the illness is large or due to inflammation and swelling, and her lips are not fitting with pins, then adjust those according to how I would recommend for their suture.
And if the illness has already uncovered from the bone and flesh, and it's not retention of her but just a small suspension, then incise that and treat the illness with medicines and restore the flesh in place of the wound. Command the patient to eat foods that are good for them: caps and meats cooked well with spices, until they are done.
And if you find decomposition in the wound and it doesn't stick to the bone, then you need to incise all that pus and extract it, and treat that area.
And if in these illnesses blood flow from an artery or vein might occur, and it's not removed by medicines, then you inquire about the artery. If you find that unincised part, then you need to incise that with a spatula or tie it; and if it is necessary that what we said does not agree, then you cauterize until the blood flow is stopped.
And if these illnesses are simple and small, then their cause is insignificant; sprinkle this powder over them, let that powder solidify before the air changes those.
And the method of this powder is as follows: take olive oil from bees' part one, dragon blood from the roots part two, and non-extinguished ash parts three; mix it all thoroughly and sift it, let that powder fill the wound, and bind well inside so that when applied over that area sticks and coagulates with the blood.
And then bind that with powder and let it rest, do not move it while still like this until the pus does not form, ensure that the medicine is not eradicated from your body until it heals.
And some times do this alone with a cautery, when you don't have beeswax and dragon root available.
And this surgical procedure is done for large illnesses when it's necessary to lay that on them and they are treated, those illnesses recently with their blood, which the air has not altered.
And if the air has altered them, especially in summer time, then it's not understandable to place this powder in its usual position, but rather treat those with what we've said before, by placing some better ointments on them or sprinkle that onto those powders from wheat flour mixed with water and honey until they turn into a paste; then continue treating those with another cure until they heal.
And if there's an injury in the bone fracture and it's small, then you extract that with your hand.
I would prescribe the treatment for skull fractures in what is poisonous.
And for illnesses of the throat.
And if illness occurs in the throat, there is no difference in treatment compared to a simple illness of the head.
And if the nerves in the throat have been incised or an artery, then if it's nerves, there is no concern with their digestion, but avoid treating them with substances that cause strong embalming effects, like garlic and others similar to asafetida which are harmful to nerves and constrict those. And do not apply anything to the illness for any reason because that substance of nerves is cold and the continuation of it is towards the brain, which is the pus essence of all body parts.
And if that which is treated with mild medicines, like washing with boiled water or oil rubbed or un-rubbed, when it's washed with boiled water and the other minor sores are treated according to this manner, then with ointments moistened.
And if the illness is large, then administer suture or tighten her lips, and then treat that with powders until it heals.
And if the illness has depth or occurs at the lower part of pus formation, then puncture that in the most deeply affected area.
If in the wound already an artery has been incised and blood flow is achieved, then separate or dry that, bind it, or cauterize that if necessity prompts you to do so at this point.
If you have incised the tendons of the Achilles tendon or all of it, and if veins in the neck are saved, then adjust the edges of the sutured chain over the tendon shaft of the Achilles tendon without touching that; flatten that and reduce that to its natural shape, and strengthen that with a decent tension, and let that heal for several days; and treat that with ointments where there is stiffness and inflammation until it heals.
If the wound has already penetrated into bone, then puncture that. If there are fragments of bone within it, extract all those you can from them; and for what does not belong to it, let this remain inside until the wound heals, then separate it so that the healing is smooth.
And if the wound is recent, then sprinkle over that the powder which is recommended. If in the wound there is a fistula, then treat that with what comes to mind as close to its head part.
If it's a wound from a spear or rib, and you gauge the depth for him, then consider if there is wind passing through the patient when he coughs; then know that the wound is fatal.
And if there is no depth in him and the wound is recent on his blood vessel, then place in him some first aid powder, without tightening that so as not to retain the blood at the depth of him and let it return to the heart without affecting the patient, rather place an attractive ointment in him, and withdraw that twice a day.
And if the ointment is not available to you, then place a little over in the wound's opening so that it sucks whatever moisture there is; and make the patient sleep on the wound so that what is adjusted inside flows.
If from the wound three days or more have passed and no convulsions, heart failure nor constriction of blood flow occur in the patient, then you will know that the wound is saved; and then treat it with rest and other good treatments until it heals.
If the healing of him is excused, and it has been open for all this time, then you will know that a fistula has already been formed; treat that according to its head.
And if the wound is due to incision in bone or rib and it is simple on the surface of the foot or chest, then treat that with what precedes suture, if it's large, or with powder if it's small.
If it has already penetrated into bone and you've incised bones from him, then hold the wound open to extract those bones if they're separate. If they are not separate, then let them heal inside until the wound heals, making the extraction of them smooth.
And for other injuries to wounds in other limbs during treatment is the continuation of what we have said.
Regarding abdominal wounds.
The sickness that occurs in the abdomen is either large, or small, or intermittent.
And for the small disruptions are made difficult by another manner, and I know that their reduction is more difficult, if you don't take care of their intervention in their place immediately after it opens up and gets bigger because of the surrounding tissue making it hard to operate on.
And therefore the best disruption is intermittent, where there's no difficulty in reducing the intestine as it is with the two species mentioned previously.
And know that there are four ways of suture for the abdomen, but two stitches are common which apply to the stitches in other wounds of the body.
And there are two other specific stitches that communicate with other wounds, however they are even more specific to the suture of the abdomen.
I advise you to always have an exposure and declaration for each one.
Therefore say that when the wound is small and there's a reason for the intestine to pass through it, making its reduction difficult, then this is one of two ways: either due to the size of the disruption as we have said, or when the intestine swells from exposure to cold air.
And when this happens, cover that area by dipping a sponge or cloth in hot water alone, or you take it in cold water and add cypress, thyme, and herbs to the intestine inside where the swelling will be resolved.
And sometimes this is done with remedies that contain stiffness, and it's better than just water alone in resolving swelling.
And when you have resolved the swelling, then moisten the intestine with water containing altitude and basil, which through this calms the tissue around it for few reasons.
If it is allowed to touch the inner parts of the patient near this cure, then divide the rupture with a small sharp tool where veins are incised.
And the first cure is better when it's proper that there isn't a section, and not an occupation to dry near necessity and deficiency.
From the tool, let its shape be like yours:
One part of the tool is sharp, and the other part is not acute, and the extremity is subtle, and do not be like the subtlety of a needle, before it becomes blunt for a little.
And so when the wound is enlarged and pushes out the intestine, then it should guide that its reduction be according to its natural shape, in its proper place, if possible upon this, which is better.
When the rupture is enlarged and it's in the lower part of the abdomen, you should make the patient lie on their back, place their legs higher than their head; and if it's in the upper part of the abdomen, then place their head higher than their feet and have the other parts of the body above that.
And similarly if the rupture is in one of the two parts of the abdomen, then you should contemplate and consider it constantly so that the part where the wound is will be higher than the other.
And thus see to it that you administer this in large wounds and in minor wounds.
And in small wounds, make that your preparation be paused, and then let it be given to your most experienced person, which has the entire rupture under their hand, and adjusts their hands, and roughly expose from one to another what causes for stitching differently.
And this is the common method of suturing: one that you take the needle, or count the size of the needle according to the width of the wound; and then let the end of the rupture of the ring finger lie freely, and firmly hold the needle once, or another so that you do not insert the needle into both ends of the string, at both ends of the middle bone where the string is left inside, as it allows that part to go through that part; and you have added both ends of the string and both ends of the middle bone, and you make four orders.
And then strengthen the needle twice in the circuit of the string, and some times from both parts at once, and add the two flaps and wound with a decent addition; and let the thickness of the finger lie, insert another needle in that area, and hold that by the thread as you did with the first needle; and do not stop this if it is necessary with the needles until you have completed all the contraction of the wound.
And may the needles be of medium hardness between coarseness and subtlety, for the subtle needles barely cut into the flesh; and the thicker ones are difficult to handle in the string, so you should make them medium in both subtlety and thickness.
And do not let the needle be stuck in both ends of the string close together, so that the flesh is not cut too easily and the wound heals before its consolidation.
And do not make prolonged stitches for the wound not to be prohibited from healing.
And then cut the ends of the needles so that they do not fall off the patient in his sleep; place powders from all parts over the stitches, which have the ends of the needles; let those be until you know that the wound has already consolidated.
And these kinds of stitching with needles in common method are more suitable for small wounds, until even in the stitching of their single needle or two or around those.
The second method of stitching is common: and you should administer in stitches all four ends, of the string and both ends of the middle bone, in one go, with a needle that has its tip enveloped equally in subtlety and thickness.
And when you have penetrated all these four ends with the needle from that part where you started, return the needle to that middle part of which you began, so that the thread pulled back goes up towards the wound, so that the stitches are according to sewing fabric for which the fabrics are tightened.
And between every stitch place the thickness of the finger's width.
And this is the way we know how to stitch.
And with such stitching, I healed the wound that happened to a man in his abdomen which had been wounded by a thorn, and it was the rupture of the larger wound of a palm's length, and it was located outside two palms from my waist on both sides; and then I returned that deposit once the intestine had gone through the wound for 24 hours.
And the wound was consolidated within about 15 days or so, and I cured that and he healed; then you should wait this long for rest, and it's talked of in his behavior.
And the other doctors had judged that he was not healed; and by a miracle, for which I did not cure him with ointment, which was in a place where ointment could not be applied or any medicine, but left on the wound like twice a day and frequent washing with honey water until it healed.
There are two types of suture according to the account of Parula.
And you begin with the sewing of the seam, and insert your needle from one part to the other inside.
And thus when the needle enters into the seam and at that point puts in threads according to straightness and length throughout the entire body, leaving the tip of the suture where you have inserted the needle; and makes the needle penetrate through the other end the thread from one part to the other inside-out at the other end of the stitch.
And when you have made it penetrate that one, then you make it penetrate another opening in that outermost end of the stitch at the part from outside to inside; and leave the tip of the suture which is in this way, and make the needle penetrate through the other end of the stitch from inside to outside.
And make the insertion of your needle also penetrate in the suture at which you have made that penetration through the stitch where all this should be able to enter.
And from this side of the hand begin to insert that on the end which is inside the suture at this other side, and pull out the thread from the seam through which it penetrated, then return it into its own seam and place the tip of the stitch that is on this other side at this end; and pull out that one from the seam which comes from part of him.
And do this one time and another, and repeat it in the same way between which you sew everything that is outside according to that example.
And the entirety of this method of sewing is that you sew in a stitch on the suture made from skin where you sew the leather, namely that you sew through once on one side of the seam, and leave that other opening until you have completed it.
The second type of own suture that is called Gualia, this refers to the treatment and as recommended by them, it means that you sew according to similarity on which some doctors sew, namely that they add every part to its corresponding part according to nature; and place the tip of another part and the tip of the stitch at the other end of this part, and this is done according to what I have advised you.
When you have placed the needle at the tip of the stitch near your own part from outside, make it penetrate inside in that sole, and leave two ends of the suture; and then revolve the needle, making it penetrate through to the inside in two ends of the stitch.
And then rotate each of those separately, making some parts from inside penetrate into the part from outside in two ends of the stitch other than those located on this opposite side.
And this method of sewing is better than the common light sewing, and it is the kind of sewing that I have previously remembered.
This is the treatment according to Gualia.
And thus they would say like this, the sewing of the belly is corrected with two needles; so you insert into these each one a thread, and start by inserting the needle from which you should sew, making it penetrate through to the other side according to the sewing that makes people equalize their bodies.
And know that when the disruption is in the middle location of the belly, then the sewing of this becomes more difficult than from other locations of the belly.
The method of treatment for gout is judgement among the other plagues.
And this is the cause when you have caught gout at the beginning of its attack before the air alters it, and return the intestine and sew here appropriately, then place over that the powdery matter.
And if the air has already altered the gout, then place over that certain ointments which you have in your possession so that they make hard wax and seal the threads, and are compacted by skin and stitch; and then treat it thus as treatment for the other plagues until it is healed.
And if you do not have the medicines at your disposal, then pause over that immediately, because it starts to expel pus, bile, and alternate between two times a day, just as you were taught, until it is healed. If there are no other plagues than these simple ones.
And if you fear that the gout might spread to the main limbs, then when you have submerged wool in oil of good quality or in rubbed oil, and leave this immersed over the areas between the armpits and let those oils rest.
And if you feel pain or putrefaction in his intestines, at those times when this happens regularly, then treat that with vinegar of a black stinging beetle, and especially if the bleeding is blocked in the intestine and causes passage through its cavity.
And know that which comes from the large intestine is a lighter healing pus compared to that found in the finer intestines.
And it is difficult to heal which is called "gegunu" the intestine that does not receive treatment for gout because it affects him completely; and this is due to the large number of veins in him and the magnitude they have in those, and by the subtlety of his body and by his proximity to the nature of nerves.
If what you're dealing with is the tissue of the disease and you've identified it clearly, then follow this procedure: return the first intestine according to your method until you reduce all the hernias equally.
If it has reached the patient's space and is now either red or black, then strengthen that on his body at the site where the condition of degradation affects him, so that there are flows of disease, for in the tissue veins and arteries are found.
And then insert what is another piece of that material, pause two extremities of the tissue hanging from the patient's side opposite the disease area, so that over you comes the alleviation of his condition. You must apply your effort to the tension of the tissue and the release of the limb of the disease.
Reminder for diseases when they occur in the intestine.
When a disruption occurs in the intestine and it is small, then it may be restored in some individuals. That's why I saw that person who was hit in his belly with a spear and had abdominal disease on the right side of his stomach; the disease had become old and caused fistula, and discomfort from his movements and flatulence.
So I pursued the healing of him even though it was not resolved in his treatment, but I managed to identify what should be healed and where the area is consolidated.
And I had the location already consolidated, I witnessed over the patient who experienced that unfortunate event in his belly; and did not allow any further bad events to happen due to that unfortunate accident and disrupted his dietary habits by eating and drinking, instead practicing in moderation with baths and exercising as prescribed.
And some experienced ones have said that when disease occurs in the intestine and it's small, then you should bind it according to this manner: take large caps; next adjust both sides of the disease and place a burning stick from those that make its mouth open over both sides of the disease. So when he takes on those and strengthens his mouth, cut off the head of him, which adheres and does not dissolve.
And then place another stick near the first one, and do not stop doing this by placing sticks one close to another according to the quantity of the entire disease.
And then reduce that and thus the disease; grind those excess caps inside the intestine until the intestine is healed; do not let the patient suffer from any injury.
And it is possible that the intestine will be joined with the fine thing which is made from the intestine of beasts added to him, because they are more twisted. And you take the end of these intestines of animals, and when he's shaved clean, then place the end of him on one of those intestines in a wrap, and insert that intestine into needles and thread around that particular animal's intestine, reduce it during the disruption.
And this way of sewing with sticks is nothing other than according to the path of trust and hope.
If the disease is large and broad, especially if it's in one of the finer intestines, where then there's no solution but surgery, and not full healing for him.
Regarding the treatment of ulcers and fistulas.
Know that every disease and abscess when it hardens and becomes old, results in an ulcer, which is not consolidated and bleeds for a long time and is not cut off. Therefore, wherever it may be in any part of the body, universally it's named fistula and we call that ulcer.
Fistula according to truth is a hard, fibrous opening, white in color that doesn't hurt and has the same sensation as the pain of exposure; therefore, it's called some places, namely coldness.
And in some individuals there is wetness which bleeds; and if you increase the humidity it will bleed after a few hours. And in some cases this wetness is a spot, it's small, it's thick, and it's fine.
All those causes have been shown, their signs, and the treatment with medicines are discussed in the division.
So I will also show you how to heal a fistula which is made through an operation using my knowledge.
Know that fistulas occur in all parts of the body; among those, there are fistulas that arise from large veins and arteries, or nerves, or the spinal column, or the intestine, or bladder, or any of the ribs, or some of the vertebrae of the back, or to any compound joints made like those of hand and chest. Among them, there are those which are closely related to the main member and have a similar appearance.
And among these fissures that occur this way are the diseases of difficult healing, and they do not receive treatment or cure, and care for them involves effort and lack of knowledge.
And if there is any of these fissures whose depth does not reach the locations mentioned, and you hope for its cure and you try to comprehend it, if you want to understand this better, then you attempt with iron or with force, and if the fissure occurs according to rectitude, and you inquire about it.
And if the fissure is twisted, then investigate it with the aid of a subtle lead, which because of the lightness of its body lifts and curves against the twist.
And if the fissure is caused by internal heat, it's not within your capability to perform this operation on them.
Therefore prepare the opening for your openings, through which the moisture with which you cleanse that one must also come from the other openings and pass from them.
And inquire carefully according to which manner it is possible for you to know if there are or nerves, and whether the depth of the fissure is distant or near, or whether it's a fissure with multiple openings that lies over your entire strength, inquiring about the patient through this, and the invention of pain involves your pressure with your hand on the area, and understanding from these significances and causes of accidents to abscesses.
And when you have ascertained all those causes at the true station, then proceed with treatment according to confidence: it is that you consider now whether the fissure appears close or in an external location, distant from joint, or from nerves, or artery, or vein, or any of the areas I told you about and said.
And you dry the fissure according to what was said about its formation of that, and maintain that which is in that filtration and of corrupted flesh, and that which has been born in the opening of the flesh, or part and similar, and treat that inside until it's healed.
And if the fissure is of distant depth and occurs according to rectitude, then carve into it as deep as possible, and modify that from all its corrupted flesh; and apply cloths wrapped in sharp medicines, and insert those into the cavity of the fissure, which you have comprehended with force.
And do this in those passages so that the sharp medicine may corrode all that is rotten within the cavity of the fissure and corruption.
And then restore it with ointments which produce healthy flesh until it's healed.
And if it's not healed by this method, then you perform cautery on it as we have recommended.
And if the cause of fissure is bone and you need to certify this, then inquire about it and dry it according to what we have recommended, if you do not prohibit any cause of vein or nerve or main body as we have said.
And if the bone is found by you and there's corruption and darkness in their body, then cut that where the corruption has been entirely; and then treat that so that its flesh within is healed.
And if it's not healed and continues to bleed like this, then know that you have not eradicated the entire corruption; therefore uncover them again carefully and thoroughly make an account of their condition and modification of their flesh with your ultimate strength, and then restore that.
And if it's healed, then that's good; and if not, then know that the corruption is in the distant depth of the body, which hasn't been achieved, therefore with that you have nothing but leave it.
And if the affected bone is small, or you're able to pull it with force, then you pull that using subtle forceps which suit this.
And if it's internal bones, then carefully perform the extraction of all those, and from them leave not a cause with your strength.
And if there's some contradiction with a cause of moisture, and in their operation there is neither fear nor error, then cut those ligaments or flesh if they are here, and deliver the bones.
And if there's not preparation for staying the bones of your time, then pause over that wound so that the wound is in it, and leave it within that around those bones and ligaments, and guard the wound so that it's not consolidated, and restrain the section you have cut during your operation.
But if you fear it, pause on that spot submerged under a heated oil surface, or a spot submerged in Egyptian ointment, or with any of the healing oils, when those ligaments can be removed, and the bones are separated from them by dissection, and that operation eases.
And if it's a large bone like the rib or thigh bone or similar, and what is corrupted in them is only their skin, then cut that only as far back so that the darkness and corruption are completely removed, and then restore the wound.
And if what is corrupted in them is a large part, and the corruption has reached the marrow of the bone, then this is necessary to close that and all cut it into the place where the corruption was achieved, and then treat that so that it's consolidated.
And I advise you that when you operate on a patient in their thigh, place that example and auxiliary support next to your operation.
For a young man around thirty years old, to whom pain occurs in their thigh, and from the divisions inside there is inflammation within the body where the matter is within the person's body reaching the thigh, and it is matter of abscess with large pus collections, and I do not attribute its cause to extrinsic factors.
And then I extend the treatment until reaching the mistake of the doctors where the abscess is opened, and remove the affected matter, and his cure was closely managed as it formed a fistula, and drains are made in the pus openings which all had drainage and the moisture from the body.
And then I underwent multiple surgeries for two years, and I did not know about those in the art, where I was called.
And I saw the change in him and the things that flowed from his those openings through a large body; and already the body of that man was all yellowed, and the color of him was yellow.
And then I inserted a needle into one of those openings and conducted the needle to the mouth.
And then I inspected all the openings closely and found that they were reaching them from every direction of the body.
And then I opened my way and incised into one of those openings where I discovered part of the bone, and removed that corruption, it was already earthy and corrupted and deteriorated; and already a part of the body had penetrated into the marrow.
And I tightened that which I discovered was revealed to me from the bone discovered.
And I judged that it was not in the bone but that corruption which was spreading and tightening, and I had already removed it.
And then continued the restoration of the wound with consolidating medicine for a long time, but it did not consolidate.
And then I repeated the process and discovered again on the bone after the first discovery, removing continuous corruption from the bone.
And I tightened what appeared to me from that corruption, and then I tried to complete the treatment of this and restoration, but it was not restored.
And then I discovered over it another time and did not cease to gradually pierce the bone little by little carefully and completed the restoration of this, but it was not restored until I pierced around a palm of him, and he extracted from his marrow, and then restored that with medicines, and it only consolidated slightly and healed.
And no repetition is necessary in the operation of this and that section for it but due to the disposition of his stomach for him and due to the lack of tolerance from him due to lack of food, which would happen to him at all times due to excess of evacuation syncopal illness.
And thus health is through complete healing, and nothing in place of hard bone tissue; and good disposition is made within him in his body and returns his virtue to him; and he is accustomed to his dispositions and does not oppose him in walking nor harm in any case.
May it be that the bone is prominent in a location of the body already drilled, then guide as to how you perform this second operation: and take hold of the length and strength there at the extremity of that bone that sticks out, and command someone else to extend that to its fullness; and place that piece of cloth wool thicker than the first piece on it; and press that against the flesh which is left from the bone, and extend the extremity of it so you can pull the flesh towards the parts left, and uncover the flesh over the location that you want to tighten so the saw does not cut into the flesh.
And place a bolster or table under that bone appropriately, so when you do this the saw is not prohibited from cutting into the corrupted flesh.
And guide that the saw is on the corrupted location little by little, so if it's in the concavity of the corrupted bone and doesn't appear in its manifestation to touch, force the closure of this other time.
And if the bone is corrupted and not prominent, before it's one continuous part from the other, and the corruption is at the middle or in a part of this, then uncover the flesh from all parts completely; and place a bolster under you, and place the saw on the first part where the corruption is between which the closure of the other part continues.
And make the closure according to the location of the corruption a little, as we have said.
And if the corruption is in the joint, incise that corrupted joint, and saw the bone where it continues from the other part.
And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it's not through reason but instinctively.
And if the corruption is in the elbow of the hand or the chest, it's very difficult; however guide that you inquire about the corruption as to how it appears to you, and open it, and show it according to each disposition which is possible for you, and with each instinct rectify it for you when it does not oppose your veins or nerves.
And know which are the ones that penetrate and the saws to pierce these bones are very much according to the location of the bones, and the preparation of those, and the thickness of those, and the subtlety and greatness and smallness of those, and their hardness and their rarity; so guide that you prepare for every species of operation tool suitable for that operation.
And know that such an operation means to you about the special use of the instrument with which you would be equipped; when your knowledge is extensive and long, and you are familiar with the methods of this art, and have experience in dealing with ailments, then you can apply what suits each instrument for all ailments.
And I will show you at the end of this chapter the number of tools you will use, which are as simple as those on which you will proceed with your prohibition, which you will experience on others. Saw shape:
Shape of another saw:
Shape of another large saw:
Shape of a rasp or file: The head of this rasp should be in the shape of the tip of a star-shaped key, and its points should follow the shape of the points on a file.
And it is not to rub only at those places where the joints are corrupted, or if there's a large wide mouth.
Shape of the smaller razors:
Shape of the side razors:
Shape of another well-made saw: have it form an arc above the pus bulge and the sharpness of its iron. Let the member of its handle descend somewhat in making. Shape of it:
Shape of the razor where it has hollowed out:
Shape of another subtle razor:
Shape of another curved-end razor:
Shape of the small rasp resembling a spiderweb:
Shape of another smaller cutting instrument:
Shape of another cutting tool; this resembles a rasp, and its end is like a saw, it exhibits in moist places along the bones:
Shape of a rasp which suits to the ratio of that which pierces the bones:
And its end is triangular and has an acute tip.
And it is made of Indian iron, and similarly hollowed like all the causes that we have mentioned for rasors, cutters, and saws.
Of the ends of incision and of the joint closure of bones.
The ends press or due to an intrinsic cause or an extrinsic cause, or when you have treated that corruption with the healing of those medicines and the healing does not come about, or sometimes the corruption disappears from the body without your touching it for any cause. Then hollow out that limb into this until the diseased part reaches the diseased area; so that the patient may escape death or disease which is more harmful to the limb.
And the sign of what you are dealing with is that the limb becomes black inside until it reaches the point where it has been burned, or you let the darkness go inside to that part of the limb which has gone black and will spread throughout its body; thus make your incision in this way.
And similarly, if it is the cause of corruption due to the impact of some poisonous causes such as by a sea scorpion or a viper or a snakebite and its like.
And if the corruption or impact is at the end of the finger, then you will cut the finger and do not leave space for the corruption to spread into your hand.
And similarly if it reaches the hand, then you will cut that from the palm of the hand, and do not allow space for corruption to spread within to reach into the forearm.
And if you have reached that point, then cut the arm in between the elbow at the joint.
And if the corruption passes beyond and surrounds the elbow area, then death of the patient is at that point; and to administer another cause in this treatment is a lot of virtue.
And similarly do for the chest when corruption reaches the palm of the hand, then you will cut that between the two thumbs.
And if it spreads to the center of the chest, then you will cut the entire chest. Perhaps if it extends into the groove, then you will cut the area between the groove's joint.
And if the corruption has already spread beyond the groove, then there is no help but resignation, and leave the patient to death.
And the method of cutting or sawing the limb is that you strengthen one ligament at the place where you want to cut, and then place another ligament over it. Extend your assistant's hand with another ligament across the remaining parts, and extend their hand with another ligament in those areas; then you separate the flesh that is between two ligaments so that all the flesh is exposed under a slit or saw mark; then cut or saw nearby.
And make sure a sheet of cloth is laid out from all directions so that it does not touch the spot, and bring the patient's injury neatly dressed and with a scald.
Perhaps if there is bleeding during your work, then you will cauterize the area cautiously, or place some powders that strengthen the blood on it; and then return to your treatment until it is completed.
And bind the affected limb with ligaments as comfortable, and treat it until it heals.
And I advise you of an event that occurred to a man in his foot, this is an accident that befell him which I and you advise against, one that involves darkness in his foot and the mixture was akin to fire's combustion.
And that corruption occurs first in his little finger within which it tends throughout his foot.
And then that man prepared himself to drain pus as he saw the healing proceed towards his limb with the intensity of its progress causing pain and discomfort for him. And it spread that foot into the joint, and the cure took place.
Long ago this corruption event occurred in his little finger of the hand indicated.
And then it reaches me, and I must consider to reflect this excess upon the one who practices medicine on his body; and this excess does not reflect but begins to proceed into another finger within which it started in the hand.
And he asked me to insert my hand into his, and I don't want to do this fearing the reflection of that excess, more than I fear your hand's death, for the virtue of the thigh is upon cutting.
And when he was no longer under my care, he returned to his land and came back to me that the man prepared himself and inserted his entire hand, and he recovered.
And I have not provided this narrative for no other reason than to aid in understanding this disease and its consequences, so that it may be significant as it is explained and according to which it was treated.
Regarding the cure of stones and the quality of enemas along with medications.
When an abscess occurs in any fleshly members and the space of the abscess is extended until it collects pus, then it bursts and perforates, and pus flows out from it, leaving the area empty as if it were a vessel, and the wound opens like cloth under it, and does not reach deeper corruption, nor seeps into bones or nerves or ligaments, it is called a stone (or cyst), and it is not named a fistula.
However, if the space extends into which corruption begins in some member, then it is called a fistula and I don't use that term.
And the treatment of it is to insert that wound completely as it has moved, and especially when it is subtle like cloth, and you make sure not to stick to the area because of its corruption.
And if you hope that the wound sticks and that this corruption hasn't achieved its later consequence, and in the wound there is a passage towards it, then you treat that with an enema.
And you consider it as a stone, and if it is large, the arm that you use has an oily smell, then treat with an Egyptian enema made from oil and wine mixed in equal parts, which are adjusted in a vessel, and they are placed over the fire until the medicine boils and reaches honey.
And then you take what is necessary from it and dissolve it with water and honey; treat with that for the stone, strengthen his opening, and leave the medicine in him for the duration of two hours.
And then remove that from its location; do this for several days until the stone is removed and his body is recovered.
And some times it is treated with ash water when this medicine isn't available to you; and then take the ashes of vinegar, put them in water; and then boil that and treat with it while you are convinced that the stone is gone.
And if the thigh doesn't tolerate this Egyptian medicine or ash water, then treat with water and honey which is mixed with zinian triissat; and treat with wine and honey that has been mixed together. Wherein a property of honey is to modify and wash, and wine makes the stone adhere, especially when there's excess of coagulation and drying in the wine.
And as you do this for some times and you are convinced that the stone is already removed, then treat with what gives birth to flesh in him.
And you take from the diaphanous paste, and dissolve that with rubbed oil and wine coagulant; or treat with it those enemas and other ointments that have the properties which I already wrote about in the treatise on ointments.
And if the opening of the stone is widened where no enema tube can be inserted, then you gradually enlarge that with small iron, and pause in it a heated envelope covered in Egyptian ointment or basilicon oil, until it's enlarged.
And similarly if the opening is wide, then you add his lips to him with stitches and leave him a quantity in which an enema fits.
And if the opening of his body through which blood flows is elevated to its parts above it, then dry that in the lower part of the pus where it's in him so that the blood can flow away from it; when the blood is restricted in the depth of the stone, flesh will be generated in him.
And if it's not possible to dry the stone inside the vicinity of the bone in the lower part of the pus as you wish, then pierce and prepare the limb according to your preparation so that blood flows slightly from him when he is able to do this without leaving any obstruction for the blood.
Let that which is over the sinus opening be done, which you reinforce at all times to prevent any damage to their arm. And so that you know whether what flows from their arm is much or little, or if it's digestible or not.
And also pay attention to the location of that sinus, whether the patient feels pain there or not, and if it's in their abscess.
And as your treatment is prolonged in this manner, observe the matter that's discharged over the sinus opening already adhering or if it's acquiring adherence. If you have to remove it, then change the sheet and renew the ointment.
Let it be known that if there's a substantial distance from the sinus to the virus, don't discard the patient's body fluids; they are part of their healing process. This is especially true for those who take longer in their bodily processes during illnesses, and conversely, it applies to others as well.
And if it takes several days for the arm to digest after coming close to the sinus, then you'll know that there is no adherence from the sinus. And if the adherence of the sinus takes time and is the cause of prolongation, then adjust in drying off the medicines; and if the medicines are wetted by their substance and by their effectiveness, they're dried just like lion's ointment, when it comes to their excessive addition of salve.
And the key to what is healed later on, is taking lion's ointment and dissolving it in clarified oil, then applying it to their skin matching its substance, and closely placing this over them, using it accordingly.
And when there's no arm present in that action, lion's ointment and honey mixed together should be used when it's coiled inside, applying it; or take myrrh and aloes and grind them all with honey on the flame, then apply this over a sheet and reinforce it above the sinus; and apply this on top of the honey-coil which gets thickened from being cooked, then grind it further on the sheet reinforcing it.
And some times, when dealing with aristocracy and their reasons (and the celestial lily among others) and fine flour from almonds and centaury, use these simple or refined ingredients, grind them finely and sift them over the honey I've suggested; and utilize this.
And if the sinus extends and isn't healed by this treatment, then you'll know that corruption is in them, already investigating within bones or other hard parts or joints. Then, you treat it with tuberculous disease therapy, as previously mentioned.
From the treatment of infected skin and cut nails, addition of a finger incision, and sectioning.
Panarix is an abscess which leaves nails on the tips of fingers or toes, and strengthens other nails. If it's prolonged and its treatment is costly, it either becomes a pus-filled abscess, or gets corrupted, and corrodes the substance of the nail from within, weakening all of it and spreading its corruption to the bone where it produces an unpleasant smell, and the end of that finger is cut off, and the color turns black.
And so when you've reached that which we explained in the division and your treatment doesn't take effect, then know that you should cut out all the excess that has accumulated under the nail and proceed to cauterize the wound closely around it, as vigorous heat is beneficial for this.
Let it be that the bone is sound and the nail is healthy, and if the extensions of the nail have already covered the flesh to their inner parts, they start poking it and lead you so. Then know that you should pause at the delicate point leaving the corner of the nail when you poke into the flesh, push this inwards and cut through that flesh with ease, place over it what remains from the flesh with burning corrosive medicines until everything is renewed; then proceed to treat it with ointments until it heals.
Let it be that corruption already spreads into the bone; then know that you should cut through the bone there and remove it, because nothing heals when the bone is corrupted.
And if you find corrosion and further corruption in the mentioned area, then cut through it using one of its nodes according to how it is being pressed into memory, and proceed to treat it internally until it heals.
Let it be that under the nail there's percussion or scratching and in that severe pain, then know that you should at the start make a bloodletting on the patient, and proceed to dry the nail with sharp blades crossing downwards through it, remember not to let the drying penetrate into the flesh left behind by the nail, as this might cause severe pain for the patient leading to birth of excessive skin in the area; then treat that spot with what reduces pain.
A condition exists which is natural in many men, where their flesh is very soft and their bones are also very soft, or their nails are very soft.
Such things are natural in the anatomy of a joint, or it's inherent to them within certain joints of the articulations. The one that is natural in certain joints has no harm, whereas the one that becomes natural in joints that are soft causes pain.
Of those that are naturally fatty, the section is slight; this means you should insert it up to where its anatomy meets the joint space.
As for what is natural at the articulation's joint, healing is difficult; therefore, guard against its reformation.
In the case that is natural within an articulation, cover it such that when you insert at the beginning of his flesh, around where the bone starts, do so with a round incision into the bone. Then, use one of those convenient saws nearby and approximately cure that area until it's healed.
Achieving consolidation which occurs among the articulations due to their natural structure in humans or from the formation of disease or fireburning, or through rubbing - thus cover that consolidation so that after this process, the articulations return to their natural form.
And place between their cloths in oil that has been rubbed, so they do not consolidate lightly, and separate them, or place a thin layer of lead between those, according to how you cover.
Likewise, if consolidation occurs in some joints on the palm, then you cure that consolidation according to its preparation and it aligns with the figure of the limb.
From an incision of veins, they are varicose.
Veins are varicose, and they are thickened veins filled with melancholic excesses that appear in the folds of the body's limbs, and their main occurrence is on the chest, particularly for travelers, workers, and those who carry things.
Therefore, when you administer the heart purge for black cholera, perform several folds with strong expulsion, and then bleed the patient from the basilic vein.
The treatment for their blood is according to two methods: the first is that you incise and remove that black blood, and the other method is that you elevate the vein and extract it entirely.
The section of it is according to this method: insert at the beginning of the chest with water poured inside until the large blood has dissolved, which becomes viscous in the chest, then strengthen the chest of the sick person up to the top part of the thighs between their buttocks and below the anus with a bend, and then bleed the black blood in a place, or in two, or three sections with an extensive bleed-off, and then lift the black blood up to your hand from the end of the chest inside them and above them, until you have extracted the quantity of blood that you want and is sufficient, which will take the virtue of the sick person.
And then guide him/her, and instruct them to refrain from eating foods that generate black cholera.
And repeat the treatment through bloodletting when the veins are full and this is noticed by the sick person.
The elevation of them is according to this method: you should remove the chest of the sick person, if it has folds in the skin, and then immerse him/her in water so that his chest becomes red and the veins are swollen; or it can be exercised through vigorous exercise, if bathing isn't available, while the limb is scraped.
And then dry the cord in the right direction of the vein by section along or behind him/her; you should pull out the anus, or from the lower part of him/her, you should pull the tail.
And then cut the cord and scrape the vein from all sides until you feel it, and you should notice the appearance of him/her that times when that desire declines towards blackness.
And then, when you have evacuated from the cord, you will notice that white line which is the cord.
And then you put both of those lines inside where it's elevated and situated above the cord, and you hang that on a nail or a hook.
And then dry another section near that section for three fingers, and then scrape the cord from the part above the vein until you see it.
And then lift that and incise there at the rear section which is by the tail, and then extract that and lift that until it's clear through the second section, and then extract that from the section above that.
Do this until you extract that from the section which is at the top or another of all sections, where everything is clear; then incise that.
And if you don't follow to extract and lift, then insert a needle with strong double thread and tie that one and pull it out, or insert both of them under his/her skin and turn your hand in every direction until it's settled. And guard that you don't incise it; for if it's broken, it makes it difficult to lift that part and causes damage to the sick person through that injury.
And when you've gotten all of that out and settled on the site of the injury, cover it with a cloth soaked in oil and rubbed oil as well as regular oil, then cure that until it's healed.
And if the body is constricted due to a certain kind of twisting that encapsulates its parts and does not adhere according to what we have said, then you must cut across that area in all directions of twisting in it and the areas around it, and hang that section with strings so that you lift everything up.
And be careful of your section so that you do not pierce the vein and cause pain in that area; it will be difficult for you to lift this part; use your caution in this.
Shape of the incision when the body is dried:
It is not like the heat of ordinary hands or has an abrupt point so as to damage the vein; it must have a large degree of softness, as if we said. If it were too delicate, it would cut into the vein because of its delicacy; instead, it should have this excess in its grossness as we have mentioned.
Regarding the extraction of the saphenous vein.
This vein is generated in the lower legs, as Al-Ategi in the regions of Arabs and in the southern dry lands of India where there is little vitality, not even grass or shrubs grow.
And in other parts of the body, it is generated in other regions besides these.
And the process of this is like decomposition, which you see in a chain, just as poison exists inside the body in the form of snakes and worms and insects that generate between the chain and the flesh.
And the sign of this disease's occurrence is when this vein encounters inflammation in the leg, causing that area to swell; and near it begins the vein issuing from that swelling, resembling a plant root.
And when you notice the extension at that point, then cover it with a piece of lead whose weight is equal to one pound, within two pounds, and place that and soften the lead hanging from the chest.
And as many times as you see that there's a cause for it outside the parts, wrap this in lead and smooth it out. And if the disease is prolonged, then you must cut a part of it and wrap the rest; do not cut that part too deeply as it should be just below the skin. If you cut too deep, it constricts and enters the flesh, causing an abscess, pus formation, and a bad ulcer in the area.
And when treated gently and extracted little by little, so that it is removed from the rear end of the leg and does not allow any cause to remain within the body.
And this vein protrudes in some individuals that extend up to several hands of length, and it has reached me such that one I observed extended up to about twenty hands.
And if it is cut during its treatment, then insert the needle into the tendon of that leg and pierce that with a long needle inside the body, so that everything within can be evacuated. Administer putrefaction to the area for several days with medicines; after that, treat it for abscesses.
And this vein sometimes has bumps, especially when it appears at the joint of the leg or in the leg itself, and comes to have open sores, and exists from every open hole branch.
And treat it as we have said for its extraction and according to what was mentioned above.
Regarding the section made on worms that are generated under the skin, it is called "bovine discomfort".
This illness is named in some regions as "bovine discomfort", due to the symptoms that are often present in cattle and it involves worms inside a creature, which is born between the chain (likely referring to connective tissue) and flesh. These worms move throughout the entire body both upwards and downwards, and they manifest themselves through feelings of discomfort when felt within each part of their body as they disrupt the chain and cause pain externally.
And its generation is due to the corruption of certain fluids like worms, snakes, earthworms, and hookworms in the stomach.
And it is found through the mischief of this (illness), when it moves within the body and rises to the head, and then the fluids in the body become thickened and enter inside, destroying the brain. This results in various swellings.
And when you wish to treat and extract this, do it only if you recognize its symptoms clearly and see it within the body. Then cut where you find any thickening or swelling, and smoothly remove it with firm constriction around it. Proceed by drying it out and extracting it accordingly.
And if it is found in the flesh and you do not feel it, then place a cautery with fire over that area from where it lives. The main cause feared is corruption within which corrupts that area as we have said.
And if it penetrates to the head close to the brain, then press firmly over the eyebrow with strong constriction, proceed by drying it out further and extract; take care that the body uses medicine for alteration of its body, with medicines expelling bad putrid fluids, and avoid foods causing corruption.
Regarding the section on bovine discomfort.
This illness is named 'nafir' in our land, and it is pain that occurs in some limbs, and spreads from limb to limb.
And I have already seen this as per what I will recount to you. I was summoned to treat a sick woman in a village, and I found her arm with a small swelling on the vein of the arm. After letting it sit for an hour, I saw that swelling move up like water being squeezed, more quickly than air, as if it were live silver when it moves from place to place.
And then the pain in that area is felt within the muscle, and here I stay for an hour.
And here flows towards the other side across which it reaches to the other arm.
And here I was told that it would move around in its entire body as I saw, which amazed me with the movement and speed of member to member. And I had already seen something similar in my patients according to that manner, but I have observed movements where the pain is being swapped from member to member. But in this case, with the patient like in the woman, I did not see it so clearly.
And I did not think it was like this until now because the woman is elderly, with thick veins and exposed arteries, and in this case appears that sensation of circulating wind from one part to another.
And it is necessary that this does not appear according to this backflow in those who are juicy and have moist veins that clot together.
And if you wish for the cure of them, and the patient feels this pain, then it is not like what we have said in your presence, so you press on that spot lightly and dryly over that place where that circulating wind is being contained, and cauterize that area.
But if you don't experience this in your patients, then you treat that with the release of the body and whatever drives away wind, and take those with stink pills and those with serapin and resemble them.
From the extraction of arrows.
Arrows are diverse according to the species, and according to the locations in the body where they can be found. Their diversity lies in that some have large points, small ones, concave ones, dull ones, and they are solid; and others have three angles, and those to which they have tongues; and those to which they are spines.
And for the symptoms of poisoning: if you catch an arrow, and it pierces through the bone, and becomes stuck in the cerebral cavity which is above the brain, causing it to become inflamed due to excessive heat, blindness, dizziness, nausea, swelling and inflammation of the tongue, spasms affecting reason, vomiting caused by anger, loss of speech, and the voice is destroyed, along with a white moist location that resembles dust appearing at the site of the wound. The eyes resemble the moisture in the flesh.
And therefore, if you notice these symptoms on you, then refrain from the treatment and extraction of the arrow, unless it is outside.
The symptoms of the arrow when found in the heart are that it is close to the left breast, and feels as though it has been stuck into hard matter, not visible flesh; and the movement of the arrow resembles the movement of the wrist, and the condition at the wound site shows blackness, causing a cold sensation at the extremities, sweatiness, and fainting; and thus know that death descends from head to foot.
The symptoms when the arrow has pierced the lungs are a sensation of dampness in the wound area and blood bubbles at the wound site; vessels near the throat become blocked, and there is a change in the color of the body, it breathes out a large amount of spirit, and asks for air to be breathed in strongly.
And if you find the arrow in the spleen which is located in the thighs, then the pain is close to the small ribs, and there's a great intense pain accompanied by sighing, and not all of the muscles are affected.
And if you find the arrow in the stomach, then there's a certain indigestion causing discomfort at the wound site.
And if you find the arrow in the abdomen, and it is stuck there, there's a hole at the wound site, or tissue, or intestine which has been ruptured; there's no hope for treating that injury by extracting the arrow.
And if the arrow finds its way into the bladder and causes the urine to flow out uncontrollably, it may cause certain effects leading to symptoms being produced externally; and there's pain on the body, in that case, know that it is fatal.
For the other limbs such as the face, throat, and chest, shoulders and accessories, as well as the ribs of the back, the breastbone, waistband, and the like equivalents of body parts, they are saved according to the most vital locations when the arrow does not encounter a vein or artery and is not venomous.
And I will advise you on this based on what I have seen about the nature of these arrows, so that you can understand about their effect in treatment.
This is the cause: when an arrow wounds in the lacrimal gland of the eye in the root of the nose, I extract that from him on the other side. You leave his ear wax for him, and he recovers, and no harm occurs to his nose thereafter.
And I also extract another arrow from a judge which wounded him in his nose on the wax of its nostril. You leave the eyelid and let it go, and the arrow was already hidden so that nothing could be obtained from that except for a small tip at which it adhered to his shaft. It was a large arrow among arrows of sharp Turks, made of lion's bone in which there were no earwax.
And if it is the judge (who has been wounded), then no harm occurs to his nose by any bad accident.
And I extract another arrow from a Christian man which was embedded in the shoulder blade, and it was an Arab arrow, and that is the one with earwax. And then I pierce through that between two bones; it was already submerged in his shoulder blade. Then I refine on that, and I proceed to remove that, and the Christian recovers.
And I extract another arrow from a man which was embedded in his abdomen, and I thought that he would die from it; and so, since the thirty days had passed and no change occurred regarding any cause of his condition, I pierce through the arrow and focus on it, and he recovers, and no harm occurs to him by any bad accident thereafter.
And I have seen a man in whom an arrow wounded him on both sides, and the infection had solidified on him. And since it has been seven years, I inserted the arrow into the root of his thigh.
And I have seen a woman who was wounded in her abdomen by an arrow; the infection has consolidated inside her and has not changed regarding her usual conditions. The woman did not experience any harm during some of her natural operations.
And I have seen another man to whom an arrow wounded his face; the infection has consolidated and expelled the arrow, without causing any pain or similar symptoms here.
And I extract the arrow from the king's prince's man which was embedded in the middle of his nose; it had already declined to the right side, and the entire arrow was hidden.
And I was called upon to treat him near the insertion point of the arrow within three days.
And then I focused on the infection from the arrow wound; and then I probed around with a tool gently, but did not feel it. Yet he felt that pinpoint just under his right ear; and so I suspected that this point was at the tip of the arrow.
And I applied oil in the place where there is an attractive and digestive power, confirming to myself that this location is what we should focus on so that it appears to me the place of the arrow, so that it succeeds upon that.
And no harm occurs in the significant location that you have obtained this place; and I continued applying oil on him for many days without any harm occurring. And the infection has consolidated, while his nose's removal space lasts for several days until I feel the arrow inside his nose and recount this to me.
And then I placed on the wound a quick-corrosive medicine for several days until I opened it, and by the tool, I focused on that point, and felt the tip of the arrow which adheres to the shaft.
And then I adjusted during the opening of the wound from that quick medicine until the tip of the arrow became visibly apparent to me, and I spent this time over that for the period of time within four months.
And as the infection expanded, it became possible for me to insert the scissors into him and refine that area. I did not experience any pain or discomfort with this method. Therefore, I did not continue to refine and engineer on that using various tools until a day began on that using various forceps insertion methods according to how those appeared at the tip of the nose, then I extracted that; and then I restored that wound.
And some doctors thought that the nasal cartilage would not be restored, but I restored it and the wound has consolidated. His nose is fully recovered and he does not suffer in any way from this.
And I advise you on the quality of extracting some arrows in order that you take this rule and meaning into consideration for what I have not mentioned, since these parts of this art and these definitions are not understood from the narrative nor do they comprehend her freely.
And the artisans wisely compare on a few matters; and about this which is present compared to what is absent; and finds new operations and new instruments you should descend from the causes of foreign arts when it happens.
And so I say that arrows are not extricated from within the members where they are attached, but according to two ways: or by penetration into the location where they enter; or by the opposite of the other side.
And that which is extricated through the location gives entry, or it is an arrow proceeding in a meaty location, it is thrown and externally extracted.
And if you do not feel any discomfort at the time when you catch it, then cover that until several days where the meat around it recedes, and ease the entry of it and its departure.
When something is affected internally and does not respond to your judgment, then smooth that out for a few days and continue with the treatment each day, until it has been cured.
And if it does not respond to your judgment for a few days, then you should investigate that it is where you puncture in the circuit of the arrow in that part from all sides into the subtle location under which the place is magnified by the arrow, and then remove that.
And if the arrow is already hidden in the body location, and hidden from feeling, then you investigate that by temptation, and if you feel it, then pull it with such instruments as are suitable for its extraction.
And if you cannot do it over it due to the constriction of the wound and the length of the pin, and here is neither bone nor nerve nor vein, then you should cut through the wound where it is magnified and where it is possible to extract the arrow.
And if they are in your earlobe at which it is stuck from all sides to the entirety of the organ that you can do; and operate on this, if you cannot remove the flesh from the fracture of the earlobes and in twisting those among which you judge.
And when you administer the extraction of the arrow in any location where it is, then you use twisting of your hand with forceps from all sides into which she does that obey; and delicately with subtle subtlety that the arrow will not be broken and that make it difficult for your difficult extraction of her and that extraction.
And if you cannot do that in your time, then you leave for a few days within which the parts that are in the circuit of her should relieve, and proceed with that which is now relieved. And if it causes you the opposite effect of blood flow, then you administer what we said about treatment in its chapter.
And guard your skill from the incision of vein or nerve, or cord, and perform any manner of operation that you can for the removal of the arrow; do this with ease, tranquility, speed, and firmness as I have recommended to you.
And thus make the arrow contract by itself so that the head is according to the figure according to which you must place the installation of the arrow in him, for it is more convenient. And if that is not possible for you, then you administer what is possible for you through the figures.
And if the arrows are outside being knocked by the opposite side, or that already progresses one part to the parts of outside, or causes weakness in the extremity of the arrow due to the sensation of the part further above the point of entry and sometimes that is eminent; then you should know about that; and let it be according to quantity where the forceps take; and proceed by pulling her, for she responds easily to judgment.
And if it is stuck in the bone, then you twist the hand opposite so that the arrow begins to penetrate into the bone, and enlarge yourself, and proceed by extracting her.
And if not, leave her for a few days, and then proceed with extracting her until you feel something.
And if the stem of the arrow is inside that, then you push it towards there.
And if the stem is broken and you want to administer pressure, then you insert that, if it is numb, use an instrument concave so that fits into the cavity of him in the side of the arrow, and proceed by pushing her towards there.
And if the arrow is concave, then you push her with a firm instrument entering that, for the arrow relieves due to that.
And if the arrow is corroded, then you should hollow out all the flesh in which it is located, if that is possible for you, and proceed to treat her with what suits.
And if the arrow is in the foot, or in the belly, or in the bladder, or on the side, and it approaches that you touch her by temptation, and it is possible for you to operate on her, then operate on her and beware of cutting into a vein or nerve, extract her, and proceed with closing the wound if appropriate, and treat her so that she becomes healed.
Shape of the forceps to which arrows are pulled:
Let their ends be like a duckbill that they make like pliers when they take hold of the arrow so as not to let it go.
And among those are made special marks, large, few and middle-sized, depending on the quantity of the size of the arrow and its sharpness, as well as the breadth of the wound, and the constriction thereof.
Thus like a ray for it alleviates her entry in the interior by means of the concave arrow and pushes towards that one.
Regarding bloodletting from the veins.
The veins of bloodletting which usually require bloodletting are... [the specific veins would follow in a more complete text]... .xxx., of which there are in the head .xvi., These are the two pulsating veins, which are near the temples, they are called Auricularis; these two herbs are in both of the temples visible; and two veins that are in the two lacrimals under each eye they are called Lacrimal; and a vein prepared in the middle part of the forehead, and the vein that is at the end of the nose; and two guide veins located on the neck; and two veins that are above the lips; and two veins that are below the lips; and - these are the veins that are called Algenic; and these are two veins that drain the tongue. The veins that are to be bloodletted in the arms are .v.; Among those veins, one is cephalic, it's from the wild liver; and the people call it "the vein of the head", and silently, it's a middle-sized vein, and is composed of a branch of basilica, and another branch of cephalica; and name that the people call it "vein of whole body" and basilica is the vein which is placed in the wild liver, and named "twinkling", and they called it by laypeople as "vein of the stomach"; and veins of the arm, it's placed on the belly button, and this is the one where bloodletting is done, and this is the one that appears above the pulse through a visible manifestation; and salvatella, and it's the vein that's between what was said auricular and the little one called pus; and are in its two branches.
And in the chest and ribcage are three veins; one of those is that leaves the curve of the lower part of the wild liver; and the second is Sophena, its place is to leave the bend of the domestic liver; and sciatic vein, its location is to leave the bend of the wild liver; and in the ribcage there are other veins similar to those.
The youth of the veins that are near the temples is to examine for ancient catarrhs, migraine, and ear discharge or ulcers of old head illnesses.
And the quality of seeing those is according to what I recommend to you: it should be with the head of the patient raised and rubbed on the back of the head at the location where both veins are palpable through ample good friction; support the patient's back by your hand in a bend so that both places near the temples can be felt under the two bends, the points being close to the temples in two lower areas of the head; feel that with your hand as I indicated, and if you feel the pulse of those hands, there is testing here.
Close you take the surgical knife, and this is the one that intersects, close you insert that under the vein in the neck between where bloodletting leads to the mouth. And close raise your hand to the vein and neck towards the upper parts, and cut into the vein with an incision intersecting. And let the length of the incision be that of two fingers adjusted or around this; and bleed out the blood until you desire.
And close strengthen with powders and leave it in where it will heal.
And already, in the introduction to this work, we have discussed the incision of these and their cautery treatment.
Among the two arteries, which are in the temples, the quality for bloodletting is old migraine, bad and recurrent, and frequent ophthalmic issues, and the flow of excessive acute body discharges in patients.
And the quality of bloodletting those is according to what I recommend to you: strengthen the patient's back with your hand in a bend so that both veins can be felt through manifest palpation, and demonstrate the pulse of each side of yours mentioned; then here you test.
And close you raise the neck above the vein towards your indicated area, and insert the bloodletting tool diagonally below it; lift up the vein in its place; cut that like you did with other veins; let the blood flow according to the amount of your need.
And close untie the constriction of the back, place your hand on the vein for an hour, and then rest over that spot with powders and strengthen it under a firm pressure; leave it in where it will heal.
And already the recall of them, and their incisions, and their extraction have been mentioned in the beginning of this text.
And thus the quality of bloodletting from the frontal vein is close to bloodletting from the cephalic veins for old facial ailments, migraine, heat, and infected ulcers.
The quality of the bloodletting for this patient is according to what I recommend to you; so, when the patient strengthens his stomach with a lump inside where a vein appears; and then take the tool which is called the 'fossori' from which this has its shape:
Place the point of the probe on the head of the fossori over that vein and hit it towards your body or towards another cause in the manner of you, let the blood flow according to the amount which you want; and then relieve the puncture in the patient and strengthen that inside so that it is healed.
Some observations are made during bloodletting at the site of bloodletting, but not that the bloodletting is of acute extremity as with other bloodlettings, before it's on this side of the extremity, and that bloodletting in a transverse way, where the bone is close to him makes me break the bloodletting when it's delicate.
Let the youth of the two veins that are in the tear ducts of both nostrils by scabies from nostril by soreness and pus in the nostrils, and for face's diseases.
The quality of bloodletting is that the patient's stomach strengthens with a lump and then perform bloodletting on those areas, making sure you stand over the head of the patient.
And when bloodletting is done in a transverse direction along the length for a few times, where there is no meat in the area; and if the bloodletting is delicate, break its extremity.
And then let the blood flow as much as necessary for you, place your hand on those spots, strengthen them with one night, and then relieve those areas.
Let bloodletting of the vein in the nose be suitable for acute fever and strong heat, as well as face diseases and migraines that occur in the face, especially when they are old.
The quality of bloodletting for this patient is that the stomach strengthens its body and places it under your left hand on their nose. Take the delicate but long bloodletting tool and place it in the middle of the nose's peak according to straightness, where the vein doesn't appear here, and when blood starts flowing shortly.
Remember to end your hand with the small bloodletting tool gradually and let the blood flow according to your need; then relieve that for one night, as it is restored quickly.
Let the youth of bloodletting lead to constriction of the eye and the onset of leprosy, as well as bad face diseases, itching and ulcers caused by corrosive substances like mercury.
The quality of bloodletting for these is that the stomach strengthens each one in its body with firmness; and the surgeons are above the head of the stomach, and the stomach should be lying on a pillow.
And then perform bloodletting along the vein longitudinally with large delicate tools gradually; and then extract blood according to the season, quantity or according to what necessity you desire that it is about; and then simulate like the other vein.
And then relieve the firmness and strengthen both veins in mid-contraction so that the stomach is not infected, let it heal inside until the disease is cured.
The youth of bloodletting for the veins of the alerich region corresponds to small pustules and blisters in the mouth, decay of gum tissues, bad ulcers, cracks, and bad ulcers that occur in the nose and within its circuit.
The quality of bloodletting for those is to behead the stomach in front of you, strengthen its body with a lump and then rotate the lips around. Look at both veins where one belongs to the right side of the lip and the other to the left; and the demonstration of each one is by the darkness of each on both sides, and it's more so when within their circuit those are small black veins; and then cut each one through an incident incision.
If you have doubt and do not know which one of those is, then you understand through an incision in the largest of them, and from the evident pus of those.
And simulate the appearance of both veins that are on the lips above.
The two veins that are left for the tongue develop in anticipation of bloodletting for the head region, before infection areas are in the gutturary cavity, for throat diseases and oral diseases.
The quality of bloodletting those is that follow the stomach between your own at the front of the throat, lift the tongue from them, look at the tongue, from one side of its vein and the other side's vein, and the color of each declines to darkness.
And then perform bloodletting on any of them; and be careful not to end your hand with bloodletting on those, as they are arteries.
Your veins that are bloodletted in the armpit are in those where pain typically occurs in all men, and bloodletting for them is performed according to two ways, or they put it with a mirtilat or olive-shaped tool gradually decreasing in thickness; or they cut with a surgical knife, and call this 'incision', and this is its form:
Let the incision be as you desire, and prepare to open the concave full veins that appear gross and large, and near those that contain large hard stones.
And this pleurotomization is of lesser breadth and has a more subtle extremity, suitable for pleurotomizing subtle veins that contain small citron stones.
Let the juvenile of the pleurotomization of the basilic vein, which is one of three veins: extract the stone from the abdominal maladies that are in the liver and gallbladder, as well as from what affects the belly and the abdomen.
And when the pleurotomizer performs this pleurotomization, he must protect that area and be careful in that place, where it has an artery near it, and if he misses or adjusts during the pleurotomization puncture, that artery will bleed and cause the discharge of stones, so beware not to pleurotome there with a sharp tool before cutting as desired.
And if the basilic vein does not appear through manifest observation, then beware that you leave it and change to another, or search for any similar vein; or pleurotome in a location at the end of the arm where that is evident; and perform this pleurotomization with care as we have said.
And if you want the pleurotomization of the metacarpus, then look ahead to the constriction of the arm where you feel the location between the wrist bones, and carefully place your hand on it with pressure; and adjust the arm and perform this pleurotomization on a concave section of the vein as we have said; and be careful not to press beyond some distance from the site of the artery.
And when you press, with the strength of your fingers, inflate in the place that you have placed under pressure with pressure; then that inflation is an inflation of the artery, and thus avoid that.
And if the stone flows in this pleurotomization like the urine of a child, and the stone is small round, then you know that it's from the stone of the artery; and then take your fingers and place them on it for a long distance; and adjust your position, and if the stone is removed, as seen stones are removed, then strengthen your arm and leave that.
And protect the patient from the baby's wound, be careful about it and don't let him hurt that for a few days until he recovers.
And if the stone is not removed, and you are supposed to not give medicine to this, then you will cut into the artery, if it appears to you; where its extremity is contracted, and the stone is removed; or that you take a longer time of fasting, and make this, and hold one finger on the place of the vein near the bone under the other day.
And then if the stone is removed, it's good; and otherwise, then treat that with this for which it was preceded to recall the memory of the powders that cause discharge of stones.
And the removal of the stone from this is difficult in many situations due to the location close to the wound and the flexibility of the arm muscle.
The pleurotomization of the dark vein is performed in a juvenile manner where we extract the stone from the upper part near the head and the lower part by the chest; for this reason it consists of branches from the basilic and cephalic veins as we have said.
And the pleurotomizer must protect that area which is prone during this pleurotomization, where it has a nerve near it; and if he misses or adjusts during the pleurotomization puncture and finds the nerve, it will cause you to go numb, making recovery difficult, and if someone is not fully recovered, this nerve is often felt. And if hidden in some people and is subtle but not shown, then beware that when you perform this pleurotomization at a point described with care, avoid the nerve with your strength.
And if the vein is between two nerves, then you perform the pleurotomization longitudinally in this case.
The juvenile of the pleurotomization of the cephalic vein is that you extract the stone from the head and facilitate to abdominal diseases in the lungs.
And be careful in this manner, if you want that the pleurotomes pierce at an olive-shaped pleurotomization or a mirtic one; which is the safest from all veins, without leaving your artery or nerve.
However, it is strongly advised for some individuals that if pleurotomization isn't done in the first pressure, then one should not disturb that lump again.
The first one is about knowing that phlebotomy should be conducted only for the sake of health maintenance and with hope for recovery and caution against further maladies. It states that phlebotomy must be done on one of the veins in the arm, these being: cephalic, dark, and basilic; and that phlebotomy is performed at the beginning of spring, before breakfast in spring and autumn, and near winter when signs of congestion appear.
And phlebotomy should be done until the third hour after the first drop that passes during the day.
Phlebotomy may be administered whenever it causes convenience and necessity, whether at night or during the day, at any time and under all conditions.
And it must be noted that an infant should not undergo phlebotomy until they are fourteen years old, a pregnant woman should not be bled until the fourth month into the seventh, and elderly individuals should not be bled if they have already passed sixty years.
And if someone wishes to be bled for any reason, it must be noted that they should have their intestines altered before phlebotomy with a lion's decoction, in case there is a retained wound. So that the veins do not draw excess fluid during phlebotomy on the intestines which are cleansed and should not overflow into the main members.
And do not bleed the patient excessively, nor during fever and intoxication or in the case of illness or drunkenness until their strength is restored. Nor bleed a sick patient due to dropsy, and more so that phlebotomy should be feared upon colic pain, upon vomiting, and upon stomach ache, and upon multiple sexual actions, labor, and exercise after meals or during nights, or from any cause that dissipates virtue either bodily or animal-like.
And when considering diet in relation to the balance of humors before it if the illness is caused by food and beverages, and with medicines if it's feasible for the patient.
And within the boundaries of reason if any cause forbids it, or due to exercise from some activity that could help make the illness more subtle.
And pause phlebotomy for the patient during the day, it's around the third hour, as we have said.
And make sure that the health of that person is protected from all animal accidents during that day, such as anxiety, anger, fear, and all bodily accidents, such as labor, excessive worry, sex, and similar things.
And according to their desire, make the causes of presence during that person's treatment be in line with what humans commonly appreciate about fragrance and scent, and like balms and similar things, depending on the amount of possibility.
And have the phlebotomist stand by a pillow that is as big as the pillow of the one who needs to be bled.
And stretch their arm outwards, and rub that area with the phlebotomist's hand for two or three minutes; and strengthen the ligament by bandaging and wrap that area for two minutes.
And if the constriction is appropriate, when the constriction does not equal to it, or if there's excess, then prohibit any discharge of the disease; or if it's for soothing, then prohibit the body from producing disease.
And for the constriction, it must be noted that the one who needs to be bled should rub their hands together until the veins swell and are felt.
And for the phlebotomist, they apply a small amount of ancient medicinal oil on their phlebotomy tool. And pause their left hand's pressure over that vein; you place your location where you want phlebotomy to be done so that the vein starts flowing slightly and the percussion is stopped when it hits the vein like a heart beats when you seek it out in that way; thus, there is plenty of air flow; then when you pause on that area with the tool, it should be tightened by applying force onto it, revealing that phlebotomy. The phlebotomist does not pierce the vein, and if they do, that one gets stretched.
And therefore, it must be noted that the phlebotomist should be prepared and attentive to all these causes.
And then pause the phlebotomy tool, but if the vein is punctured in a single minute, then it's finished; otherwise, repeat this process at another minute, leaving that area slightly, or over them with pressure, if that area isn't sore.
And if the area is sore, or the illness subsides, then you let it be for one day or two days, and do not strengthen the muscle, as forcing too much could lead to pus formation. Nor enter a bath.
And continue with phlebotomy if the illness persists.
And if the pulse is small and the disease is subtle, and you fear that not enough disease will be eliminated, then you repeat the phlebotomy in that area according to rectitude and make it smaller in size of pulse. Do this with pressure before the area gets sore; when the area becomes sore for men who are in a state of illness, you reduce the number of pulses.
And if you find that the area has already become sore, then do not repeat over it, for there is no excuse for any cause; pause over that portion of the oil cavity, which relieves the body of disease. And it's better in this area than oil and other oils.
And similarly, administer oil cuts in every phlebotomy where the phlebotomes should forbid the flow of blood from the body, and they make this treatment with a thorn extract and antiseptic when it is placed on one of those over the spot, as the blood is refined and mixed when it is thick.
And if in the area of the phlebotomy a large abscess is generated, where punctions occur, especially in those who have not been bled but just had an incision or at the location of the small vein, then you burn, and place over the spot a damp sponge infused with water and salt, one slightly scratched, and strengthen that for an hour, as it dissolves.
And indeed let him do this close to the seat of the blood flow of that vein, in harmony with him or another vein.
And if there remains a certain darkness or greenness in the spot for some days, do not notice this; and if you wish, place over that a cause of aloes and myrrh dissolved, or a cause of juice from mint or of gentian or similar to it.
And punctions occur causing abscesses and swellings, you should perform phlebotomy from the basilic vein.
And place your hand over that area, and if you later find soft tissue, keep your compression over that area; then that swelling is bad and harmful. And from thereon protect yourself to place over that a cause of what we have said, as strong blood will flow from the blood artery.
And apply plaster in the water where it is heated, so that the area lasts, and then treat that with the other treatment while it heals.
And indeed, let you extract from blood to every man according to the quantity of its virtue and according to the color prevailing over the blood as it appears.
For if the blood is black, then let it bleed until it becomes red; and similarly if you find it thick, then let it bleed until it becomes thin; and similarly if it's sharp, let its sharpness be contained within.
And indeed for that which is full and strong and needs the extraction of blood in an incision, let the phlebotomy on the vein be extended, and let the phlebotomist be long.
And for that which is pale, let the opposite happen to that; and indeed, let you extract him in many punctions, and let it be straight.
And the best that is administered in phlebotomy of veins is a cross section, not an incision.
And this method of phlebotomy saves from blood flow and injury to nerves, and it is better and safer than phlebotomy according to latitude and longitude.
And at which it is accustomed to occur fainting, you should perform phlebotomy, and indeed cure that beforehand with a small amount of paste infused in water from mint or simply scratched apple cider vinegar; and extract blood from the patient in three punctions or four.
And if it is warmed up by compaction, then before phlebotomy take an infusion of myrrh or of flavored honey water with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger and similar, or of a fragrant and aromatic syrup.
And if fainting occurs, you should perform phlebotomy, and it is the cause of his blood flow, so indeed let him drink water from meat and flavored syrup very subtle; and use aromas in that, and limit his feet by that.
And use the other causes we've mentioned in the division for treatment of fainting through evacuation.
And whoever wishes to empty his arm and dissolve his blood in another punction, for the phlebotomy is for evacuation through punctions, and the virtue of him being cold, that drains the blood little by little, so it depends on the quantity of its virtue in the continuous days.
And whoever wishes to empty his arm and warm up his blood in another session, and his body is strong, then do this about seven or nine hours after the first phlebotomy.
And whoever wishes to draw blood from his body against the direction it usually flows, indeed do this on the second or third day.
And that body in which there is already drained and sharp blood causing fever, indeed do this by extracting it in one punction and a large amount of it, so extend the incision until you encounter fainting; because all conditions for phlebotomy should be retained. And let your hand rest on the patient's wrist to prevent death instead of fainting, as multiple punctions require this when the phlebotomist is ignorant and negligent.
And indeed when you wish to remove the arm and drain blood in a second session, as soon as you close the opening of the vein and make it difficult to drain blood, press underneath that with vigor and slightly bend it outwards, for this is too harsh.
Let it rest until you are able to perform phlebotomy again; or keep this with the sharpness of the phlebotomist who is coagulating blood in the opening of the vein; or place over that with thorn extract, or antiseptic, and press gently there while the blood is out.
And if the vein is swollen, then smooth it out and don't touch it until the swelling subsides.
And if it is necessary to provoke the body to evacuate the contents according to its need, and this is not a refusal, then you apply pressure there on that spot or on another arm at another vein.
The vein called "muscle of the arm" is phlebotomized in place of the saphenous or the basilic, when they are not present or are hidden, which is made up of those.
The quality of the phlebotomy is that the patient dips their hand in hot water until the easy reddening occurs and the vein appears clearly.
Then strengthen it over that with lye and a narrow constriction; and then perform phlebotomy according to the transverse small line, not laterally nor longitudinally.
And make your incision wide and perform your phlebotomy at that over the joint of the hand, just a little.
And if the flow of the blood is prohibited, then you should immerse your hand in hot water and let the blood run in the water until you achieve your need.
May it be that if you were in the days of summer, then you are excused from the immersion of your hand in hot water, and similarly during winter, keep the body of blood warm in hot water.
And the phlebotomy of this vein is saved that among all other veins, for you do not have a pulsating vein or nerve on it.
And the phlebotomy of the wrist artery of the right hand is related to the ailments of pregnancy.
The quality of the phlebotomy for this person is to strengthen your hand with lye or with your own hand, since you have it submerged in hot water, while the vein swells and is shown by pressure; then perform a transverse phlebotomy there; and if you incise that all over it would not bleed.
And remember to not end your hand at the phlebotomy, for you have there the nerves of the fingers bare of flesh.
And then immerse your hand in hot water and let the blood flow through there; if you do not immerse that area in hot water, the blood will clot in the opening of the vein, which prevents any flow.
And like it is extracted the blood according to the quantity of need, then you press over the vein with oil and salt, so that it does not solidify clot-like; similarly make it in every branch straight.
May the youth of the phlebotomy of that on the left hand be related to the ailments of the womb.
And do it similarly with the phlebotomy for this as you have done with the other.
And the youth of the saphenous vein phlebotomy is related to ailments that are in the lower parts of your body, similarly to mother's ailments, and retention of menses, as well as ailments of the thighs and old sores on legs and ancient ailments, having similar symptoms to them.
The quality of the phlebotomy for this person is that the patient dips their palm in hot water and performs friction until the veins appear; they place a bandage over the joint of the hand. The location of the vein you should identify based on your instructions, and from there its branches run through the surface of the hand.
And thus perform phlebotomy on the larger branch or leave the cushion where you should add the increase of it, which is better and with more salt.
And if you perform phlebotomy there on the surface of the hand, then you protect from the nerves that are left there on the surface of the hand, and place your phlebotomy where you perform it across, just as if you were to incise it.
And may your phlebotomies be successful.
May it be that if the outflow of blood is prohibited, then you should immerse your hand in hot water and let the blood flow through there until it can be evacuated.
And if the phlebotomist misses in the first attempt, then try with another phlebotomy on its side where there is salt; and do not fear from it being painful, but be careful of the nerves as we have said.
And similarly perform for the saphenous vein on the other hand equally.
And for the sciatic vein, as we have said, you should leave where there is a cavity at the exit of the wild part.
And the youth of the phlebotomy for this person is about the pain in the hip when it's due to blood poisoning.
The quality of the phlebotomy for this person is that the patient enters into bath water and quickly strengthens their forearm from their elbow up to the knuckles on one long and thin bent hand, which does not appear otherwise.
And when it appears, then you perform phlebotomy on that according to each organ that is within your capability and according to the transverse method, which is better; or you incise that by incision or bleed that by bleeding, where there is salt.
It occurs in thick men more often; and if you find it, but it doesn't show by touch alone, then perform phlebotomy on some branch of it, and that is the one that appears between the two hands behind the mentioned auricular and annular.
And protect yourself from nerves, let blood flow in the vein as much as you want.
And loosen the constriction and place your hand at the location of the phlebotomy incision point, strengthen that area, so that it heals slightly.
From suction and the quality to use those.
Suctions are from cups, or from leeches, or from blood.
And suction is done in two ways: one of them is incision and blood extraction, and the other is suction after incision.
And this suction that follows incision is done in two ways, either with fire or without fire.
And the suction that is given after incision and blood extraction are administered at 14 locations in the body, of which the one where suction cups are placed is the navel, and it is the last part of the head; and the middle location between the two parts of the chest is each side of the chest; and suction near the mouth leaves the jaw further from the mouth; and suction on the two spatulas; and suction at the anus, which is above the pubis; and suction for two fires, and they are about an arm's length apart; and suction with two needles, and they are about a hand's width apart; and suction in the two armpits; and suction of the thighs.
And suction does not take out the blood, but only from small veins scattered in the flesh, so it does not have the effect of those, just like when performed through phlebotomy; nor should suction be done with fire or without fire in any illness caused by being filled up inside that the body is completely emptied.
If it is necessary to perform suction due to illness or continuous pain, administer that at the beginning of each month and at the end of it, in the middle of it and at any other time.
And therefore when it happens in any of those causes, and especially if it's towards the end or middle of the month, then it is commanded that suction be performed as soon as more than a day or three hours have passed.
And youth for neck suction is when it causes heaviness in the head and to that which settles into the eyes; but rather, that it corresponds to the evacuation of the entire body.
And this suction is performed at the phlebotomy site on the cephalic vein.
And it is not written that one should use this for someone who experiences overfilling, or in the case of a catarrh, which can cause great harm.
And because of this, it is not recommended to use that on the elderly, and in the cases where there are illnesses affecting the head.
And to those who continue over it on them is made forgetfulness; and because of this, you should warn the suction operator that they should keep their hand close but not touching with a small space at the suction cup when it's done, fearing for the generation of forgetfulness.
Suction of alcohol is performed at the phlebotomy site for the dark vein and the basilic vein: and thus it causes asthma, constriction in the lung, and division of its membrane, coughing, and congestion.
And it is known that the alcohol suction should be left for a short time, for if it's removed, it causes weakness in the body and stomach.
And the suction of arnica causes accidental pain in the head and eye infections, migraine, and reddening of the eyes, and toothaches; and this is performed at the phlebotomy site for the basilic vein.
And it is known that you should command the suction operator not to press their hand too hard during incision so as not to puncture an artery and allow blood flow.
And leaving the suction on the chin causes alcohol in the mouth, and decay of gum tissue, and it manifests like diseases that are in the mouth, and this is done at the phlebotomy site for the aliheric which is located in both cheeks.
And the suction that is performed on the two spatulas causes scalding heat, which is caused by overfilling with warmth.
And the suction performed inside both sides of the fire tools causes youthfulness akin to phlebotomy from three veins, which are the basilic, dark and cephalic veins. That one draws blood from all those veins that are scattered throughout the body, as well as the small veins within the larger veins where the suction reaches all three veins.
And command the suction operator not to proceed in incision, where the place is stripped of flesh, and leave your hands on its nerves and arteries.
And this suction is performed over anal fissures and causes hemorrhoids in the anus and ulcers, leaving them as they are.
And command the suction that it be a large vacuum, and one made of iron, as what place needs strong drying; and have him use fine, forceful suction with subtle tools, and he should perform incisions in the manner of incision.
Decrease the vacuum on the legs through an evident reduction, which pulls out the disease from all parts of the body, and helps to bring old complaints in the lungs and liver, and of the bladder; and they cause menstruation, and help to relieve urination and other conditions; and they are located at the place of venous puncture for two small veins, and phlebotomy, and for two cavities.
But motion weakens all parts of the body and causes fainting in men during movement.
And from the suction, to increase youth is equivalent to increasing the suction of two thighs.
And the quality of the position of the suction is to place the vacuum at the beginning view and continue for a while until the juice is cooked, and do not prolong the position of the suction, rather pause those slightly, then let them cool down gradually, and ensure that the humors come into play equally. And do not stop repeating this until you see the place already turn red and swell, and that the manifestation of the disease appears.
And then you perform incisions and repeat the juice little by little, and consider in the disposition of the body.
That person who has thin rare flesh, it is advisable to perform one incision and not more, so that the place does not become ulcerated.
And command the suction operator to expand the incision slightly and stop there, always keeping the juice available for use.
And if the disease becomes thickened, it is advisable that you perform two incisions; in the first incision, open the pathway for subtle removal to the disease and its moisture. And in the second, through thorough examination, you obtain the extraction of the thickened disease.
And if the disease is very dense, it is then that a third incision should be made for it to reach the end.
And gradually, when we want to extract some of the disease little by little or a small amount, until it reaches one incision.
And if we want extraction of thick disease, we perform incisions in a more forceful manner; and if we know that the disease is thick, then it's advisable to perform wave-like incisions.
And the term of the incision is at the depth of the canal only.
And if the canal is thick, hard, dark, and his veins are tight, it's advisable that the points of the suction be softer, more open, more resolved; in summer time, like oil from aloes or oil from violet, or oil of lemon leaves, or oil from cinnamon; and in winter months, such as oil from narcissus, or oil from iris, or oil of chamomile, or that similar.
And if the abundance is thick, hard, then let the oil be of calendula, or oil from balm, or oil from aloes, or oil of coriander, and that similar.
And if the suction operator has ample veins with thin flesh, it's advisable that oil be prohibited for them, and ensure that near the area of suction the points of the suction devices are rinsed with water or with hot water from solatrum, or with water from cinnamon, or with water from lemon leaves, and similar near those.
And that one whose disease has a moisture content, washes his suction points with vinegar, or with water from myrtle and sumac, and similar near those.
And for that one whose excesses are thick, wash his suction points with old vinegar, or with water of sunc, which is marjoram, or from decoction of coriander, or chamomile, and similar near those.
And it's advisable for the suction to be kept in front of bathing; and it's advisable that it be taken close to the shower for an hour or two, and ensure sleep near the suction.
What is necessary is that the blood-letting tool be kept in front of bathing before suction.
And consider at the beginning: if the suction operator or the one who is due for phlebotomy has anger and heat over their disease's inflammation, it's advisable that they take cooling causes, such as sorrel vinegar, endive with vinegar and lettuce, and secalinum, and julep, and similar.
And pause with their meats such as chicken, cooked rabbits, and meat seasoned with herbs, and similar for them.
And for that one whose complexion is hard, it's advisable for them to drink essences of almond oil or essence of secalinum from seeds, sumac, and vinegar mixed with a bit of both old and new; and it should be advised for them to limit their drinking and eating, and pause meats like chicken, rabbit, peas, small birds, and pigeons.
And it's advisable that the amount of drink during days of suction and phlebotomy be greater than food.
And it's advisable to give in drinking for some hours before a Tyrolean alpharac, or medicinal substances of musk (which is muscat), or alum in front of suction or in front of phlebotomy or close by, so that the main parts are comforted and the disease becomes subtle; do not advise taking that type of castile soap.
Let the incisions that are cuts be made parallel to the fold of the stomach and on the belly, and around gout, and on the umbilicus, at the places of joints, and across the waistband, for these members do not suffer from cuts on themselves.
It is not to be done through those (cuts) but as a puncturing of the muscle, like suction cups over nipples in gout due to the flow of blood in the body; we use that method for it to dissolve the excess air, similar to making incisions on the abdomen and umbilicus; because that hardens the body part and soothes it, resolving the pain that accompanies this excess air.
And when it is made on the elbows if they occur or bend, for by the force of puncturing one becomes strong and removes the bending from its place.
Similarly, when it is made on the stomach and belly, you relieve air in those confined areas.
These suction cups are administered several times with oil alone; some are also administered with heat.
Some of these punctures are filled with hot water in stomach maladies.
This is why the suction cup must be full and contain large pus, so it is hot water alone or water in which herbs appropriate for this purpose have been steeped.
Form of suction cup administered with heat: let the size of the opening be that of two fingers, according to how we have made it; and the amount of coagulum is that of a palm; and at its base, in the place where it's at the circuit, that length of it, the tube should be small according to the amount that enters it with one needle.
A make is done using elderberry or citrus, large peels, lion's, equal and smooth ones so that it does not hurt the body part when its position over it should be.
And at the midpoint of the cross-section of elder or iron, where a candle is placed above the fire.
And this is that large suction cup compared to the one we have described; and the small amount of it according to stomach ailments and the condition of the person using it.
And suckers for children and those in exhaustion are different from suckers for young people and with large crosses.
And the quality of making this suction cup on the body is to extend the firewood in front of a small candle made of beeswax, and place that over the midpoint of the cross-section at the center of the suction cup, so that the fire be lit near your hand.
And it should be placed on the body part of the patient, and you should use as we have said, within which when we have the suckers and do not need to show off this method that boils over that tube, then the suction cup shall soon dissolve.
And according to its nature, heat the firewood, and repeat this process if you need more of it.
Let it be known that the suction cup to be used in gout due to pressure, with water, without cross-sections or tubes, is administered only when filled with water and is placed on the body part alone.
And this is its form: And this suction cup the larger it is, the better it is, so that it can receive large quantities of water.
Chapter/Capital XC VII (Roman numeral for 97)
Bloodletting is not administered in moist body parts but in those body parts where there's no position for suction cups, because of their smallness, like the liver and gum tissue or similar to them; or on a bare flesh member, as described and similar ones.
And the quality of using those that you have found bloodletting devices in the water bubbles of cooked oils.
And it should be laid out for a day and night in cooked oil water until they become soft, without breaking any cause within those; and it should be emptied of the body during meals with leeches and suction cups; and it should be rubbed on the patient's body until you see redness; and it should be placed over them.
And when they are filled up, then.
And if oil from that place can be used with suction cup, it's better in youth.
And otherwise, then wash the place with vinegar and add hot water; and rub it and press it out.
And if the body of blood extends to the location of the leeches, and this is what's left over, then you place a cloth in cold water, and put that on top so that it absorbs the residual.
And if the blood is multiplied, then sprinkle over it sulfurized vitriol, or gall and similar substances from the causes, until the blood coagulates; or they are placed on the place of the strong powders of cooked peas, and they are left until the peas adhere to the place, and the blood is coagulated.
And if necessary, repeat the use of leeches, when it's possible to change those.
And if bloodletting is prohibited from suspension, then rub the place with recent blood or leave a needle in those places where it boils blood; and they should be left, as soon as you feel any blood coming out.
And when you want it to stop, grind a little bit of saffron powder, or salt, or ashes on those, and put the cauldron there immediately.
Thus begins the section on restoration therapy: for recovery. This chapter contains necessary instructions in the art of medicine; it is about the restoration of fractures and accidental dislocations in bones.
Oh, son, realize that many doctors and laymen, and those who for years will neglect the works of the Ancients or fail to read even one letter from them, use this chapter.
And for this reason, this method of the scholars on Earth is kept private; I have not forgotten anything during these times and I did not include everything I heard. Instead, I drew from the works of the Ancients through lengthy reading and study of their understanding in order to extract the science from them.
And further, direct yourself towards experimentation and study throughout my life.
And I have described in this chapter all of my science and what has been experimented by me; thus, I abbreviate this for you others and release it from the occupation of lengthening; and abbreviate it at the end of abbreviation; and demonstrate it at the end of declaration; and form it into various shapes of the storms that are administered there, just as I did in two previous chapters.
First chapter.
Summary and collections from the existence of bone fractures, from which it is necessary to start before we begin recalling bone fractures and their various types for each. Let us therefore declare what is said in the preamble of this chapter, which are summaries of speech; and these chapters, those understood by craftsmen at the beginning to clarify the truth of these matters, are for you and those who already know or learn this noble art from you.
And let us say that when an accident happens to a bone fracture or dislocation or twist or entanglement occurs, then you must consider at the beginning with bloodletting or alleviate that area, or any other time, if no cause is prevented, such as excess of humor, or the one to which this happens is elderly, or in weakness, or it's time for strong heat, or strong sweating.
And let it be satisfied with food consisting of herbs and venison and crabs; and forbid large meats and fill only with foods and all foods that fill the veins of the blood, within which you ensure the absence of pus in the wound, and if you do not fear the leakage of matter to the body.
And then return the patient to their normal position according to which their custom is.
And when the broken bone begins to be restored, let the patient be fed with nutritious foods rich in nutrients and heavy and dense, such as wheat cooked in water, rice, carrots, potatoes, meat from cows, nuts, fresh fish, large meats similar to those, and following this routine, there is a coagulation of pus in the fracture slightly thickened and milky.
And realize that bones shrink when they are in the young people and in those who are old, it is not possible for them to continue shrinking according to their nature by drying out their limbs.
However, nature adjusts and allows for any cause similar to lard in which excess accumulates that adheres and strengthens it internally where it becomes glutinous over time, within the periods of gluing together and settling periods, during which they reach the end of strength and firmness, such as fire at the beginning, within which no cause prevents it from performing its tasks.
And for this reason, it is necessary to stop the foods of the patient, foods that are heavy, viscous and density, as we have said.
And know that the species of fracture are various according to the diversity of the limbs, for a fracture in the bone of the knee is different from a fracture in the skull bone; and the fracture in the foot bone is different from the fracture in the two bones; and similarly all other limbs are different among themselves.
And I conclude with a recall of every species of fracture, detailed in its own chapter separately from the other.
A variety of fractures internally. A variety of fractures in the bones themselves; one is made into an arched fracture another that happens within its star. And some are made to form fractures according to the length of the bone: these are the fractures of the skull and stars and additions or non-additions, as when preparation for writing takes place, it results in a fracture with scratch and breakage on the head, and is a small crack fracture.
And for every species, there is an appropriate storm in its restoration according to which the recall of it will be distinct in its places.
A sign of bone fracture. And for this reason, bone fracture is known by its sign: it is the curvature of it, and the feeling of its prominence and attachment to the pain, and when you press it with your hand.
And therefore, when there is no obvious curvature in the place nor should you apply pressure to your finger when touching the bone during pressure, if the patient does not experience significant pain, then it's not a fracture here.
It may be possible that there is curvature or a small crack, so when you touch my hand with your own and during compression of all, pause on them for the duration of the moments in which you remember those medicines; and then stretch it through subtle constriction afterwards.
Know that if the location is curved and does not split into two or anything else that doesn't happen in its stomach, when it swells the whole part of its body; then touch where you start to correct the duration that it happened until the appearance of pus with a cautery.
And if pus appears in it, then smooth that for several days until the pus ceases; and then adjust that according to any method you can of elevation and ingenuity.
Know that the restoration of your body and the adjustment of your illness is a slight elevation from the bone in which it occurs internally.
And then strengthen that according to the memory of your condition.
If in the bone there are stomach issues, then it is necessary to extend this broken member from two parts, if it's a hand or a foot; or with your hand if the member is small; or with two cords or with one cord and your hand.
And if your position is where you pause the member in place according to its natural figure, while spreading out the parts of the broken limb, then make it so that you perform returning those additions with ingenuity and according to any method you can apply in their locations.
And guard yourself so that it doesn't occur to the patient during your operation on them or injury, and perform according to your ability that you apply one bone to the other in its companion according to their best forms.
And touch that with your hand in that moment, and if you notice any different cause here, correct it and adjust it according to the amount of your virtue.
And avoid excessive extension and compression, as some foolish doctors cause the appearance of pus with their operations or cause compression in the limb like what we have seen through their operations on them.
And the quality of the constriction of the stopped member is as I have described; know that broken members vary in their size and in their magnitude, and in the shape of those ones.
And for those that are small like the arm and the other ones and similar to them, then make sure that the wrapping is of a soft, fine cloth.
For those that are large like the thigh or chest, make sure there is a firm and hard wrap, so that with the application of strength to the large member from all sides in balance, so that no mark appears within it.
And proceed to start, your operation for balancing, pause comfortably in that manner, on the site of that fracture with three wraps or four according to the member needed; and strengthen your hand a little on the ligament.
And proceed to go to that part above the site of the fracture, and strengthen more so as not to cause your constriction on which you have strengthened the location of the fracture. And proceed to lengthen the wrap on the site of the fracture just a little bit, and soften the constriction gradually while taking from that site a large portion.
And take another branch and cover that other area around the broken limb with a wrap, then proceed to go towards the wraps to the part above the fracture; and if your operation is in the constriction of the wrap and in softening it as we have said in the first wrapping on top.
And between the wraps of the stopping cloth or fabric, pause so that the curvature of the fracture is equalized if there's a curvature in it; otherwise, do not pause for any cause.
And pause on the other branch, and then adjust over these neatly made stars for a while, if there is no inflammation or pus in this area; then pause where that pus was and where bone causes inflammation; leave it for several days; then strengthen on those stars.
And let the stars be of cane's length, and shaped wisely; or made from wood; or from palm leaves; and let each star have this size and this shape:
And yet ensure that the star placed over that fracture is much larger in size than the other stars and has a length according to its magnitude and size as it would be when reading from the limb. And then strengthen on the stars with another branch following your first constriction; and adjust on top in an even manner as we have said about constriction, and let your constriction be more towards the location of the fracture than that, and the longer you extend the fracture, the less the constriction.
And consider that the threads be finer in pregnancy and subtlety, and be of his many; and if the threads are thick, like I have seen during several operations by tying up some of his heart cords, this is a great mistake, when causing equality outside the constriction.
And thin threads are not convenient, for you will not achieve what you want with them in terms of constriction, and do not consider that between each thread there is space as wide as a finger.
And if the patient is laid out so that their extremities are close to the constriction near the sensitive areas on the feet, then place some leather or woven wool under them so that it does not cause injury.
Some broken bones are afflicted by disease, and there's disruption in the sequence, and I will recall this in that manner at the court according to uniqueness.
And know that not all broken members are bound with stars on the first day; this cause is that when the limb, if it's large, cannot place pressure on your stars but approximately three to seven or more days later, depending on how sure you are of the occurrence of an abscess cautery.
And this is the method of the plastering techniques that the ancients used to restore, which are applied over fractures, dislocations and twists.
The method of plastering like a brief restoration of fractures, suitable for complex injuries and more so to women and children, which is that you take powder of mill stone, it's the essence of the flour that comes from the movement of the grain in the walls of the mill.
And do it this way instead, if not, sift that with egg white, and prevent the formation of that non-thin or subtle; then use that accordingly.
Another method for treating bone fractures, dislocations, and twists: prepare a mixture of asafetida, lapdanum, acacia, rue, and myrrh, which is finely ground into one thousand grains, all totaling one pound. Take five parts myrrh and twenty parts aloes; take twenty parts alcoholic vinegar or hen's egg white if the patient is delicate; then prepare this ointment with these ingredients in proper composition and restores broken bones slightly, giving strength to old men.
Another method of plastering which helps with fractures and twists: prepare a mixture of myrrh and white alum, one pound; myrrh and crocus root, five pounds; acacia, six pounds; Armenian bark, twenty pounds.
All of them are ground in a mortar on the wound, they are sifted, and mixed with water or egg white and it should be administered.
The method for plastering joints and bones separated from their places, and pain accidents in those and cracks and fractures: take surgical thread wool and immerse it in vinegar and oil of turpentine, then place it on the area.
In this plastering, there is not just restoration power, but it expels abscesses and truly relieves pains.
Another method of plastering that restores broken bones: take fig leaves and leaves of wild poppy; mix them all together to make a plaster from them.
The brief method of plastering to be administered for the restoration of bone fractures and when you want resolution of the remaining abscess: take ground almond paste, chamomile flowers, violet petals, flour from poppy seeds, all in equal parts. All of them are ground and mixed with vinegar if the limb is not injured.
And if it's injured, then do this with water from aloe or with water and use it.
Another method for plastering that promotes faster resolution than the first, when there is an abscess lasting to restore the limb: use ground almond paste, lime seeds, borage, red clover, basil, chamomile flowers, all in equal parts; everything should be ground and mixed with water from artichoke or with double-strength water or with vinegar, according to the quality of the limb and the color of its rest.
May Ypocras does not allow free use of oil or vinegar on the broken limb for its restoration, instead recommends making a salve of beeswax and oil and not any other cause; it is advised to have it at an intermediate level between thickness and subtlety.
Yew Gualia is seen to be used by placing it on the broken limb for its restoration and among the causes in which small dryness from heat quality are thus such as myrrh, ashes and resemble those causes that we have recommended.
A method to bandage and soothe injuries and pain: take equal parts of powdered flesh from slaughtered pigs or horse's buttocks, as well as powdered white chalk and salt; grind them equally, sift them, make them into a poultice.
Decide the quantity according to how much pus is being produced and if it's not increasing, you consider if there is no pain or pressure, nor has any bone been broken; then you do not change your treatment for several days. And if there is severe pain, pressure or inflammation at the site, then you should treat or change that immediately, and keep this patient's bandage in place.
And take flax and a sponge that's soaked in sea water, immerse this in hot water, then wash the affected area with it until the pain and discomfort subside; and let the limb rest for an hour. Then lay on woolen cloth submerged in vinegar and oil or rubbed oil over it, cover this up overnight, until you're sure there is no pus pocket, and that the swelling of the limb has subsided, as well as alleviating the pain.
And then apply that fine strip again and make small bandages not to restrict your first constriction too much, and gently apply it until it is healed.
And when you notice that the pus and the pressure as well as the pain and swelling have all been reduced completely, and you need neither bandage nor constriction, then continue with this treatment as you did at the beginning equally.
And if nothing happens to the limb for any reason as we have said, then do not change this until at least three, four, five or seven days; And some of these treatments will be left for up to twenty days according to your observation of the progress in healing the limb as we've said, until the fracture sticks together and the flesh starts to coalesce on that area.
And then adjust the bandage more than your first bandage entirely, and adjust according to the thickening of the patient's meat, as their recovery progresses.
And if you notice that the fracture is already dry and more withered than bleeding, then you know that the nourishment cannot reach there; therefore, you should clean it with vinegar water every day; this must be done for three days in total. Then slightly relax the bandage, allowing some of the nutrition to reach the area through this operation, so that healing starts gradually.
And if the limb restorers do this for those who fracture their limbs again after not recovering at first, as they bleed and then recover according to their curvature, it's an error according to their operation method; there is great fear. If a surgeon did enlarge these Ancients in their free works and healed with this operation.
And I have not seen any of them do this; therefore, it is more reasonable that this does not happen.
Second chapter: About fractures when they occur in the head.
The types of fractures are impacts and their figures vary, with distinct causes. Some fractures occur due to impact from space, where the impact stays within the skull, leaving the bone intact, similar to what happens in a stick, for this reason, this type is called 'ascial'. Or the space strikes some part of the bone and cuts into the flesh without going through its rear; this kind of fracture is called absolute elevation.
And the damage from these two types of fractures is either severe or minor. For friction or impact fractures, their cause is impact against stone or hitting on stone, similar to them.
And this fracture penetrates nearly to the brain, leaving the bone intact. Or it occurs in the bone's face, and the damage from these two types of fractures is either severe or minor.
And for the fracture that grows in the bone, in its subtle strength similar to a hair's thickness, thus this type of fracture is called 'capillary'.
And the fracture is made by hitting or from impact of stone, which results in some layers of bone entering the parts inside, and it occurs at the concave location, similar to what happens when logs are hit causing their entry into the parts inside during wood processing.
This is mostly done in moist bones, such as children's heads.
And for all these species of fractures, they are heavy like separate stars. And I will revisit the healing process in its location.
And we know all these species of fractures through diagnosis on them and by examining the affected flesh that has gone bad.
And the capillary type is known because it's discovered over the bone, it's washed off, and its limit is determined by feeling around it, where the fracture appears black.
In the treatment of fractures, consider the patient's condition, and then if you observe these symptoms as clear signs on the body, such as vomiting from cholera, extension, loss of understanding, abscess formation, fainting, acute fever, nosebleeds and pressure, and similar symptoms in major conditions, you may conclude that it is not healing.
And if you observe unusual symptoms, you hope for recovery; then you begin the treatment of the patient.
This cause is that if it has come to you the inflammation as it inflames and this happens in the days of winter, then conclude that you study in the anatomy before the twelfth day according to every disposition.
And if it is during the days of summer, then conclude that you examine or finish studying in front of the seventh day, having understood that whatever has affected the anatomy is corrupted by the heat, and accidents occur as we have recounted.
And if the fracture has already reached the heart penetrating the brain, and is in small parts spreading, then conclude that you should incise the part indicated and rub it, according to what I will instruct you.
And if you examine the head of the patient inflamed, and uncover over the anatomy according to custom and method as possible for you according to the appearance of the inflammation, and it should be gentle on the patient.
And if it happens to you that you have detected the bone, pus or abscess flow, then you oppose yourself to it in such a way that you will know how to handle it, and you will fill the area with scented cloths soaked in vinegar and rubbed oil, and make the patient rest with the inflammation inside until the abscess is numbed; and be sure of the blood flow; and proceed around the bone and in the excision of it.
And it should be done according to one of two ways of operating.
And the first way is that you incise the bone with a straight incision tool, and this is its form: And then administer another incision tool of this, slightly shorter than that one; and this is its form:
And then administer more of this incision tool that is wider than the second one.
And you should know that there are several types of incision tools which have some that are wider than others; and among them, some are shorter than the others, they have their tip ends in a finer state and are made of iron or steel.
And use them with ease when striking against the incision tool, to ensure that you do not cut the head and damage it.
And if the bone is strong and hard, then conclude that you should puncture in front of its circuit before administering the incision tools on its surface, which are called shallow tunnels.
And they are not called so only when those do not reach the end of the bone test until it is close to it, whereby at the tunnel the tip or margin near that which makes your head seem sharp like a margin or small circle, one must prevent it from being submerged and passing through the thickness of the bone.
And it is convenient for you to take a large number of these tunnels each of which fits the thickness of each bone, within which there is an end of which is sharp, the amount in length and width should be according to the thickness of this test.
And this is the form of three types of tunnels: The quality of puncturing in the circuit of the broken bone is that you place the tunnel on the bone and twist it with your fingers until you know that the bone has penetrated; then move the tunnel to another location, and let that be between all taken out material having the thickness of the ray or around that.
And then you incise with the tools between each piece of bone you have taken out, and make that fine pus over it so as to lift lightly, just as we said, while you remove the bone or with your hand, or for some other reason through certain instruments you may have prepared for this, such as tongs and delicate forceps.
And it should be understood that you must exercise great caution so that the incision tool does not touch any part of the anatomy.
And when you have punctured the bone and separated it from the anatomy if it continues with that, and you extract it, then understand and equalize it in the roughness of what is in the bone as another tool similar to an incision tool but however understand that it should be more refined and more delicate than other incision tools.
And if you find any small or soft part of the bones, then take that with ease using your tools; and proceed to heal the wound with linens and ointments as we have said.
And the other way of operating is gentle and far from pain, which Galen described through great praise; this is what it's about: It is necessary for you at the beginning to start uncovering the part of the bone in the area where the fracture is more intense and more evident. Once you have uncovered that part and placed its tip over this incision tool, this is how it should be:
And this is that the conical part is strong and does not incise any cause, while the sharp part is at both sides in length before it, thus; so the conical part should be adjusted to the anatomy on the side where its inclined sharp edge meets the bone.
And then strike upon the incision tool of a part within which you make an easy incision through all the bone as it has been twisted, and you are sure of the heat that it does not occur in the accident that you fear in any way. And if the surgeon was the most sick person among all people and the least knowledgeable about them; certainly, and if he was asleep.
When touching any associated cause in the bones of the small leg at certain bone locations, that agent will enter through his hand to the tip of the cutting tool that is circular, and withdraws it from him easily, which is withdrawn from his injury and his pain.
And if the bone fracture does not penetrate into the small leg, and what is detached or left in the bone is the skin of him, and it enters him with roughness and fine scars, then carve that roughness out and remove those tiny spots using thin tools that you have prepared, with different quantities so that it is possible for you to administer some from each location according to which suits them best and drain the pus of those according to where you are cutting the broken bone and its shape.
And when administering according to your judgment, make cuts in the beginning of each piece of bone where you drain out the pus from those cuts, and roughly use near his delicate pus. Do not cease performing this until you have administered both the thick pus and the delicate pus from all of them.
For any other small cuts or subtle fractures, make sure to administer care according to how you would correct it.
And this is the reason that not all of those who have studied in that art will be skilled at it. And we have shown on what we wrote, demonstrating large fractures.
And if the small leg is injured when you drain out the bone, then when you have assessed the size of the injury, take cloth according to its quantity and immerse it in a well-tanned oil, then place it over the wound's opening; moreover, take another folded or tripled cloth, immerse it in vinegar and well-tanned oil, and place it on top of the first cloth. Carefully spread this dressing over the wound, without causing pressure that could harm the tissues; furthermore, apply a layer of fat over this, and do not tighten it unless it matches the size of the wound only.
And leave it under this treatment for one or two days until you are sure of pus coming out; then remove it and apply medicines that help with excessive drying, such as flaxseed, rice flour, powders of ashes and aristolochia, and powders suitable for these.
And make sure to apply these medicine powders finely ground over the wound when they are dry. Generally, administer all medicines with properties that cleanse without causing irritation or biting effects.
And follow your judgment in caring for the wound during your treatment; it should not be left with ointment residue or any other substance. Do not let impurities accumulate on it; when applied to the thigh of the brain, it corrupts it and poisons that area, leading to this malignancy spreading into the body.
And it spreads into the brain tissue when it affects him, especially if his treatment is neglected. If you observe a dark color on its surface; then consider this: when accidents occur in the body that we have mentioned, realize that all is corrupted there.
And if no dark color appears, but only the color of the medicine left on it, due to the properties of that medicine causing that darkness, then take honey and well-tanned oil in equal parts (three parts). And mix them with a cloth, then place that over the brain; and later apply treatment with the remedies suitable for healing until it recovers.
Chapter III.
Chapter III: Restoration of the nose when it is broken.
Know that the nose is broken not just by the two parts of it coming together, or because one or some of those have been pushed out, due to there being bones in it. The part you leave behind is cartilaginous and undamaged; it doesn't affect him but causes swelling, twisting, and curvature.
And if one of the two parts is broken, then when you insert your small finger into his nose, adjust that fracture internally according to your finger's indication, and outside of it too. Perform this until the nose returns to its natural shape. And do this with ease and ensure that you don't allow your operation's pressure to affect the body as a whole.
And if the fracture is in the top part of the nose's outer segment, and your finger doesn't reach that area, then when you have assessed its thickness at its widest point, adjust it there.
And if the fracture is in two parts, then perform this gesture:
And help him with the restoration of his nose on the first day after the fracture, if it's possible; otherwise, wait until at least seven to ten days have passed since the pus has stopped coming out.
And when inserting into the tip of the nose a piece of cloth or two bandages, depending on whether it's one part fractured or two parts. Place them so that they fill up as much as your thumb can fit inside the nostril.
And I refer to the methods of old restorers who enveloped the bandages in wax, having them stay on throughout the day but not being seen by me; rather, when you place a cloth soaked with bird's egg white and powdered moly inside, let it remain until the bone is set and the cartilage becomes hardened.
And sometimes inflammation enters the nose, instead of blood, fear of an infection that wraps around the patient like a lion's cloth; and if already there is a violent nasal pus and the patient is unable to inhale.
And this reason is not necessary for you; if you wish, do this, and if you wish, do bloodletting.
And if another infection occurs in the wound, cover your nose with a wet cloth or with oil-soaked cotton wool, or with vinegar.
But if no infection occurs in the wound, then cover it with sifted safflower flour and powdered cinnamon; and place your hand on their foot as if you were pressing on it, and do not allow them to touch their nose for any reason.
But if the bones of the nose are broken or they have been damaged, then cover it so that you split over those, and extract them with instruments suitable for those; and then take care of the wound, using what promotes healing and consolidation, and apply bandages as is appropriate.
And if an infection occurs inside the nose, then cover it so that you treat that with bloodletting and administer lead pipes into which everything is healed.
Chapter IV
Regarding the restoration of the jaw when it is broken.
When the jaw has been broken and its fracture is not contaminated by pus, observe that if the fracture is only outside, and is not cracked into two parts but bent towards inside, then his understanding is slight.
And thus, if the fracture is on the right side, you should insert your left index in the patient's mouth; and similarly, if the fracture is on the right jaw, then insert that index of your right hand. And push outwards the elasticity of the internal fracture towards outside with your other hand from the outside part of the mouth; do this properly on both sides equitably.
And if the jaw fracture is already separated into two parts, then cover that you administer extension of both parts according to rightness while it's possible for his equilibrium.
And if there is a commotion of teeth leading to disruption, then strengthen those that you expect will break into gold or silver or clay; and place your hand over the broken jaw with a wet cloth, and place another cloth underneath it, and a large star-shaped patch decently made, or one person equal in length to the jaw; and place that on top as long as you understand their perspiration and that suits the application, so that it is not destroyed.
And command the patient to rest and be calm, and stop feeding them lion's delicacies.
And if you estimate that it has been altered in some way, then you take and untie those on the third day; and then correct whatever has already been altered from them, apply that with powdered moly, with egg white, or with sifted almond flour, since you have stopped using their lion's food, and place your hand over the plaster cloth.
And then when this plaster is properly applied to them, and the position of the mouth is not altered, leave it alone, do not untie it until it heals and strengthens the fracture; for how long will this inflammation last for three weeks.
And if another inflammation occurs in bloodletting, then administer what we have said about the inflammations while it heals, and let that pus be reformed.
And if the fracture is contaminated with pus, then consider whether it's a piece of bone that has separated or is stuck, then you should delicately apply those stuck to what suits for their removal from the disturbances.
And if the wounds of the pus are straightened, then you should expand it with a bloodletting tube according to your need.
And when you have stopped those pieces being stuck, and if that pus is not reforming again, then cover that hole of the wound if it's wide; and otherwise, place one of the plasters you suit for that and consolidate that area until it heals.
Chapter V
Regarding the restoration of the hyoid bone when it is broken.
The inflammations are that the hyoid bone of the front part has been broken due to the muscles, and this fracture is made in three ways.
Or it is broken, or separated, or separated into two parts other than those that do not come off stuck together; and this is easier for restoring it; or if there are sticking pieces in them, then it makes the restoration difficult; or if the fracture is contaminated with pus.
And for that operation when the fracture is contaminated with pus, you must have two ministers present, so one holds the assistant and follows the broken hyoid bone, and the other extends the neck collar to that part.
And then join the fracture with your hands until it is made into its shape according to what you have covered, and do not leave any slight elevation or depression in it.
And if you need more extension, then cover that you pause on the patient's breath of cloth or wool, and its size according to your need; extend and elevate the hyoid bone and press the lump with your hand until you equalize the fracture according to what you have covered.
And if you cannot pull the base of the collarbone to the outside parts, as it is hidden in the preon, then guide that part of the patient so that he is leaned back on his neck, and place a cushion slightly above the muscle of him with a medium-sized pillow.
And the minister touches the muscle of him at the points where you have placed them inside so that the bone of the collarbone is elevated as it is in the preon area, and then you correct the fracture and align it according to your previous instructions.
If you feel that the collarbone is displaced and painful, then guide your way as if to cut into that area and remove those displacements with ease.
And if it is stuck in the bone, then you devise an incision from him using one of your scalpels that you have equipped for this task, because you had placed the collarbone slightly towards the center which serves the articulation; and this tool is made of wood or iron and has this shape:
It is similar to a spatula, whose curvature matches this shape. Its width depends on what you need from it, according to the size of the bone or its fragility.
The length of it should be according to what is possible for the operation; there should be two ends like before, and one end should be broad while the other is narrow.
And if the disruption of the wound that you have incised when removing the displacement from the bone is wide, and you are sure to have pus at the site, then adjust both edges of the wound for suture.
And if the disruption is small or you fear pus formation, then use the wound with cloths and powders according to the size of the wound's cut.
And if pus formation occurs, then apply a cloth soaked in vinegar and oil to it, and place it over that area.
And finally, ensure that the table spoon does not obstruct the broken bone; and guide it so that you can see your patient every day. When their muscles are softened or you notice the spoon has hardened again, then correct this and strengthen the healing process.
And adjust your patient's sleep on their neck, making sure they rest with their head slightly raised at night using a small pillow. So that when you place this support under the back of their head, then raising the backrest creates an elevation for the fracture of the collarbone, or if instead, you keep their arms at the side of their body.
And do not remove the muscle until it heals faster or if pus occurs, within about twelve days.
And adjust the plaster again if you have noticed your patient's face improving like that, and correct in the narrowing, restore it and smooth out until it is restored and the collarbone fracture has coagulated.
And it is strengthened and made comfortable after about twenty-eight days, and in some cases, certain treatments are performed within that period of time.
I am sorry but "Capitol .vi." doesn't seem to translate into English from any of the languages you mentioned (Latin, Italian, Spanish) as it stands alone and appears to contain a mix of Roman numerals and a term that may not have a clear meaning in these languages. Without more context or further sentences connected to this phrase, I am unable to provide an accurate translation. Please consider providing more information about where this phrase is coming from or how it's used in the text you shared earlier.
"De restauracio de fractura de la spalla" translates to "Regarding the restoration of a shoulder fracture" in English.
The spatula tart is broken at the spot on you and it is not broken from you, but only around its edges.
And so when the spot on you is broken - if it's broken in the middle spot of you - and it can't be known other than by touch, then according to that which makes up the fracture figure, you prepare yourself and reduce it following the natural figure, through all mechanical means possible that suit you.
And place on the spot the powder of ground albumen mixed with oil, stop the nose; and place on the spot powdered double cloth; and place on you a strip of table wax paste according to the amount of the spatula or more by just a little.
Perhaps if you find that the strip is curved in some of the places of the spatula, then fill that curvature with nose stopper, and return to place the strip according to equality.
And strengthen on top with an herbal remedy for elongation and within the constriction of the strip, ensure that it does not exceed its place.
And examine the ligament on every day; and for each recovery where it has been softened, make another application and strengthen it and equalize the strip if it exceeds its place.
And have the patient lie on their back so.
And the spatula is restored in xx days or in .xxv.
And when this number is completed, then you dissolve the ligament, and you will know securely that whatever started it from the bones does not tremble nor its dissolution.
And if you are dealing with the site of the bone and place on it the codon, then you divide over you, stop it, and do according to what we have said about the fracture of the cervical vertebra in case an abscess cauterization occurs here.
Chapter VII.
About the restoration of the fracture of the leg.
The leg sometimes breaks in the middle of it and there the spatula must be applied; but its ends must not be crushed or broken.
And about the injuries when it breaks in the middle of you, it tends towards the divisions inside and happens to you great pain, difficulty in walking, coughing, weakness, and nausea; and it is declared in the cavity of the broken bone and is not hidden from feeling.
And the restoration of you is to have the patient lie on their back and place a cushion between your shoulders; and press into your muscles, adjust your ribs against two rib positions, and refine in your operation and in the balance according to all possible means that suit you so that while returning the shape of the bone as it should be.
And place an ointment plaster and stop above it, placing a thin strip of table wax or calx on top, making sure they match in levelness because you cover that with cloth; refine in your adjustment over the broken bone so as not to exceed its place; prepare that according to the smoothness at the back for some days, strengthen that with a tight bandage; and continuously consider the swelling at all times, and when it softens, strengthen that.
And if necessity compels you to provoke in that disintegration or pressure, or pain, or abscess that occurs in the area, then remove and relieve that and eliminate the plaster, rectify what happens according to your method of treatment; and reduce the plaster if you find that it affects this way; adjust its bandage so that it heals.
Chapter VIII.
About restoring the ribs when they are broken.
Know that a fracture of the ribs does not occur in small places but only in those that span both; and for their ends from the division at the front, they do not experience this friction against each other except due to their being cartilaginous. And knowledge of it is not hidden from feeling; you must inquire about the patient with these words.
And the restoration should be like this: you align the fracture with your words according to possible means, so that it is swallowed as it should be, and then plaster and strengthen the broken bones with a strip, if you need that.
And if the fracture of the ribs is tending towards the divisions inside, then it happens to the patient with intense pain and puncture, like the puncture that happens in those who have swollen lungs due to water retention; and it causes difficulty in breathing, coughing, nausea and vomiting; and this is hard to treat.
And already the Greeks are made with that in a way of using them internally.
And of them we say: do this when you eat food from the body that causes inflation and wind, so that the belly is inflated and extended, and the fracture be pushed outwards towards the divisions.
Perhaps we should avoid causing that to not become a minor cause to generate abscess cauterization, if it doesn't happen; and if it already happens, then help with that.
And some of them say that it should be placed on top of the winded area and to press with strength; this is similar to reasoning, but however, there's a concern that the wind will push the surplus towards the place due to weakness.
And some of them say: do this - have the area covered with wool that is already submerged in oil cauterization, and place powders between the ribs until full, so that the swelling matches when you cover it according to smoothness; and prepare the patient's body for water retention treatment and medicine.
And if there is intense compression of the patient causing discomfort and piercing pain in punctures, fearing for the patient, then we must cut over that area, expose where the broken rib lies, and place a tool over it. The use of this instrument follows a previous thought process, and with ease, we insert the bones, removing them.
And when adjusting the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with stitching, and after it has healed, apply bandages until the healing process is complete.
And if an abscess occurs internally, then you should press and insert powders in olive oil onto the area, and place your hand over it, so that the patient heals with this method which closes to the abscess internally.
And when it is properly turned onto its side on the one where it sleeps, until it is healed.
Head chapter IX.
Regarding the restoration of fractures in the spine of two and the neck.
Some burns may occur due to fractures in the bones of the neck, and damage to their ligaments, similarly with the vertebrae of the back. And if something like this happens to someone else and you want to know if they will heal or not, then consider it: If their hands are already softened, swollen and dead, unable to move them up or down or strengthen them, when you press those on your fingers or poke those with a needle and don't feel pain there, then know that it is not healing. In the states of dispositions they are fatal.
And if you find it difficult to move those and feel constriction on pressing them or poking them with a needle, then know that the base of the skull bone is saved and that the patient will recover from this condition.
And if you observe something similar with the vertebrae of the neck and want to know if they will heal or not, then consider their feet.
And when you notice that they have become softened, observe what happens with those similar to the hands. When you press on their back, they experience warmth and loss of appetite according to their willpower. Sometimes burns are turned onto their back and they want to urinate but cannot, then know that it is fatal, and thus do not continue with the treatment for them.
If no cause of those things does occur, then the cause is better and more minor.
And the treatment for them is that you perform cauterization of the abscessed area when you place it on the heated oil, or with hot stones. Place some burns on those areas a few times while letting the abscessed area heal during each day until the abscess heals.
And then place one of the bandages comfortably and remaining, strengthen it on that spot; and order the patient to rest and maintain calmness and not sleep where he finds pain until they are healed.
And if it happens that there is dislocation of the cervical vertebra or any cause that has separated from them, then you must operate on the spine and remove that bone; then adjust the two lips of the wound, with stitching if it's large; also cure that with some kind of ointment until it heals.
And if there is a fracture in the sacrum bone, it's at the end of the spine, then you must insert your right hand's index finger into the anus, and align the broken bone with the other hand according to possible second-order equation; and place a bandage and sandpaper over them, if you need those, and reinforce that.
And if you feel displaced fractures in them, then you must press on that area, and stay there, and treat the wound with the appropriate treatment until it heals.
Chapter X.
Regarding the restoration of the collarbone.
The bones of the collarbones are broken, and if they break, then there is no communication in the ends of those bones and they are inscribed along their length, declining towards the internal parts; this causes pain at the site and punctures. When it's a fracture, the change (or transformation) becomes numbness.
And the restoration of them is that you extend your hand over it while it's above the fracture which has the shape of them.
And if the fracture is only at the end of them, then you must align that according to how it's compatible with an equal equation within, so that it resembles its natural shape.
And if the fracture is in the long or declines towards the internal parts already, then you must make the patient lie on their abdomen until your preparation for restoring that fracture is ready. And when you have aligned that, place a bandage over them, and then place the sandpaper of wood or fabric over it, and reinforce with ligation without fear of puncturing the fracture or moving the star.
And align the cavity with that which fills it so that when that accepts the ligature according to equality, command the patient to sleep on their back or on their side.
And if an abscess occurs and needs cauterization, then you must stop the extension and restoration of them until that abscess is treated, and place what causes it as required. And afterwards, return to the restoration of them and reinforce it accordingly.
And if it happens in the bones that are dislocated or fractured, then you must treat them.
Chapter XI.
Restoration of the fracture of the assistant.
The assistant is that which is between the shoulder blade inside the head of the shoulder.
And if it is broken, then the restoration of him can be done in one of two ways, of which the first you take wood flat on the inside according to this form:
And if there are two ends in each extremity are two ligaments, and they should be suspended from the elevated location.
And have the patient lie on one side; and then let him throw out his broken arm onto the wood so that it reaches up to the elbow in the middle of which is attached the curvature of the stick.
And suspend above that something heavy, or let the surgeon extend it to the parts left; and then let the doctor examine the broken parts each time; and so that the break returns according to what is required.
And the other method is that the patient should be rolled on his back and his hand held by the neck ligament; and then instruct two servants to do as follows: one of them holds what is broken down from his hand, while the other keeps his arm in place. And each should extend it towards their own part.
And if you want the extension to be stronger, then apply strength over the break by ligament and over that one too by another ligament, and let both servants stretch their own parts.
And if the break is close to the muscle's extremity, then you should place half of the ligament over the elbow and the other half on the break towards the knee.
And similarly if the break is close to the knee, then you should place the ligament at that spot and on that knee.
And apply it with ease and do the work, and as soon as it is equalized according to what is required and applied properly, then strengthen that so as not to cause a carbuncle from the heat.
And if a carbuncle does occur from the heat, then smooth the constriction on the seventh day, and place on him woolen bandages soaked in vinegar for five days, and insert oil that is rubbed inside until the carbuncle rests, and then apply this.
And the way to strengthen this is to place plaster over the break, and then cover it with a new cloth wrap; and adjust the arm towards the assistant, and place his hand opened on his own muscle.
And place the cloth and apply pressure on the assistant's arm so that the arm is in a star-like position, otherwise you may prohibit some cause of the broken bone.
And then use stars.
And that is to place over the break this star which should be more compact and stronger than the other stars; and place between each star a width of your finger, and let the length of the stars according to the breakage increase by three fingers from all parts.
And then apply pressure over the stars on this constriction which I mentioned at the beginning of the head.
And your constriction over the location of the break should be more tight. And as much as it gets longer, the constriction becomes smaller.
And so if you locate the position of the stars and constriction as we have said in the time when you restore the limb to its place, then do this.
And if you fear a carbuncle from heat, then you should smooth the constriction and the stars for seven days as we have said.
And then consider the ligament in all parts for three days so that it does not occur at the spot of pain or swelling; or let food not reach the limb because of excess constriction; and thus correct all this as we have said.
And if you are worried about preventing any cause of this, then do not loosen the ligature until at least three days or more.
And let the patient's sleep be on his back, and his hands be over his stomach.
And place on the assistant a full pillow of wool in equal parts, and consider at all times of night or day that the figure of the broken limb should not be disturbed nor dissolved, or that the ligament should be softened; thus correct this altogether according to your skill.
And let the food of the patient follow the order which we have set forth before meals, so that the food should be subtle at first until strength begins to develop; then from this point onwards increase the food for him.
That the strength of the assistant and his chest is that they should be strong in forty days; then it should be released and given baths and treated with ointments which correct this.
And if the break is laid out and rubbed, then do not release this ligament and stars until one day or until two months.
Capitol Chapter XII
Restoration of the fracture of the arm.
An arm is composed of two bones which are called the humerus and the ulna; where the small one is called the head and the larger one is placed behind it at the upper part.
And when the arm is broken only the larger bone or the smaller one, and they both break simultaneously.
And when it is only the smaller bone that breaks, then its restoration is easy and its healing is easier.
When the bone breaks inside him, you leave his fracture bad, and his healing will be difficult.
And it is worse with that when two bones break at once.
So if the bone that breaks is the small lower part of the shin, then for the doctor, it's convenient to restore his repair, which should have a small extension in which that can be made equal.
If the shin is large and broken, then create an extension that will hold more firmly.
And if both shins are broken at once, then prepare for you to make the removal much stronger.
And when you place the shape of your hand, prepare his repair and extend his placement over a cushion, with all else as previously mentioned. Let the auditory part be lower than all others, and let the leg be at right angles to the fallen seat.
And place a cushion in front of him at the height or angle of his body, so that his leg does not inadvertently move.
And nearby the minister should extend his arm to the part that is more comfortable at his own hand or almost immediately, and another minister should extend similarly above.
And nearby the doctor will equalize the bone within that restores it according to the best figure that can be achieved.
And if there are stags in the structure of the bone, then you must reduce all parts to their place with your strength.
And if there appears a separate stag that catches the chain and does not allow your hope in his restoration, then you do so on him and stay like that according to the method we have mentioned above.
If the fracture is at a disadvantage, I have already addressed this singular case, and therefore take care of that.
And if by chance you encounter an abscess at the beginning of your restoration, then cover it with a cloth impregnated with roasted oil and white wax, making it midway between thickness and fineness. Place a strong cloth over that in subtle compression where the abscess can soften; then leave the dressing and apply a plaster made from powder of myrrh on honey, and prepare stars. And let the star be placed above that fracture more accurately and more strongly.
And know that the number of stars on the arm is in the major dispositions, or whether the fracture is in one shin or both shins at once.
And place your compression on the site of the fracture firmly and vigorously. When more easily allows the contraction to reach the parts above the fracture or lower parts of him, place the compression a little moist according to when his restoration begins in the introduction of this chapter.
And the cloths that you wrap around the fracture should be moist and soft, not hard or prickly. The clay on which it is strengthened should be midway between fine and coarse, as we have recommended.
And consider the member and its position for a few days. And if there occurs any cause that requires correction, as what usually happens to the limb, then prepare for you to immerse the limb in water so that that pain ceases.
And let the member not be strained until it rests, and then return your compression.
And if the contraction has already been softened and the bone has already been restored as before, then correct all that with your strength.
And consider more if nourishment is prohibited from reaching the limb due to excessive contraction. Then prepare for you to soften that a little and let it rest for a few days until the nourishment flows back there, and then strengthen that again.
If to the leg there is not any cause that we have said, then prepare for it not to be discharged within about 20 days or so.
And nearby have the hand of the leg suspended by its strength in movements, and let him sleep on his back.
And know that this fracture is restored in 30 days or in 60 days, or moderately it is restored in 28 days, and all of this depends on the composition of tissues and movements positions.
Chapter XIII.
On Restoring Fractures of the Thumb and Fingers.
Know that fractures occur in the thumb and joints of the fingers, and they do not happen to them except by small movements.
And when there occurs a fracture or dislocation in the hand, then prepare for the leg to be lying down and forward of him spread evenly, and nearby place your hand over that stretched out.
And nearby the minister extends the broken bones, and the doctor will equalize those so that they are connected with good congruence.
And then prepare to apply plaster and stopper, if there is not an abscess. And nearby place stars according to the amount of the site, and you have already wrapped that in clay cloth.
If the break is in the inner parts of the fingers towards the palm's belly, then prepare like a hollow of cloth, and command the leg to strengthen that on his broken palm; nearby it should be strengthened with long cloth.
And let the star of copper on the cloth where it floats, so that the copper is applied to the palm; strengthen that according to your preparation.
If the fracture is in external parts, then cover it with two other sticks of the part placed on your palm, so that your hand be opened and straight; and place the constriction, as you would twist your hand like a rope between the fingers firmly.
And if the fracture occurs in one of the joints of the fingers, then when you bend it, it should be equal as you cover and proceed to strengthen on your palm; and if you wish, place a small stick straight under him so that the fracture is raised and not crushed.
If the fracture is in other fingers, just like in my middle location or on the index, or on the ring finger, or on the little one, then it should be equal and stable for that finger; or they all are tight as a continuous line, which is better; or place a small stick over that one, as we said earlier about bending.
And consider, in your restoration, and close to this, the position of applying a cautery and opposing - during your operation - that which covers when any cause of these occurs, according to what has been recounted about it.
Chapter XIV.
On the restoration of fractures of the thigh bone.
The thigh bone, when broken, is felt according to its transformation into the part in front and towards the upper pus.
And the restoration of him is done so that the muscle becomes strengthened over the fracture and other muscles remain under the fracture, and the patient lies on his stomach and his face.
And then the minister extends all the muscle to its part according to quality, when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
And if it approaches the line of the thigh, then let the muscle approach the front at the part of the femoral head, so that the extension fits into them, and the other muscles remain under the fracture.
And similarly if the break is close to the head, then let the muscle be made close to the head, and have the extension at the parts remaining.
And then the doctor equalizes the bone among both his hands so that it reduces according to its natural form; and when the bone is connected by good connection; then cover it with a plaster bandage if you don't apply a cautery to the member. And if there is an abscess in him, then you leave it for some days until the abscess from the cautery goes away, and then return to your treatment.
The constriction of him should be done like this: cover the fracture with a hard bandage, fold it two or three times, and cut off the excess; then wrap the socket until it reaches the middle and the line of the thigh.
And insert a long needle between the thigh and the socket near the head at the parts remaining; extend the ends of the needle from the lower end of the part towards the upper end of the two parts, then twist around the socket and thigh as the excess of the bandage comes off.
And then place on the thigh at the site of that fracture sticks (pins), and place one stick over the bone of the socket from those.
And then fill the voids between the socket and thigh with thick cloths, so that the constriction may clot.
And then start with a strong constriction in the middle over the site of the fracture with three or four layers, and as far away from the site of the fracture your constriction should be smaller and more gentle and wetter.
And then extend both ends of the needle to the remaining parts until it reaches the chest cavity, strengthen both ends of the needles from the other side so that the muscle does not move away from its place.
And then leave the constriction on that side as it is so that nothing happens to the member to corrosion or cautery abscess nor inflammation and resemble those; if any of these causes occur, then examine him and adjust accordingly what happens close by, according to what we said about broken bones.
And if in the bone is there a hole that you can put it, then cover as you make it equal according to what is possible for you; and otherwise, do something on him and let it heal from whatever came before it, until he heals.
And in some cases this thigh bone fracture is strengthened differently from the one that fits his sticks as we said in the assistant and arms.
However, in the restoration of him done in this manner no limpness occurs in the patient; and if it is restored alone, then another one that is applied to his other socket, then it is necessary for that one to be limp for a while.
And know that the thigh is strengthened in 40 days or a few months or a few more months, and all of this depends on the variety of conditions and other arrangements.
Chapter XV.
On the restoration of the fracture at the knee joint.
Know that fractures at the knee joint are uncommon, yet they do occur in certain places.
And if it happens to him with fracture, then it is merely a crack or strain in its parts, and this can be due to one or two blows, and the whole is felt accordingly.
And the restoration of him is undertaken so that what was broken from his parts in those places where it should be added and joined according to the possibility for calculation, ease, and manufacture.
And place a plaster and press over that round pillar if you need from that; strengthen above with pressure according to what is appropriate for the compression.
And consider all the arrangements that we have recommended in other fractures, such as pus drainage and similarities to those where they should oppose to prevent any accident for what is convenient within so that he/she can be healed.
Chapter XVI.
On the restoration of the fracture of the knee joint.
Know that in the knee joint are two bones, one of which is thick and named after the knee itself; the other is delicate and called easy.
And when it comes to the types of fracture that occur in both bones of the arm, and thus restoration is done for him just like for the arm's, and his operation is one.
And if there are injuries to both bones simultaneously, the knee joint changes into all parts.
And if it is just the delicate bone that gets injured, the knee joint changes towards the forward parts.
And if it is the thick bone that gets injured, you make that space large, and they are of those causes that are not in your care.
And subsequently manage extension, calculation, and assembly of the braces according to that equality.
However, when you consider that the fracture of the knee is long without a significant bend, make the extension stronger and softer, and stretch your strength upon it.
And in the knee, there is an operation for the arm on which you equalize the stars and complete your entire operation. Then you take pieces of stick of the foot that are placed under all the causes which are laid aside in solitude, made from palm branches; remove those to which there is a slight discomfort, and do not make it feel like the hands, and let its length be as long as the knee's length, and within the pus lay them.
And subsequently envelop each one in two layers according to the length of him/her, place one over the knee joint's part and the other on the opposite part, they should be within the pus at the appropriate location on the chest.
And subsequently tie the two stars in three locations of both extremities and at the middle one. With this structure, the knee is prevented from bending to either side of the right or left part, and it stands well-stationed.
And already has been administered a stick of wood according to the length of the knee; and make sure the knee is placed upon him/her such that it retains its ability to move.
And above all, remember this when dealing with fractures, and especially when it comes to properly dressing the injury.
And subsequently, consider the knee every day and study it backward for further examination, take care of it to avoid pus, swelling or other similar causes; and when any cause from those occurs, then press on him/her so that within what is convenient, he/she can be healed.
Chapter XVII.
On the fracture of the heel and the bones of the foot, fingers.
Fracture of the heel does not occur in entirety; rather, fractures happen to some extent in the foot bones; and in their fingers, only minor fractures occur, which do not happen to them except due to improper positions during months.
And if there is a fracture in the foot bones and occasionally those bones are elevated over each other, then place your thigh on the ground prepared like this so that the knee remains extended.
And subsequently place one foot on that which is elevated from those bones, and press them down firmly and evenly into the locations until they turn around in their places.
And subsequently place a plaster and rest on it, and have the foot of the thigh placed with a small table under which there are two inflated cushions.
And subsequently strengthen that with the foot in a descending structure, for you have enveloped it with cloths and from other causes of which you need.
And as three or four days pass over him/her, then you release that ligament, which you will find the bones equalized, or if they are injured or displaced, and in those cases, it is thus what you know about operation.
And if some fingers are injured, then restore those and equalize them as I have taught you in the restoration of fingers of the hand. And subsequently place the injured finger on a pillar according to the length of the finger, and make it slightly softer than usual. And then have your foot placed on this table which is recommended for you, and strengthen that with descending curvature.
And if what is injured of the bones are two or three or more, then place on each finger a pillar equal to its amount wrapped in lion cloth, and strengthen the table at the bottom of the foot, and standing on one of the table's cushions hold your abdomen so that it has good retention.
And it is convenient to you that you do not forget to consider all the causes which we have mentioned to you in other fractures of accidents, and press on him/her so that what is convenient prevails.
Chapter XVIII.
Of the bone in the thigh, and of the shinbone, and of the leg bone in men.
When the thigh bone is broken, then it bends into the hollow place, and afterwards leans that towards the division of the two sides slightly, and is held behind.
And then the midwife lifts the knee bone, and it is made like this in the bone of her thus as she wishes; and the woman is bent, and raises her two small ones gradually, for all this is outside until that is ahead of the division of the bone thus as she wishes and the broken thigh bone returns.
And then place powders on her back, and when she wants to urinate, help her lift her knee so it becomes easier for her to urine, and after she urinates, return that according to the method by which you mixed that at the beginning, and then return to her original powder.
And do it this way for seven days or about those, until that is restored.
And if you wish, take an ovine pouch and strengthen with the thread over her patient's back one catgut; and immerse the whole pouch into her thigh, and then blow into the tube with force while the pouch is inflated inside the thigh, for the fracture returns.
And then it is filled with the knee and stays for some days according to what we have recommended, until she gets well.
And when the shinbone of men or women is broken, then administer in its restoration and adjustment what we have recommended for the bone of the hip.
And that which is straight is not hidden in these nearby fractures and few occur, mostly among those who have some study and use this my free advice; for that fracture means to you in the largest directions via of movement in the restoration and constriction of it, so understand well.
Take care of it in the leg of men when it is broken, take hold of it with your hand, and put the leg into that; then place over her wrappings made of fabric, and cover her, and let her rest for three days or about those, and she will be healed.
Chapter XIX.
Regarding the restoration of fractures when they are infected.
It is convenient for those who receive fractures when infected, and especially if the bone is large such as the bone of the knee or the femur, or similar to that, that you take care of it immediately with bloodletting if the conditions of bloodletting are suitable as we have said previously.
And if the infection discharges pus, then cover that you take care of it within so that you dust over her swollen place, if for other reasons there is no presence.
And then begin restoring the fracture on that first day, and do not prolong this if it does not produce abscess.
Take care if an abscess occurs with cautery, then you let the restoration of her happen within the ninth day, until the abscess is drained, and do not approach her on the third and fourth in total, for this will cause other mishaps.
Take care if the broken bone is prominent over the exposed wound, then cover that you force to reduce it and equalize it with your own hands in order to facilitate and make little extension.
Take care if extension is not at your preparation and the equilibration of her with your own hands, then you reduce that with your own hands using this instrument; and this tool is made of iron, its length is seven or eight dits and its width according to the quantity of the infection; and for this it is necessary for the doctor to take three or four according to the quantity you need in the treatment throughout all species of fracture.
And it is redone, and with little roughness in order that it not be bent, you compress over it during the time of the operation.
And it has a sharp tip at which her extremities are margined; and its texture of her is generally tensile, and in the middle of her towards the divisions.
And this is the form of her:
It is named in Greek "labre volenz atelarem", thus it is a spatula with little extension.
And you should consider that her extremity be raised over the prominent end of the bone.
And force it into a groove until it returns the bone and is equalized with some equilibrium.
And therefore force to equalize the ends of the fracture between them, and if her broken extremity is subtle and does not take that tool for good access, then you should insert her bone end into the place where the instrument has power over this.
Take care if you cannot reduce the bone in this as we have recommended, then cut it with what is convenient for her of the scalpel which we said; or cut that with one of the saws in any method that is possible for you.
And then cut only what remains on the surface of the rough and thin bones.
And when the bone is reduced, and then during this reduction the patient feels intense pain, you know that the bone has not returned to its natural place; and accordingly do this so that you apply great strength to the patient.
Once your restoration to the bone is complete, then immerse a cloth in a stiff black vinegar, especially if it's summer, and do not place ointment or any other cause on the wound with oil, so as not to cause her sweating and running.
And nearby administer splints during the time of your completion of bone restoration, and leave the wound exposed to heal, inserting blades with a saw and using bandages according to the size of the wound.
And observe all the caution to not contaminate the wound in the fracture area, as these are techniques that old doctors used, and allow accidents to happen to their patients' limbs or they corrode or seriously harm them, this is healing. And if your narrowing is slight, soft, different from the narrowing of other fractures.
And if the wound is large or a bad wound, and you fear those bad accidents that we have listed, and you feel pain in that area, then do not press on that splint, but use that hard cloth wrap instead of splints and strengthen it with those.
And about one or two days after the wound begins to heal, so it is on their part that a brace should be made from the cloth you placed over that area. Then administer ointments, which are the ones we usually use for healing wounds, like tetrarhomachion and similar remedies, in that way.
And make sure you loosen the bandage and consider the wound every morning and evening until it is consolidated and sealed, and ensure that each limb is prepared in such a way that the healing process flows from them to their parts with ease.
If the wound takes days and is not consolidated nor removed by your brace, then you should know that here are the small ones for which you can remove the brace when necessary to heal the wound in peace. And of those small ones, separate and remove those that are not attached, those that remain attached force you to remove them according to what is possible for your own sake.
And if something happens to the wound that it festers or decays, so it is inflammation or another form of corruption and putrefaction, then you must press on each one of those as your own guide for how to treat it, which has a preceding narrative in its chapter about healing.
And in the case where you want to make it so that your best is in you and you present yourself: when bone is broken, press over the limb like the bone of the thigh and the helper, similar to those of large limbs, and do not assume that it will heal or removal by this leads to death; leave it there until it can settle, which will fall naturally after about 20 days or .30.; And then treat the wound if you see fit, and if not, leave it as it is.
Chapter XX.
Regarding the treatment of necrosis that occurs in the aftermath of any fracture.
Decrepit wounds cause this necrosis in the aftermath of fracture healing, especially close to joints, and the figure of the limb is rubbed away by it; so forcibly you prohibit the limb from its natural operation.
Then consider if the necrosis is recent and administer medicines that have a effect such as aloes, ashes, look at it, compress it with cabbage leaves, or use them; choose some or all of these, and apply them to the necrosis on a poultice, and hold them in place properly to avoid leakage.
And leave the bandage without removing that for a few days; then remove it and apply another one until the necrosis has improved. Or strengthen with a layer of lead sheeting, since lead has the property of reducing everything that inflates in limbs.
And if the necrosis has already turned and spread out, and it needs to be brought about gradually, then divide it by the uppermost part of its partition line, and cut off the excess or remove that with some remedies until it has improved; treat it until it heals.
Chapter XXI.
Regarding the restoration of fractures when they are restored and inappropriately moving the delicate member according to its natural state.
When a bone fracture is restored, and it is attempted to move the delicate member according to its natural state, this should not be done except for certain causes: among which one is an excess of serous fluid in the joint and movement made without considering that; or due to excessive swelling from the joint's ligaments where nourishment can't reach the limb; or due to excess of ointment; or due to unnecessary movement before its time; or due to weakness of blood circulation in the patient's body and debility.
And the treatment of this is to reduce the patient, making their blood flow and circulate in them; apply baths; and apply heat and joy on them.
And place a poultice on the limb, so that the poultice draws in its nourishing fluids or continues to apply liniment with hot water until the nutrition flows and returns to its natural shape.
Chapter XXII.
Regarding the treatment of broken bones that are incorrectly set, and avoiding the operation for what you consider.
When there is a member already restored to the healing of its deformity and necrosis in the broken bone, and it takes on this unnatural shape, however, the limb does not prohibit itself from its natural operation, so you should not accept the word of someone who thinks that this limb is newly broken.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors. If it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. And if you need to return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out. You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands. The first sentence translates as: May these medical surgeons and restorers who have done this in our land be criticized; and this operation is very condemned causing great fear of the sign which is fatal.
If limping and swelling are recent issues, then seek them in a bath of hot water in which medicinal herbs are soaked, such as mint leaves and herbs with cooling properties; and apply to him the application of 'mollifying ointment' just as it is done for well-prepared baths. Or take a paste made from aloe gel and apply it to him; or that he be treated with the juice of mint of the high and be rubbed with linseed oil or almond oil, then wrap him in that; or if he has taken fatty fruits and they are strained through wool sponges, and similar ones to those of the medicines called consolidators.
And sometimes it is dissolved by gentle, continuous rubbing that is applied to the wetter parts, and it should be administered movements of the limb in all directions at all times.
If the twist has already gone ahead and been made strong, turning into flesh, necessitating its healing with iron, then seek that pus be above the incision and the continuation of the bone is dissolved, and the cutting should be done where it is superfluous for removing nodular parts of that metal on the bone with fine knives. It should also be administered in that area with enthusiasm and study.
Chapter XXIII.
Regarding conversation about dislocation.
Dislocation is the displacement of one of his joints in place, so that it cannot move, and it causes the shape of the limb to be distorted, causing great pain and serious injuries on the body.
So when it happens to one of the dislocations, immediately puncture so that it can be reduced, and do not delay in reducing that, for if it is delayed, the place gets stuck and strengthens under that, making the reduction of dislocation difficult.
And for this, do not make it too tight or stretch during the time of immobilization, as tightened areas cause convulsions and biting pain.
When this happens, take care to immobilize the foot of the patient, and then leave it in place so that the swelling can rest; and have the limb wrapped in warm water and oil, and have the reduction done with ease.
And all limbs should be treated with what comes to mind, which will recall its memory in its place.
And I have already organized the chapters on dislocation according to what is preceded in fracture; from the part of the body above comes into play with the part below.
Chapter XIV.
Regarding the treatment of dislocation of the jaw joint.
So if the two jaws are dislocated but not broken; and the dislocation of both is done according to two methods: either they are gently moved back into their places with a slight movement and are softened slightly; or they are completely dislocated and fully within, where saliva from the body is produced and cannot be contained by that, nor can it close its mouth, and the patient's tongue is enveloped in their words.
When the dislocation of something is slight, then it returns to its major positions by itself due to minor causes.
If the dislocation is complete and full, then it should be administered a gentle reduction of it, and it should not be delayed completely.
And when the minister has the head of the body, and the doctor inserts his finger at the place of one side's mouth in the bone of the jaw within the mouth, if the dislocation is on one side; or he inserts both of his fingers together, if the dislocation is on both sides, and the other commands come from the rest as they are outside under those that equalize; and command the body to stop its jaws and move them out of every part. And the doctor equalizes the jaw and inspects the jaw so it returns to its place.
And if the reduction of it is difficult, and especially so when both jaws are simultaneously dislocated, then administer evacuation with warm water and oil, during which a slight reduction of both is done and do not delay the complete reduction of both as we have said.
And when they return and are equalized, and the mouth of the body is closed and not softened, then place on those powder of drap with cerat, and make it using wax and oil rubbed; and have them bound with soft wraps.
And let the body of the patient sleep on his two sides, his head between two pillows, so that it does not get stuck to the right or left side; and do not force him to eat any cause with difficulty; having his food be forbidden by lion, until when pains are softened and jaws are nozzed, then let him eat whatever he wants.
And this should be administered with ease, and do not exert effort on the opening of the mouth for eating, drinking, or breathing, until the jaw is nozzed and healed.
And if the reduction of two jaws when they are dislocated in any hour and do not convert to their own places is difficult, then convulsions and regular fevers occur, and it strengthens you that the belly of the body is swollen, and it strengthens you with vomiting colera pure.
And when you do this, then know that it is a loss; and boils will develop in the person to whom this happens within three days.
Chapter XXV
On reducing the dislocation of the fulcrum and the tip of the muscle.
The fulcrum is not dislocated within the socket due to its continuation with the foot; and sometimes it is dislocated at the part outside, which is described by feeling.
And the restoration of him/her is that the patient lies on his/her back and extends their arms. And apply pressure with your palm on the area with strong pressure, so it will return.
And place something over that, apply plaster and dust there, and strengthen that.
May the end of that which is continuous with it not be dislocated in any day; then conduct that it may be reduced and made equal according to what we have said and according to your equipment.
And place something over that, apply plaster and dust, and bandage, and instruct the patient to maintain restfulness and recovery during their healing.
And with this treatment, reduce the tip of the muscle when it is separated from its location.
Chapter XXVI
On reducing the dislocation of the muscle.
Know that the muscle is only dislocated in three ways, of which one is when it is dislocated at the root of the tendon on the side of the body.
And the second is when it is dislocated at the top of the muscle, which is done with heat; and it is not dislocated on the back part by the shoulder; and it is not dislocated on the front part by nerves.
And it is mostly dislocated and lies outside at the parts below of the tendon, especially in those with few muscles, slightly dislocated; but in those with many muscles, it lies outside with difficulty.
And a strong blow or impact often happens to some people, and the muscle of him/her swells with an abscess, and it becomes dislocated due to this already being dislocated.
So conduct that you treat him/her while you are over-equipped with him/her, and then proceed in his/her treatment.
And when you know the dislocation of him/her when it is at the parts below of the tendon; and so distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the normal muscle, which you find among those with obvious diversity; and find in the tip of the muscle a concavity and on the edge of the cap of the muscle as big as a hen's egg, and the patient cannot return their hand to their armpit, nor even that one for all movements.
And if it is dislocated below the foot or near it, then you will find a clear touch there and it is not hidden.
And for this dislocation, slight reduction is performed when the patient is young and it's fresh.
And the reduction of him/her is that the attendant raises his/her hand to above; and then places your fingers on the edge of the tendon below, and elevates the joint with strength to its place; and the attendant raises his/her hand, extends it there; and then pauses it so that it returns slightly.
And if for what we have said it does not return, and is due to the manner of dislocation, several days later, then conduct that the patient be bathed in hot water and administered a salve that soothes and lines as if they were oat flour, fenugreek, and thyme in water, and should be given.
And have the patient lie on their back and place your fingers on the edge of their tendon waiting for a wool covering that is equal in softness to stiffness, and then the doctor places his/her arm under the spot and raises the tip of the muscle vertically, pulling the patient's hand so it does not get stuck at the parts below, and another attendant holds the tip of the patient's hand so it doesn't get stuck at the parts below, which will return immediately to its place.
And if you wish, reduce it according to this manner: and you make present a man who is longer than the patient, from that side of his/her body, and inserts his/her muscle below the tendon of the patient's hand and raises the tendon above him/her so that the patient hangs in the air, and another attendant pulls the patient's hand away from the parts below of their abdomen. And if the patient is slight, then conduct that something else causing suspension be present, because in this case it makes the dislocation return immediately.
And it is reduced steadily according to another manner: and you place in the ground a long pole whose head is round in shape, like a mortar's pestle, which should not be thick or thin, and then have the patient stand above this pole; because when laid on top of the pole with lions' skin, the patient stands according to the length of the pole, and then extend their hand to the parts below of the other side; and stretch your body from the other side with strength, so that the joint returns to its place quickly.
And if it is difficult to reduce him/her due to all the causes we have mentioned, then use this cure: and you take a pole whose length equals two arms, its width should be four digits, and its thickness should be as thick as the edge of the tendon according to this shape:
And around the head place lion's hide so that the fire does not harm the patient.
And place another cushion under the patient's buttocks, and spread your hand or arm over the fire inside the parts where you are, and let the fire rest on the support and the arms and the tip of your hand.
And place one arm on a ladder scale according to its width, and the hand spread out in the places where you are, and the other leg is suspended from the other side, so that the joint can come back immediately.
And when the treatment of the patient is completed in any way that is possible to you, then prepare as follows: place a wool cushion under his buttocks equal in quantity; and spread on it prepared plaster mixed with moli powder and egg white over the entire muscle area, even after being rubbed onto it, and strengthen the wool cushion with tight bandages; and turn the plaster around the cushion, and let your hand be attached to his neck, and leave it like this, without harming your hand for seven days.
And when the food is given to the patient little by little, inside which member it becomes more comfortable, which makes his recovery easier.
And the food should be given more generously every seven or five days and exercise is performed; and if it's closed and not softened, then already it is healed.
If the joint is dislocated due to dampness that affects it or for other reasons, then you should apply a cautery with three pokes as described in the section on the use of cautery.
And if all this has been done and after seven days the ligament and the joint are released but not closed, and the plaster and the bandage are reduced on some occasions, but not closed and cannot raise that arm above the parts, then you should know that the nerves of him, which are at the head of the muscle, are already cut or extended or softened, and you should know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
From the dislocation of that which is done to the foot or the heel or the parts behind, the reduction is performed with pressure and extension on the elbows, so it returns.
And another bandage is applied there, and care that one until healed.
And if there is severe healing in the member and delayed movement of him, then the patient uses hot baths internally until that heaviness is relieved and returns to his original nature.
Captulo XXVII.
Regarding the treatment of dislocation of the elbow.
You should know that the elbow joint is dislocated due to difficulty and similarly returns with difficulty; it's dislocated in all directions, but mostly towards the front and back. The dislocation of it is not revealed by you when you press or touch those places according to which figure it is dislocated. When you adjust the dislocated elbow, this is clearly declared to you, as the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm, nor touch with that its muscle.
And when you touch them, reduce the dislocation as soon as it reaches his boil point; if it reaches his boil point, it's difficult to reduce him, and he is not fully healed. Especially when it's towards the back part, which is worse than all other types of dislocation, and has more pain, and hot baths lead to death for that one.
And the restoration of him, when it is that which can be reduced, is that his hand should be extended between two assistants, and his arm expanded, and the doctor's hands are on his elbow and him, and you push the joint with the heels of his assistant's feet or inside the palm of his hand until it returns to its place.
If the dislocation is in front of the parts, then returns this way that bends the hand to his own hand, while hitting the elbow inside the palm's edge.
And if the dislocation does not submit to reduction, then administer strong extension and powerful force.
And this is that two assistants extend the arm, and have those aids in such a way that they are not overwhelmed by the extension.
And then rotate his arm around all parts; because it is wrapped in a folded long cloth over his hand or ligament.
And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, apply some oil to that so as those causes which help in lubrication of the joint are facilitated; and then force the joint with strong pressure until it returns.
And when the reduction is done, you should place him on that plaster in which stiffness and movement are facilitated by egg white, and extended with tight bandage; his arm should be suspended from the neck, and left for some days.
And then should be released; and if the joint is formed in its place, then you release his ligament and leave him.
And if you see that the joint is not strengthened, then you repeat the plaster and ligament, and leave him for some days until they are hardened; and then release it.
If there is severe healing near the joint reduction and his position is in movement, then you should apply moisturization in bath and subtle friction, as well as compression, until it's relieved; or place him on top of the joint for a while, which is the fatty part of his thigh; then bind him and leave him over bone throughout the day and night. And take that one out, and put it in the bath; and when it becomes soft, then you rub the joint with a warm friction, and repeatedly apply this medicine on that spot, which is its natural remedy, once or twice, and the third time, and so on. Corruption has already spread within the liver's substance, within its limits.
And if you want, place over that wet and scraped opening on the flesh; and do this for several times, until that part is moistened and returns to its position.
Chapter XXVIII.
For the treatment of subluxation of the elbow, it's about the joint that is between the arm and the hand.
In some cases, the hand is partially dislocated, and the reduction of this dislocation is easy. Contrary to other joints, however, it's more important that there be speed in the reduction when it happens, before the site gets swollen or a boil occurs.
And the reduction of this dislocation is that you place the elbow joint of the patient on a table and extend their hand, and the doctor places their hand or palm over the vicinity of the joint, pushing that spot back to its original position.
However, it's important to consider whether the palm is already inside the elbow of the patient; then the patient should place both hands on a table for extension and reduction. If dislocation occurred before, then it should be the position of the hand inherently on the table, so that the doctor's hand comes over this vicinity of the joint.
And so if it returns promptly, that's good; and otherwise, then strengthen that with padding to drain the boil and let that be. And don't repeatedly do this, because otherwise, you won't endure or manage the reduction of that anymore as time passes.
However, the joint bends according to its flexibility; and don't blame the patient for any cause, but when their hand is softened and can't be blamed for any cause; then you should understand that the nerves are severed or torn, and so it's not a disease in that case but it needs to be treated with a cautery around that area and strengthen that treatment until you get some results.
And when swelling returns, then place over that dressing which we have prescribed, and let it rest and be strengthened for several days; and then gently remove it and let it rest, also exercising the hand of the patient.
However, if the motion of that is still hindered and causes any gravity, then ease that with warm water and friction several times, until it's relieved.
Chapter XXIX.
For the treatment of dislocation of fingers.
Several times, you dislocate the fingers in every direction.
And when one of those fingers is dislocated towards the back or inside of it, then hold the finger and push the dislocation away with your thumbs, until it returns.
And then support the tip of the finger, and suspend that from the part where it is dislocated, letting that rest for two days.
And then suspend that and extend that until its straightness matches in that day.
And when it's night, lay that according to that narrative, and don't cease to dislocate that during the day and exercise with motion, and lay that at night; and do this for several days until it is straight.
And pretend this if it's dislocated in the palm of the hand, and lay that towards that side, and do this with your first operation until it heals.
And similarly do this when it's dislocated in other directions.
Chapter XXX.
For the treatment of dislocation of the shoulder blades (scapulae) of both sides.
When it happens to any of the shoulder blades or collarbone causing full dislocation, and there is a large swelling around those places, then in that case there is no treatment, for death will threaten the patient.
The sign of this is that the excretion from the patient goes beyond their will and cannot be contained; and several times you soften some limbs of them or both breasts of them, or one of those; or it swells one shoulder blade in its place, for if there are swellings they should be treated by softening them until they can be moved to four directions.
And that has swollen behind and is called gelsemia (a condition characterized by swelling).
The treatment of this is that then you must consider if the gelsemia occurs during childhood, in which case there is no cure for it and neither can all be healed.
In those that occur through blow or impact or similar to those, the Ancient ones would say that long treatments were prescribed, of which the most important returns to common sense; I have already made a shortened version from that, for which some excuse is given because of the abundance in it, based on my familiarity with its middle exposition, to which I refer and expand upon using various tools from that in which I show this and elaborate upon it.
And only that which occurs directly at the point I have prescribed is cured of those, not the others.
And the patient should be laid out on their face above a pillow somewhat near the wall, and should be spread out so that their feet are moistened by themselves to prevent their legs from getting dirty.
And one straight board should be placed, fixed in the ground near the pillow around the head of the patient, and another board in front of the feet of the patient at the other end of the bed.
The minister should hold the board, and not fix it in a hole; and another minister should hold the other according to that manner.
And cover the head of the patient with it and fasten the tie around their forehead firmly; extend the end of the band to the board which should be under the head, attach that there; and fasten the other band on their buttocks with their legs, aiming for their chest; and adjust all the bands and attach those to the second board which should be under their feet.
And the minister should extend the band to the part of the board opposite the foot, and let the two boards and the bands of their places not tighten too much under them, but rather do not make it as tight as we have said.
And the doctor should place his hands firmly in the middle where he can return it, or place one on a table, and have them adjust their feet under that as they return.
If it does not return in this way, then take a table whose height or length is about three spans, and dig into the wall as we said that there is a place for the patient under the end of the table. And place the table's edge on the spine, the doctor places his feet at the other end, and stretches himself so that the spine is curved and returns to its place.
And if you want, open each side which is twisted on the back; and it's what you should place in the ground, under the head of the patient at the end of the pillow two boards, their length being about one span, and place the head of them at the end of the pillow respectively two boards; and make the distance between each board a span, and that has been made in every board to draw around it, and each should be fixed on the ground so as not to loosen.
And make another board in which is the backbone, and it twists at the two ends of both boards.
And at the end of it is a notch where the board forms, its length being about one span in this which twists; and in the other two boards it is similar to that.
And adjust the bands that you have tightened on the feet of the patient in the groove which should be under their head, and the bands that you have tightened on their thighs in the groove which should be under their feet.
And you must adjust each groove with one minister who twists the groove with his hand, and the doctor equalizes the spine as we said.
And when the spine has returned and the location has been equalized, then take a powdered plaster of calf's lung and stop it; and place over the powdered plaster a table whose width is about three thumbs or roughly those, and the length should be as much as takes up the spot of fatness, and over the part of the spine.
And adjust with the band that we said, and let the patient receive subtle nourishment so that it may heal.
And if there remains any danger at the end of healing in that place, then it is prescribed to take medicines that soften and cleanse before and for long periods after applying the table, which we have recommended; and already a lead leaf has been administered in that place.
And sometimes injuries occur at the end of the spines of both sides, and are caused by that dislocation; and it is that bone which has already injured so that no one should be expected to take this medicine, which will cause you to die suddenly.
Chapter XXXI.
Regarding the treatment of a hernia that has been dislocated.
Know that the junction of the iliac bone and the junction of the muscle do not simply undergo dislocation, but accidents happen to those ones which happen to other joints with little movement and curvature.
And the junction of the ilium is dislocated in four ways, it is dislocated towards the inside parts, or towards the outside parts, or towards the front parts, or towards the back parts.
And it is mostly dislocated towards the inside parts, and rarely towards the front or back parts.
And the sign of dislocation towards the inside parts is that when you adjust the healthy buttock against the patient, it is longer, and the tendon is more prominent than in a healthy person; the patient cannot bend their leg up to their knee, which causes them to bend their leg at its knee joint, so that the buttocks have already reached this point.
And the sign of him where accidents happen are dislocated is towards the outside parts, it's that his accidents are contrary to this one.
And the sign of him where accidents happen are dislocated in front parts is that expand his healthy side according to complementation, but not bend that pain which is in the tendon, and if it is pushed towards the front he cannot proceed on it; and his urine is retained and his bending gets stuck, you should move him above the shin.
And a sign for the one to whom you occur dislocation in parts behind is that he does not spread his knees apart, nor can he bend forward as long as he bends backwards, and the change of him is quicker than the other, and the backward bending softens, and the end of the thigh lies towards that part.
The reduction of the types of this dislocation is what you consider, then, if the dislocation is old and ancient, that already has the person close to you undergoing treatment for it and you perform its reduction according to their disposition, not in all; therefore do not proceed with assuming a diagnosis in such cases.
In the case where the dislocation is recent, and it belongs to one of the four types of dislocation, then you should guide in such a way that you return the joint and extend it inwardly and outwardly, and move it left and right, which strength returns him and does not require another cure.
If it does not return in this manner, then assume that you must prepare force and extend the change of him from his side or over his chest, or on the side where the dislocation is located; and another minister extends his hand above him so that he places his chest near the patient's ribs. And strengthen at will on the length of the thigh, and have another minister press gently on the end of the tendon.
And whether it is extension of him or from inside to backward bending on the sternum's side, or from behind to the backside's side.
And when it is the extension of all in one go, that under which the patient's buttocks are raised to the ground level and which hangs down.
And this type of extension is common to all four.
And therefore, if the dislocation returns as we have said, it's good; and otherwise, for each species that is necessary in its own treatment.
In the reduction of his own, when dislocated, and the dislocation is towards the inside parts, assume that the buttocks are reclined onto his side; then place the tendons over the length of the thigh in that area where between the end of the thigh and the location of backward bending there's a protrusion; then extend the tendon from the part towards the backward bending to its opposite sternum part.
And another minister with strength takes his arms, and tightens the large area of the thigh on the backside, then extends it outwardly by extension forcefully, which returns in its place.
And this species requires less treatment for the member to be reduced than the other ones.
And if you excuse yourself and do not adhere to this treatment of all, then assume that the two buttocks of the backside be in tandem under strong forceful tendons, lightly, on both thighs and both knees.
And the length of each is as much as four fingers, and the backside's change extends more than the other by two fingers.
And let the backside be suspended over the head of the trunk, and in this way; and let the length of him of the earth be as much as two arms.
And command a strong youth to contract the end of the thigh, and be suspended by another backside youth, and let another youthful contract the thing with forcibly pushed forcefulness, which makes the joint return to its place at speed.
And in the self-reduction, when dislocation is towards the outside part, assume that the backside jags according to what we advised during the patient's examination; and strengthen the tendon over the backside change properly, and on his feet.
And let two trunks be placed, one on the foot of him, and the other on his head; then have two adjusted trunks be located halfway down the backside where he is wetted with dampness, so that the backside does not get dampened by the trunk being between his thighs, because you should maintain extension in these inward parts without it being pulled.
And each minister extends according to their part, and the doctor with his hand administers reduction according to art.
And when the dislocation is towards the front parts, then let the change be extended slightly, and according to this middle story on the backside; and the doctor pauses his right palm onto the forward backside, and has that contracted with another hand, and in that contraction he pauses him who extends towards the inward parts from the location of backward bending.
And if the dislocation is towards the back parts, then do not let the backside be extended to his inward parts, and it's raised onto the ground; have that paused on a hard cause, as that is when an elongation is seen if his width is dislocated towards his outward parts, according to what we said about him lying between two widths; and it's on his face and his tendons are extended, as we said, without much deviation.
And have that compression administered onto the table at the location where the joint is bent.
So when the reduction process is completed according to how it should be - and the sign of the reduction being successful isn't hidden from you, meaning you extend both legs, and when you bend those equally and the patient stretches their leg and expands their excusal area, then you know that the member as per the process has returned. Then you adjust both thighs and place padding under them, and stretch it so that no part of it gets distorted; and adhere the patient to rest for three or four days.
And then loosen the thread and padding, and compare one leg against the other.
Then, if you find those bends equal in both places, then you know that the dislocation has already been fixed, and from there let the patient rest.
And if you see any cause for softening, then return and plaster that area, then stretch it according to your first stretching, and let that rest for three days.
And then loosen that area, and have the patient walk around with it for several days until they are comfortable.
Chapter xxxii.
On the treatment of dislocation of the shoulder.
The shoulder can be dislocated in three ways: it is dislocated outward from the parts, inward towards the center, and outward to the parts at the front of the body compared to those at the back; it is not dislocated forward.
And the sign of a dislocation in the patient is that you command them to press their leg against the thigh; then you know that the shoulder has been dislocated.
And the restoration of all these methods is that you place your leg straight under them, so that their shoulder can already extend if possible; attach yourself to them facing their body, and place their foot between your feet; then have them bend their arm against you, hold those together firmly on their shoulder, and another holds their hand above the dislocated shoulder with force, while another extends their other hand until the shoulder returns to its place.
And the sign of restoration in them is that their shoulder adheres against the thigh under light labor.
And then plaster that area and have the shoulder adhere against the thigh, and place them under one limb for three or four days, and loosen those afterwards.
And do not make the patient walk for several days, until they are healed and comfortable.
More so if your reduction of them is justified, then administer strong extension to the ligaments as described in the previous narrative on hip healing.
Chapter xxxiii.
On the treatment of dislocation of the ankle.
The ankle can be sometimes slightly dislocated due to minor injuries, and in other instances it can be completely dislocated. The dislocation occurs either inward from the parts or outward towards them.
And the sign of an ankle dislocation is that you see it swollen proceeding to the part where it has been dislocated.
More so for treating a minor dislocation is gentle restoration, which involves extending them with ease and equality until it returns to its position.
More so in treating when the ankle is completely dislocated, you should place your leg straight under them, and have another strong and brave assistant hold their foot at the back of their leg in the middle area.
And then have your right hand under the top of their foot, and with your left hand at the lower part of their foot in the area of the ankle bone.
And then pull their foot towards you with your right hand, and with the left one from two sides, and extend it with the left. And press the ankle bones on the right against the shin bone.
And perform these two actions as we have discussed.
And then press the ankle bones against the shin bone from the third side, and you are at the ankle joint.
So if it returns in one or two stages as with this method, and if you find the foot even, it's good; otherwise, then on them perform surgery again, which is when it returns.
More so if it is forbidden for you to reduce them as we have recommended, then place your leg under their thigh on the ground, and stretch a mat on hard earth, and enclose them between their thighs, and you already cover them with a sheet so that they don't fall down.
And then the assistant should hold their thighs together, and another assistant extends their foot against the extension of their leg or on the ligament that lies under the neck of the ankle; and extend each person against their partner's extension, and the mat remains between the thighs of the person lying down, so that their body doesn't pull towards the sides opposite to their extension.
And then the doctor bends the ankle at their joints, and another assistant holds the healthy thigh on the opposite sides, where the dislocation returns with ease.
And when the dislocation returns and you have been informed of the success of your reduction, then stop using bandage and stretch it strongly against the ligaments, and connect their foot to the shin bone.
And when you fear or protect from the nerves that are behind on the ankle, in order that the ligaments over them do not become forceful and harm them heavily.
And after that, let him rest for two or three days; and if the inflammation subsides, stretch him out.
And on the third day or fourth, untie him, and forbid the patient to walk for forty days. May it be that if he feels compelled to go in front of that space, not ensure that the dislocation is not over something dissolved and corrupted, and thus so that it does not receive treatment.
And if you happen to come across an abscess on him, then cover where you administer in the area of him where we previously detailed our narrative, in another location for treatment and application, within which it will be rejuvenated.
Chapter xxxiv.
On the treatment of dislocation of the fingers of the feet.
Make sure that the one which is dislocated is adjusted to about several extensions of a session; and what is not difficult, before it becomes easier.
May it be that if the dislocation is in some toes of one foot, then make him lie his foot on a level spot or table, and he should stand as if walking.
And then stand on your foot, place your hand over the area that you aim towards the joints, and press it onto the point of the toes with force until it returns, and observe it to be adjusted, not appearing in the expected location.
And then place the belly of his foot on a table that holds all the foot, which has two ends, and press it with strength until it becomes decent and firm for three days; and then untie him and have him rest from walking for a few days, during which it will be strengthened and its effectiveness assured.
Chapter xxxv.
On the types of dislocation that may occur from illness or from fracture or at any time.
When any cause of those happens, and you attend to the treatment of that and the restoration of him, many things occur leading to death.
And so do not assume over the treatment of him, but rather he who is wise in the art, long accustomed, merciful and compassionate, slow, not reckless or presumptuous; and use at the beginning of medicines that lead to abscesses alone, leave the patient to divine judgment, but instead go to the one you hope for salvation from loss, for alleviation of the illness, in which you show some hope. And then make every effort to do him the reduction immediately during the beginning of the cause, before an abscess appears.
And then, if the limb returns as we wish, then administer a regimen that leads to an abscess cautery and heals the illness with what suits him from the dried ointments.
And if the dislocation is from a fracture and happens in the separated joints, then you perform their setting, do what we have said about those illnesses related to what was previously detailed in the locations of those.
And follow and avoid according to your skill that of the instruments in the paths of fear as it is followed by my preaching; for this is better to you from what you owe to your Creator, more permanent to your glory, and more healthful to you when you see these things at your time. Thus ends the words of Albuqayj perfectly from which God shall be glorified. Amen.
