Oh, children, let this book be pleasing to you as it fulfills the science of medicine for your satisfaction, and through its explanations, and through its declarations, in my view, I find that this treatise has been compiled for you. This part is from the operation on myself, which is surgery.
For the operation on oneself is confined to our region and in our times entirely private, where its science faces great peril, and its traces have been left behind; it would not be possible without it except for some small descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which rectify many errors and misconceptions within these confines where interpretations are closed, thus extending the effort and skill required.
And it is seen by me that this treatise should be revived in the manner of exposition, declaration, and abbreviation; and to bring forth the forms of the tools like cauteries and other work equipment as part of the explanation, and for their preparation, which cause is necessary.
The cause for why a good artisan cannot be found to use their own hands in this our time is that the art of medicine is long and requires expertise before being exercised in the science of anatomy which Gualia knew about the young parts of the members and their shapes, and their connection and separation; one must have knowledge of bones, nerves, and ducts, their number, and their removal; as well as pulsating veins and quiet ones, and the locations for their exit.
And that is why Hippocrates said about his name is motion, but in the work small, and mostly in the art of hands.
And we have already said about this in the introduction to this book; whoever does not know what we have told you about anatomy will fall into error which can lead to the death of many people, as I have seen too many like them who are formed in this science and then move on to that other field of study.
For I saw a physician who was experienced and had performed an abscess operation on the neck of a woman, and he opened several neck arteries so that there would be a great bleeding, resulting in her dying among the many others.
And I saw another physician who was about to remove a stone from an old man, who had been suffering for his condition, and the stone was large. It successfully removed that stone using a piece of the bladder, resulting in the old man's death on the third day.
And I have already attempted to remove it, and I saw that due to the size of the stone and because of the position of the patient beneath him causing obstruction below, he would die.
And I saw another physician who was paid a fee by a duke from our land for surgery. He operated on a black slave who had suffered a fracture in his thigh; and with his lack of knowledge, he removed the fracture piece onto the wound, using pieces of wood and strong bands around it, not allowing air to enter the wound.
And then he would let it heal according to his desires, and he would dress the wound, and he would keep it clean for several days and instruct us to remove the stitches; and this is also within when the thigh and the leg abscesses, it will lead to disaster.
And I had him call me, and I prepared to remove the stitches, and thus achieved calmness and alleviation of his pains.
However, the corruption was confirmed in the limb, so I could not stop it, and it continued to spread the corruption within the limb as the patient's condition worsened.
And I saw another physician who punctured an abscess and became infected over several days, during which the severity of his illness increased in front of his lord.
This is because the young person's body is full of melancholic humors, so it does not spread throughout completely, but rather that one part of their body suffers from being exposed to everything.
And for this reason, children, it is necessary for you that the operation on oneself be divided into two desirous aspects: one is in operation towards health associated with it, and another in work where there are major risks.
And I have already established this throughout all parts of this book concerning the operation where errors and fears occur; so it is necessary for you to observe this and guard against that, so as not to confuse others or yourself.
And therefore take your tools for service and protection of God, and your patients for happiness and strength.
And use the best way by God's grace to seek salvation and acceptable succession, and leave your terrible diseases of difficult recovery, and guard against the tools that make you afraid, knowing that more remain for your glory, and further in this world and beyond to your sanctity.
Gualia had already spoken some wise teachings: "Don't treat bad diseases with bad doctors, for it's better not to have a name than to be treated by a bad doctor."
And I have already organized this book according to three chapters.
The division of the book begins, and the first part is the first one. The first chapter is ordered under 'in the feet', in the forms of tools and the instruments of cauteries, and what is necessary in an operation.
The division of the second part. The second chapter, concerning drying and piercing, as well as suction cups, plagues, the extraction of arrows, and similarity to those, all organized and detailed regarding the forms of the tools.
The third chapter, concerning restoration and relocation, as well as the treatment of torsion and similarity to those; an organized chapter about injuries within the limbs, and the forms of the tools.
Let me tell you about the quality of those affected by this cautery and its consequences, and in which stage it is prohibited to apply cautery.
So I say that the discussion about the quality of cauterization and its consequences is long-winded and detailed, subtle in science, and hidden in secrecy; many wise men have already spoken extensively on this topic, and they disagree with each other. As for me, it's enough to mention just a small part of their speeches, fearing lengthiness.
And thus I say that cauterization affects the entire body universally, which is made of matter or two kinds of matter, except for two conditions; these are the conditions of the tailbone.
In the tailbone and in the dry condition there is only matter; some argue that cauterization should be applied to such conditions, while others argue against it, stating that cauterization is not suitable for maladies of the body which are due to quality and dryness. Since fire has qualities and promotes dryness, applying heat can cause harm by drying out what needs to heal and leaving it dry instead of restoring its health.
And the one who disagrees with you says that in every tail malady which is dry and found in men's bodies, cauterization should be done to promote its healing. When you compare the body of man to the qualities of fire, you find that the body of man is cleansed by heat.
And I say according to the argument presented there, this experience was something I discovered a few times already.
However, it is not for me to delve into matters that have already been discussed in the chapter on cauterization through subsequent exercises, and I am familiar with the diversity of bodily conditions in men and the disposition of their ailments across various body parts, as well as the causes behind them, their accidents, and the timeline associated with these issues.
For other conditions, you need not fear; especially in wet and humid ailments, all doctors have agreed on these matters, and they are not in disagreement about the use of cauterization in such conditions.
And know, children, that the secret of healing through cauterization with fire and its beneficial nature lies in applying cauterizing medicine which burns. For fire is simple; its action reaches only the part being cauterized and does not affect other parts unless there's a small harm involved.
The action of burning medicine extends to those parts of the body it touches, and strongly promotes making difficult-to-heal injuries easier, as well as speeding up their healing process.
Fire, due to its purity and the excellence of its substance, does nothing else but remove excess. We have come to know this through experiments and from our years of service studying the art, understanding its true causes; hence I apologize for the length of my explanation. But were it not that this knowledge about fire is hidden in my manual and the quality of its operation within the body as well as its expulsion process where you expel diseases, which would be demonstrated philosophically, it would have been enlightening for your minds.
And know, children, that they disagree about the time when it's best to do cauterization and favor the best time of spring.
And I say that cauterization is suitable at any time, as the harm caused by the incidental accident gets submerged in the healing process of what results from cauterization, especially if it's for pain or necessary pains that are severe and painful ulcers, which do not tolerate delay as feared for those caused by malicious actions, which surpass minor harms occurring due to time.
And rest assured in your minds, children, or those who only value the common people and laymen doctors, it's true that not all ailments treated by cauterization are suitable at all times, and they follow this principle.
And the reason is not just because they are cautious about this, for cauterization is merely a form of medicine that alters body composition and dries out the humidity which causes pain.
However, excessive cauterizations over medicine due to the value of its effectiveness and the virtue of its operation, as well as the grandeur of its lordship.
It's possible that their ailment could return at some point in time, according to the composition of their body and the location of their illness, as well as its virtue, and what is prepared within their body from the addition of these excesses, as well as what is consumed by them through foods and similar causes; unless the ailment that receives cauterization is a subtle illness involving few excesses and humidity. Just like cauterization for tooth pain and similar cases, it's possible that this particular pain doesn't return within them anymore, but only when dealing with small matters.
The common language is that a cautery is the last tool of medicine, and this term is formal, not something I understand in it, as they believe it is neither a cure nor a cause related to medicine or any other reason for a cautery.
The cause is opposite to this; I understand that a cautery is the last tool of medicine, not only when administering the methods of treatment in certain illnesses. If those medicines do not work and at the end of the process they apply a cautery and then proceed with it. And here are the 16 points that a cautery is the last tool of medicine, not according to my understanding which includes common knowledge and many doctors.
And they would say that a cautery made of gold is better than one made of iron, and they didn't say this simply because of the equality of gold and its inferiority to the substance.
And they would say that the place for cautery does not smell bad, as this is not absolutely true; I have already done this and found out that it doesn't do this in certain types of bodies, and a cautery made with gold is good and better than iron too, as they said. But otherwise, when you make a cautery over fire using gold, it's not like you're declaring its use, because the heat depends on the quantity you want for the strength of the gold, and what needs to be received during combustion; and if you adjust over this flame, the gold is melted by the fire, and in some cases, layers are produced so that the artisan can work with it.
And because of this, when making a cautery out of iron, you should do so more lightly and more precisely in the direction of the operation.
And I have already organized this chapter on cautery according to chapters, and I have organized those of the head in the feet, because I am asking for what you want from them.
The first chapter.
This cautery treatment is attributed to humidity and coldness causing the unfortunate event of which there are two causes, they are due to excess of water and trauma from fluid movement, called gushes, from the head to the parts of the ears and the ear canals, and from sleeping, and toothache and tonsillitis, and universally for any illness that comes from coldness, such as paralytic illnesses, edema and apoplexy, and resembling those illnesses.
The method of this cautery treatment is as follows, which we initially command the patient to be under the application of a diuretic medicine on their head for three or four nights, according to what you require and the patient's age and their usual habits.
And then command him to shave his head with a razor, and make that servant stand between your servants on a lowered bench, and place his servants on his chest.
And then place the tip of your palm near the nose between his ears. However, when your indicated middle location has been reached, mark that place with desire, and then ignite the olive cautery of which this is the form:
And then place that over the marked desired location, in such a way that it descends, with your hand being gradually constrained, and you rotate that.
And then lift your hand slightly and look at the spot, and if you see any part of the brain being exposed to some extent, like the quantity of oil, then raise your hand. If it doesn't show anything, turn your hand towards that iron, or another one, if it's cold, in which I've told you to look for what I said.
And then take a little salt and dissolve that over the spot, and let it sit for three days.
And then place on his burnt cheek in bandages, and let it sit until the skin of the heat has been destroyed. And then treat the area with turpentine tetrabromide until it is healed.
And they used to say that when the wound in Roman times was opened, it smelled much better because it is better and more rejuvenating.
And they would say some of them that the canal is cauteryed in the skull, and that you should keep the cautery until a part of the specificity of the skull becomes hard.
And then make this mark which sticks to the skull, and then treat it.
And they would say others that when the cautery reaches the end, it begins to strengthen in the skull until the skull breaks away, and this is the form of small cautery: And from that place, they estimate the escape of the steam from the head.
And let the wound be open for a long time, and then let it heal until it is consolidated.
May I not see these two types of cautery throughout, but in some people according to fear; and let this be, I beg you, better with health when it happens; because the head is released by the solution of continuity of him thus as we have testified in other limbs, especially when the head of the patient is of fluid nature.
And the type of cautery first is more beneficial and better you should use it; from that one use that action for your health.
Second chapter.
On the head's cautery.
When chronic and prolonged head pain occurs in the patient's body, and if it uses weapons, armor, pillows, plasterings, gloves, coats, and cloths, especially if a cautery has already been used with a single cautery that doesn't intensify its weakness from those causes; then consider whether the patient's body is of strong constitution by nature; and not being overly exhausted by effort or work, in which case the head is cauterized using another type of cautery; he leaves the first one alone for a little while. And then cauterize that on the crown of his head with an internal cautery where the disease is divided. Incise the disease and expose the amount of which we have recounted; then cauterize that with a cautery in the rear part behind the head at the place which is called artery - and it is that place where suction is performed. And hold your hand in ash, and do not expose the bone, for the patient experiences intense pain of a different kind due to this method compared to all other head cauterizations.
And I prescribe this cautery in its place, for it is that cautery with which you cauterize the crowns of the head and the occiput is more delicate than that one with which you cauterize the middle area of the head; and this is how he does it.
Final chapter.
On the removal of old migraines.
When the pain is localized in the head region or persists within the skull, it should be relieved with medicinal treatments that alleviate symptoms, and then other therapies are administered; those are described elsewhere in my treatments for illnesses. If these do not relieve the pain adequately, then the treatment involves two methods: one with a sudden burning medicament, or with iron.
The type of cautery with a burning medicine involves taking half an apple, and piercing it, then cutting off the ends from both the halves. And then pierce the pain area on the temples with a thin needle where you make the wound, and then let the disease remain hidden inside.
And then apply strength over it stopped by descent constriction, and allow that to be free through the spaces of three hours; and wash the apple and let the wound remain for two or three days, and rest on your back submerged in water where the area feels warm.
And then treat that with ointment until it is healed.
And if you observe this, do so with some burning medicines which I have written about in my detailed treatise on burning medicines.
The cautery with iron follows this method: heat it until it reaches the form of fire:
It is called the lock pick, because it forms like a thorn in which there is some curvature; in its middle part of it is a small prominence.
And then place your hand over the painful area; restrain your hand - so as not to heat the metal which is left, - and rotate the small iron piece gradually at speed.
And if the quantity that gets heated due to the intensity of the disease is almost all of it, raise your hand so that the artery which is left isn't heated, so as not to cause bleeding.
And then soak your hand in salt water and place it over the area, and let that rest for three days; and then soak the hand in hot water, and treat with ointment until healed.
And if you see fit, perform the cautery at the end of the thorn instrument as per the method, and beware of causing an artery incision in this old migraine.
Final chapter.
On the treatment for old migraines through cautery.
When you treat migraines as we've described with previous cures and the divisions of illnesses, if those treatments are not enough due to the nature of the illness, then consider igniting the thorn-shaped cautery until it becomes white-hot. Then place your hand over the painful area along a long line which represents most of what was said about the first cautery with medicine or the fire-cautery; pause for a moment and apply strength under this while piercing the artery and going into the skull.
However, you must take care not to damage the jawbone, which is used for chewing, and ensure that the tongue isn't heated and the nerves associated with it aren't injured, and prevent any spasms from occurring.
And if it's concerning the fear of bleeding from the artery which is cut, there should be a certain caution and more so for those who don't know what they're doing and aren't experienced; leave the operation as planned.
And I will recall the regulation of bleeding in the event of an artery injury according to your method, at this place in the manual.
And if you observe this illness that isn't treated with this cautery and finds the body of the illness tolerable, perform the cautery in the middle part of the head as we recounted, and treat the wound until it is healed.
And if you see, apply the cautery we have mentioned for the tip of the artery where the cautery has two blades, and this is a better cautering and more suitable.
Head./
Regarding the treatment of earache injuries.
When in the ear there is pain due to friction and it is treated by lack-causing factors and another treatment which I mentioned in the division, and if the pain does not subside, then apply fire cautery, this is the one known as point, of which this is its form:
And place the point close to the fire, and let it touch around the entire ear like a wheel is turned, or in any circuit if the pain is in any part. Continue with the ear cautery little by little, until you have found the spot and tried it.
And if the cautery of these points throughout the ear, and remains there, then treat the areas within that are to be healed.
Chapter VI./
Regarding the treatment of tortures.
The torture that is cured and treated with cautery is simply of the species that come from phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of diseases.
Avoid cautery for the species that arise from drying out or muscle spasms of nerves.
When you treat that species of torture with stones, urine, and purgatives, and if your treatment doesn't work, then follow this for the part of the body where you apply cautery: first, treat the tip of the ear, secondly a little less than half its width, and thirdly, treat the junction of two lips.
And pause your cautery opposite the diseased part, where only a healing is sought in the part that appears healthy.
And the method of cautery is to apply it on the right side of the end of the ear a bit higher than the edge of the head, and in the temple area another, whose length should be according to the length of that part, then pause your hand with cautery until that quantity of the essence of the cord is burned.
And this is the method for cautery, it's the specialty of surgeons, its form being in front of the table. However, it's somewhat subtle that you should do this only a little bit; and observe when the blade is in place of excessive roughness, just a little.
And then treat the area where it's being processed until it heals.
Chapter VII./
Regarding the treatment of old apoplexy.
When apoplexy is old and treated with what we've said, but if your medicine doesn't work and the body has no fever, then apply cautery in four stages: over all parts of their head; on top of this, at the middle of their forehead, as we have said; and apply cautery to their chest. And the method for applying cautery is done according to what was previously described.
And once it's been applied over the mouth of the stomach; and more at the rear end; then treat with what you're using to proceed.
Chapter VIII./
Regarding the treatment of forgetfulness caused by phlegm.
Make sure you give the body large stones and pills for digestion at mealtime.
And then rub the entire head of the body and pause on their chest covered with the center as described in the plaster treatment manual.
And pause that for a few times, which is the method of applying cautery. And do this according to that order of methods I've already mentioned.
And so if that brings good health; otherwise, then apply three cauterizations to the very back part of their head, which should be descending from the more elevated part of the head towards the more lower part of the neck. And pause between each cautery for as long as that time, and then treat the area where it's being processed.
And if your tolerance increases and the body can bear it, then apply cautery in the middle area; and if you have more tolerance, then apply cautery over both parts.
And treat that until it heals; and let the olive oil be applied according to the method described previously.
Chapter IX./
Regarding the treatment of paralysis and soothing of the entire body.
Make sure you proceed with digestion of the head with stones and as we have said; then rub the head of the body, and apply cautery in the middle of the head, and apply cautery over all parts of their head, and apply cautery on the very back end of them, and apply three cauterizations to the spine of the neck.
And if it's necessary in the disease of soothing the body for many and if the body can tolerate it, and the disease is strong, then apply cautery over four cauterizations on both spines, and afterwards apply cautery until that part of their body burns completely, and raise your hand. And treat that until it heals; this is olive oil cautery.
Chapter X./
Regarding the treatment of epilepsy.
The treatment is not a cautery for the epileptic, but rather that type of epilepsy is caused by phlegm.
And therefore, modify the patient's diet at the beginning of their thirties and in another treatment which we have described in the division when the illness is large and can withstand the side effects of the medicines.
And if it's a child who doesn't tolerate the medicines, then administer mild remedies and chewers that modify the intestinal activity, for several days before, with the improvement of the foods.
And then shave the patient's head, and then apply a cautery at its middle on the head according to the previous method, and apply another cautery at the back of their head, and over each corner of their head she applies a cautery. And if the illness is strong and can withstand it, then apply those cauteries I mentioned, with a paralysis-like effect and body softening on the cervical vertebrae and the thoracic vertebrae.
And use an olive oil-based cautery as previously described.
If the illness is for a child, then apply a subtle cautery according to this method.
Chapter十一.
On the treatment of melancholy with cauteries.
When the causes of melancholy are wet humors and sluggish phlegm, then apply those cauteries we have mentioned in having a paralysis-like effect.
And if the cause of melancholy is excess declining to melancholy, and the patient's body is wet, then give them to drink what modifies the head as we have described in the previous section for modifying the head.
And then shave the patient's head, and then make a moderate tortoise shell on it over the circle, and then place that in the middle of the head.
And when the patient is sixty years old, they should be treated with every part of this treatment.
And then apply lotion; it's worthy to use an old sheepskin dressing. And heat that over the fire for a well-prepared warmth, which the patient feels increases with time. And apply that in the middle of the head on the circle, let the patient stay inside until it cools down.
And do this for the patient for one week in total, with the rest of their diet until they are healed; or if you want to, apply this makes small points according to his preference, rather than leaving your hand on a cautery like this: this is a type of cautery that moistens the head equally.
And apply that cooked pate in grease or in wool rags.
Chapter XII.
On the treatment of descending water with cauteries.
When you have been told the beginning of water in the womb through the signs that I mentioned in the division, then start and give the patient to drink what modifies their head, and protect it from all moisture.
And make them dissolve sugar in hot water for a few days.
And command them to shave their head, and apply a cautery on the middle of the head; and then apply two cauteries over two temples if it's the beginning of descent of water in two wombs, or on one side if it's the beginning of water in one womb.
Let the cauteries affect all veins and arteries which are left from the chain; and let the cauteries be in that length across the width of the temples.
And watch out for blood flows when they are being treated with cauteries; and if you notice the patient's blood flow, give them some medicine that is available to you.
And I will come with knowledge about what's in the extraction of arteries and about removing those, as well as caution against blood flows.
And sometimes it is treated by applying a few cauteries in the neck between two bones with two applied cauteries sequentially.
Chapter XIII.
On the treatment of old tears.
When tears from the wombs are old and seem to be due to humors present outside of the head region and it has been confirmed that this is an excess of phlegm causing the tears, then apply a cautery with the type of cautery we have described in the chapter on beginning water in the wombs, and apply a cautery in the middle of the head and two cauteries on either side of the temples, and apply two cauteries on each side of the neck. And if you experience excessiveness, then apply a cautery on the whole back of the womb over the tip of the eyebrow with small cauteries.
Chapter XIV.
On the treatment of nasal odor.
When you treat that with what we've said in the division and doesn't improve your treatment, then prepare and give to the patient garlic for three nights; and then shave the head of the patient, and apply a mid-size olive oil-based cautery. And then apply that with a thorn's oil-based cautery and two small cauterizations over the two eyebrows leaving some hair.
And watch out not to ignite that artery.
And this is the form of applying that thorn oil-based cautery.
Chapter XV.
Cautery for the softening of eyelid swellings in patients.
When the eyelid of the patient is swollen due to illness or moisture, then that eyelid is cauterized with a cautery; and this is how it is done:
And if you do the cauterization above both eyebrows with a small to two cauteries across entirely, and make them long on the temples. And let the length of each cautery correspond to the amount of eyebrow.
And do not press too hard with your hand on the cautery, but according to how much of the eyelid is heated.
Chapter XVI.
Cautery of the eyelid in patients when the skin turns into divisions inside and on the hand of the patient.
When the skin of the patient turns into divisions inside such that I touch the skin, two methods are used for the cautery: either as a physical cautery or with a medicinal burning agent.
If it is a physical cautery with fire, instruct the patient facing this so that they feel their skin as if those who cleanse them, until they are extended and equalized; and if you touch it, then when you place your hand on their birthplace, then you strengthen the skin of the patient with a bandage to prevent burning until the hair is born.
Once they are born and equalized, then place the head of the patient on your own side, and press about the eyelid of the patients with your hand, marking it in a symbol as if it were a holly leaf shape, and make the mark near the hair.
And then place butterfat or pus from hog or from pustule on the skin.
And then apply the heat of the cautery, such is its form.
And then gradually cauterize over the figure that was marked, little by little, in spots burned out, while burning the surface of the skin which is like a holly leaf, altogether visibly.
And a sign of health in the treatment is that you see the eyelid of the patient already contracted and the skin of it being raised above the point on the skin.
And then raise your hand and leave that for three days, and press it gently with the palm while the scab is being formed. And then cure it with ointment until it heals.
And if any cause returns through the skin near its birthplace and the eyelid becomes swollen, then do another treatment of cautery over that entire area as you did initially.
And if the skin is left on the eyelid, then cauterize that until it rises to its natural place and becomes equal, so that the skin does not hurt the face.
And the cauterization with a burning medicine is that you command the patient to feel their skin until it is extended and equalized, then have a piece of cloth made in the shape of a holly leaf.
And take some familiar soap and a live onion. .1., Take this preparation and mix those ingredients well, do so quickly to prevent cooling down; then spread it on the cloth made in such a way as if it were a holly leaf shape, place that over one or both of the eyelids; press with butterfat from hog or in its place, and keep the head of the patient facing your side.
And place that with the medicine on it and press slightly on it but do not burn the patient when they feel the pain of the medicine, which is like being burned for them.
And when they continue to feel this pain, then remove the medicine and take it off your designated spot; once the pain stops, then reapply the medicine with water on the eyelid; and then consider if the eyelid has already lifted as if it was cleaned by fire or incision, which is when you do that here; and if it does not return to that place under the medicine on the location where they did not apply the medicine and does not worsen until your operation is equalized and the eyelid is contracted again.
And then press it gently with the palm while waiting for the scab from adjustment to be eradicated, and cure that with definitive ointment or otherwise until it heals.
And it is necessary for you to maintain vigilance in your operation that the medicine does not spill over on the skin of the patient, and if the eyelid is somewhat days swollen and some cause from the hair touches the eyelid, then apply your medicine to that place which is swelled by the eyelid, and do so properly as initially instructed, and press gently around it until it heals.
And this is the shape of a holly leaf.
Know that men's eyelids are differentiated according to size and thinness, therefore according to this you do your contraction.
And let there be no concealment of the path of justice towards that which is studied in this art.
Chapter XVII.
Regarding cautery treatment for a fistula that occurs in the tear duct of the eye.
When you treat the fistula as we have discussed in the divisions of illness and do not provide your cure, then instruct that you cauterize it in this manner: command the patient to place their head facing your side, and have someone attendant's head between yours so they are neither burnt nor agitated by their own head.
And place a point on fat in butter or in flour on the skin of the patient.
And here is how the shape of this type of cautery should be made:
Which should be cylindrical, as the shape of a cane or a goose quill is, with one end where the cautery is made.
And if you see that it penetrates into the other end. And if you want it to be out like a thread.
However, for the purpose of work, that which is cylindrical is better in Gaul.
And if there is an opening, press it to allow the healing and dry out that area. And if it's not open, then make an incision there and remove the pus from him.
And place on him the hot cautery, have your hand in Gaul but a little of the cautery at the nostril opening, so that your hand doesn't move or disturb the patient, then pause the cautery in the gray area and destroy it.
And indeed, if at the beginning of your cautery it enters into the mouth, it's good; and otherwise, then reapply the cautery once or twice if necessary; and let that be for three days, then place a point on that area with oil around it so that dried ointment is between where it is to heal.
If it has been more than ten days and is not healed, then apply the sharp corrosive medicine inside where the bone is revealed and scrape according to what suits in its skull.
And there is another way to apply a cautery to a fistula which some initially described: locate the place of the fistula and make an incision there and press that point with a thin material in the form of it; put one unit of melted lead in that area; hold your hand firmly without causing pain to the patient so that the melted lead does not enter his nose; and when you apply it over the nasal passage, like a point on fat or water, when the lead covers the site of the fistula and heals it through miraculous healing.
And if the fistula is healed as we have described with this about cautery and healing, it's good; and otherwise, then it's necessary to administer a nostril scrape and reduce the fistula to the chest of the nose according to its proper location.
Capítulo XVIII.
Regarding the cautery for a cut on the foot.
Red spots may occur in cuts, especially on children's lips.
So when you treat those cuts as we have told you in the sections and do not deepen your treatment, then ignite the small cautery knife according to this form that we described:
And let its depth be according to the subtlety of the knife.
Then pause that initial incision in those cuts where the cautery reaches to the base of the cuts.
And after that, heal it with ointment until it is healed.
Capítulo XIX.
Regarding the cautery for a sinus in the mouth.
When there is pus in the uvula or on the palate or in the root of the teeth, causing swelling, when it breaks open and heals over time, forming a sinus, and if you treat that without going too deep into healing, then determine the amount of heat required for the cautery based on what is inside the sinus, place the heated tool at the opening of the sinus, have your hand so that the heated tip reaches to the base of it, and do this once or twice; then treat it as we have described with healing treatments until it heals.
And if the healing has been removed and it has healed, it's good; and otherwise, then it is necessary to discover the location and remove the diseased bone according to what suits in its chapter.
Capítulo XX.
Regarding the application of cautery to teeth and soothing of gums.
When the gums are softened by moisture and teeth are painful, treat those with medicines but do not apply them directly. Then hold the head of the patient in their usual position and place the heated cautery tool accordingly nearby. You should pause when you press against a tooth and immediately introduce the hot cautery tool into that area to prevent the heat from reaching the tooth's root.
And then lift your hand, and repeatedly apply the cautery for several times according to what you want.
And then have the patient drink water from a salt bowl and keep that there for an hour, and afterwards let it out. This way, hardened teeth are softened, inflamed gums are made less inflamed, and excessive moisture is dried up.
Chapter XXI.
About the application of a cautery to toothache.
When toothache is due to coldness or worms within, or if you don't find medication effective, then apply a cautery to it in two ways: either by applying a cattle's border (or possibly meaning the surface), or by directly placing the flame.
Applying the cautery to the surface means you take cow's tallow and heat it in a pot. Then prepare some wick and cover its end with this substance, dip that covered end into the heated tallow, and then hold that over the painful tooth as quickly as possible until it gets cooled down.
And then apply this process several times so that the heat of the flame reaches to the root of the tooth.
And if you see fit, immerse wool or cloth in the tallow above mentioned and place this over the painful tooth, holding it against a burning iron until the heat of the iron reaches to the tip of the tooth cavity.
However, when using a flame for cautery, you should wait until there's a small ember or at the heart of the iron, and make sure that the heat of the flame does not reach into the mouth of the patient.
And then light the cautery in such a way that its heat will come to resemble what you want, hold it over the tooth while keeping your hand there until the heat of the cautery cools down; and do this several times so that the pain is somewhat relieved either on the same day or the following day.
And as for the application of that cautery which fills the patient's mouth with good tallow and keeps it there for an hour, then swallow that; this is how to apply the cautery.
And apply the cautery to whatever end you see fit according to what's feasible for you.
And this is how it should be done with the cannula:
Chapter XXII.
About the application of a cautery to hernias.
When hernias are due to phlegm and cold fluids that don't respond to medicine, yet digestion is somewhat improved after this process, follow this method for applying the cautery: have it in two blunt ends so you can blow out the smoke from one end while holding the flame at the other. Hold the lit end over the hernia pocket once, or do it again if necessary until heat reaches to its tip.
And if the hernia pocket is small, then apply the cautery according to the size of the pocket. Then rest it for three days and cover it with a cloth immersed in tallow while letting what burned by the flame be relieved.
And then treat that with ointment, bandages, and cloths until it is healed.
Chapter XXIII.
About the application of a cautery to respiratory obstruction and tightness in the throat.
When moisture invades the channel of the lung, especially when this is due to body coldness, then ensure that the patient has an evacuation at meals with laxative medicines, and apply cautery by heating up the area behind the throat where it is compressed.
And be careful that you do not apply the cautery to the throat or burn from the patient's neck, just a little.
And apply the cautery at another point by heating up the junction of the neck with the lower part of the spine on the patient. The application of the cautery to his collar bone should be done in a similar manner.
And then treat that with what was described beforehand until it is healed.
Chapter XXIV.
About the application of a cautery to lung disease and coughing.
When cough and lung disease are due to moisture that does not cause fever or dyspnea, they are old, then apply the cautery in two places on the sternum where it is compressed by the neck and underarms; and at another place in the middle of the chest between the two nipples; and when applying the collarbone cautery do so as described previously.
And if you wish, make your application of the puncture to the cautery which is called punctation, as described in the section on puncturing ear pain.
And make points within the grooves at those places; and then treat that with whatever application was described beforehand until it heals.
And already make three points for that cautery; and when you do the application of the cautery, you can perform three cauterizations according to this manner:
Chapter XXV.
About the application of a cautery to the tip, which is the head of the penis.
When the tip of the penis is dislocated due to lubricating moisture and is not returning in its usual time, you should reduce the dislocation before it returns back to its normal place, as what we've witnessed. Then have the patient lie on his side or on his stomach; lift the neck which is at the opening inside the tip from your left hand's fingers when the connection is dislocated internally.
And it is necessary to have two heads for the cautery; this is how it works:
And it should be heated inside the channel so that it goes into the other side; and here comes the image of the cautery treatment, using two heated points.
And some treatments are adjusted according to this count and for what purposes are the cauteries .VIII.
And it is necessary to place on the cautery with salt pans, and it should be made for the patient to lie in repose, and the body should not get worse until it is relieved of discomfort.
And if the dislocation is above and in the thigh, it should be treated this way: apply a cautery over the muscle with a rod or needle cauteries points, where the joint is confirmed and moisture is reduced, thus healing the patient.
Chapter XXVI.
On the treatment of the stomach with a cautery.
When cold and moisture are inside the stomach that comes from his body and multiplies within him, if you continue with the methods of treatment without curing it, then it seems that the patient is under the impression of regaining his strength, extending his limbs and his things, and applying a cautery to this in three applications: an one point for the quantity equal to an application's worth of a needle cautery on his foot, and with two points from both sides of the cautery, until you get the figure of a triangular cautery; and extend among those that are not adjusted they will do reduction.
And if the depth of the cautery is equal to the two-thirds of the thickness of the canal's wall.
And make the shape of the cautery according to this form as an addition. If you wish, apply a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form; this is a cautery according to the circular shape according to this form:
And treat the stomach with points to which that is scared by this cautery: and you should apply points on the stomach according to the quantity that you desire for the ailment, and then apply this method of treatment using a cautery at these points; and take care of this with the treatment leading to healing.
Chapter XXVII.
On treating the kidney stones with a cautery.
When there is pain in the kidney due to coldness or moisture or excessive wind that gets from his normal body due to unnecessary discharge, if the patient heals as we have said and does not recover, then it seems that the patient regains strength on their back, and you apply three cauterizations according to this form at this quantity over the kidney under the hips, while lying in the position of a man.
And let the space between each cautery according to the thickness of the digit, and make the cauterizations according to the length of the human body.
And don't hesitate about yourself when it comes to applying the cauterization heat.
And if the amount of water that has been applied is equal to the height of the thickness of the canal's wall; and do not make it too tight; and if the patient is standing on their feet; and if they are not standing, then they should lie down, which already extends their limbs, and raise their arms.
And it's possible for you to apply these cauterizations with an incision cautery when you have subtlety and caution in the art.
And make sure you don't overdo the cauterization process, and ensure that the thickness of the entire canal is heated so that it can reach throughout the body, as this canal here is delicate; be aware of this.
Chapter XXVIII.
On piercing kidney abscess with a cautery.
When there is inflammation or abscess in the kidney and you want to know if that abscess is within the kidney tissue or on its covering, then if it's within the kidney tissue, the patient experiences increased gravity and pain intensification.
And if it's on the kidney covering, the pain is intense and often times the doctors have tired of treating him.
And it seems that the patient should lie on their back; and then indicate the location of the abscess with points; and then heat the cautery which resembles a rag, as its shape was explained in the other page. And apply this and that cautery until all the canal is heated, until it reaches the stomach, until you achieve health.
And then treat that with treatment for other abscesses until he heals.
And don't use this form of cautery treatment other than the one that the study in the art of medicine extends, and about which many maladies are known; however, some treatments have been tried on this operation, but still follow this method, it's better.
Chapter XXIX.
On treating lumps with a cautery.
The ancient methods of applying cauteries to lumps were done according to this manner, and here's what you should use from the parts of aristocracy; take a long, dried part of aristocracy that is found, which has the thickness of a digit.
And then immerse that in oil and place the fire on it, and apply a cautery at that location which is between the continuation of the scapula and the neck; and with two cauteries, leave them burning where they are behind the neck. And make another application at the point that declines between the fifth rib and the spine, declining one toward the area behind; and make another application at the site that declines between the second and third ribs, declining one further towards the back; and make another application in the middle of the chest; and also on the stomach, and make three applications at those points behind; and make another application where is located that point which is between the two shoulders, and make two applications on each side of the back.
And don't withdraw your hand from the application of the cautery, rather let it be in the operation's progress as seen by the patient.
And it is said by some ancient ones that such men who use a kind of iron cautery resembling a ray and fire, place that in the location which is between the ribs, where we reach into that from this to that blister, healing it healthily as we have mentioned about the blister of scabies.
Fear not for this puncture with the cautery, rather what often happens when you burn it in the location of the fistula where healing does not occur.
End of chapter xxx.
On the cautery treatment for boils.
When you treat the disease of boils as we have instructed for treatment in section and do not apply your own remedy, then when applying cautery to it, there are three methods, all of which are according to custom. Among these, one is to make three or four lines with the cauterization in a row along the length of the boil, as shown by the figures of scabies' cauterizations, which I have already described.
And between every cautery, there should be about the thickness of a finger or perhaps less, and the method of applying the cautery is in the same way as we have described for the cautery of scabies.
And do not remove your hand from the application of the cautery; and let the patient lie on their back with their hands above them.
And there is another way of applying cautery, in that you ignite the cautery with two streams, which we have described in the chapter on dislocation of muscles, and raise the body where it is perpendicular to the boil, so that when the patient lies down on their left side, they do not feel any discomfort.
And let your elevation be such that when you raise the body according to the length of the torso, so that cautery is done according to the width of the body.
And then insert both streams inside, ignite the fire in that place where the body of the other side penetrates.
And then extract the cautery; and therefore it is done with four cauteries.
And if you see fit, apply cautery using three streams.
And then you treat the cautery if it has let blood for too many days, as better is to consider these other previous causes in treatment.
End of chapter xxxi.
On the cautery treatment for dropsy.
Cauterization should not be done on the entire body but only in a specific place.
When you treat dropsy as we have described in the section and do not apply your own treatment, then immerse that you cautery it with four applications around the navel area and one application on the stomach, another on the scabies, another on the boil, two around the two sides, and one application to the right side of the back, and another application on the stomach. And the depth of the cautery should be roughly proportional to the thickness of the body.
And then let the application of the cautery spread freely, so that blood flows for a long time.
And do not remove the patient from treatment immediately after the cautery as it might cause two misunderstandings and needs assistance for recovery.
The shape of the cautery where it is applied to the belly should be curved as per the shape of that which was previously used, and that for which it is applied to the back is similar to an olive according to its previous form.
End of chapter xxxii.
On the cautery treatment for the legs and thighs.
When the legs are swollen with water and filled with salty fluid, you should apply cautery to the back of the legs up to the point between the auricle and annular bones. Raise your hand over the application without twisting it; then raise your hand further, do not remove it entirely as the salty water will dissipate.
The application of cautery is as follows: Then apply two applications on each thigh, and for every part, make the cut near the tip of the cutting tool's application. And let the applications of the cautery be according to the length of the thigh: hold one at the bottom and the other in the middle of each thigh; and on each thigh, two applications.
And let the open wound receive long treatment for as much time as some water may remain from it.
And then treat those causes that we have described.
End of chapter xxxiii.
On the cautery treatment for abdominal areas.
When the belly is due to friction and by humidity inside which distends the organs, it is the digestive and retaining functions, which are in the stomach and in the intestines, that cause this. It is treated with various curative methods without surgery, and sometimes the patient experiences a demonstration of the function's extraction, then apply a large cauterization on their stomach according to what preceded in the stomach's cauterization, applying the cauterization to the circle and four cauterizations around the subtle umbilical circuit, performing a subtle clavilh cauterization; and apply a cauterization over the anus for a long time or perform two cauterizations.
And if you encounter excessively wet conditions and the patient can tolerate it, then apply a cauterization on the navel and to the intestines, and reinforce by adjusting two cauterizations on the stomach and close to the groin areas. This is a complete cure for young ailments of which you would not err.
Chapter XXXIV.
On the cauterization of old hemorrhoids.
When it is of a nature to cause old hemorrhoids or one with large humors or corrupt moisture, and they are treated as we have said in the division without undergoing your treatment method, then apply three cauterizations on the pus left behind by the two small and small triangular spots. Then perform a cauterization over the navel depression for two times.
And if you find that the stomach of your patient is chilled and their food is not digested, and their face is swollen, then apply a large cauterization on the stomach according to what has preceded; and perform one cauterization on the back, and another on the chest with a cauterization for the navel. Leave the cauterizations open for some time until the opening is healed, and treat your patient until they are cured.
Chapter XXXV.
On the cauterization of the artery near the surgical incision.
When you remove the artery, then you ignite the cauterizing tool that is assembled like a probe. Insert that ignition into the cut artery, and finish your hand's movement so that the cauterization reaches to the opening of the vein from which the flow comes.
And do this one or two times; if there are too many, then cauterize each according to what we have recounted, and treat those with the ointment you give them until they are healed.
And if you apply a large cauterization to any part, it will heal more efficiently in youth.
Chapter XXXVI.
On the cauterization of fistulas that occur naturally in parts of a person's body.
If nature does not comply with the work we have recommended in its place and the patient is frightened by this, then they should be treated with cauterization.
So when some has a fistula in nature that occurs naturally, and it is old, sick with sputum and corrupted moisture, then what deserves to be removed from this should be cut open with a subtle tool. And you should know the depth of this area according to the previously mentioned tool.
And ignite the cauterizing instrument that resembles a probe. And place that ignited cauterizing tool into this fistula, and according to the depth in which it enters the probe.
And apply this cauterization over that until those diseased bodies are burned out, once or twice, three times, depending on the amount of your need.
And be careful not to burn nerves or veins; if the fistula goes towards the bladder or towards the intestinal cavity, then you must avoid all those areas. And do this only when the fistula is in a meaty area and you consider that it is not penetrating.
And treat that area until it is healed.
And if the area is sealed, and all substances have been removed from it, but it still remains long, then you should know that it has been completely healed.
And if the substances are not from your body, then you should know that it is penetrating or within a part of your body's corruption, or comes from those causes which will bring memory in its place.
Chapter XXXVII.
On the cauterization of ulcers.
When in ulcers there is pain due to friction or by a large amount of air, and the patient's buttocks have become hardened, then it should be cut open and you should cauterize each ulcer with a cauterization over each ulcer and apply subtle cauterizations for recalling that memory.
And reinforce each cauterization with a small amount of the substance left behind, so that three linear cauterizations come about, and thus they will heal more efficiently in youth.
Chapter XXXVIII.
On the cauterization of the bladder.
When the bladder becomes distended and loses its elasticity due to friction and moisture such that the patient does not retain urine, then apply a cauterization at the place where there is pus left behind on the bladder, which is similar to the skin of the navel, and cauterize with one cauterization on the right side, and another on the left side.
And let the length of each cauterization be according to the amount of pus; and apply a cauterization on the lowest part of both sides, or two cauterizations if necessary.
And when a knifewound needs a searing as it proceeds.
Chapter xxxix.
On the searing of the scrotum.
When there is blood and moisture in the scrotum, and because of this, intercourse is prohibited, and his menstrual cycles become corrupted, and their triggering is delayed, and pain occurs during urination, then you should apply three searings around the area of the navel, as we have said about searing the bladder; and also make a searing on that spot at least two inches above or below from his penis, or make two searings, and do not forget to use knife incisions.
Chapter xli.
On the searing of the dislocation of the anus.
When moisture causes them to infiltrate the part of the anus, and they produce disturbances in his body's condition, a sign is that his thigh gets extended over the other when compared between them. And the location of the dislocation occurs in the patient's buttocks.
Then you should sear the patient's buttocks over the exit part of his anus with searing like a circle, and when you have made a cut around that area as it has been described, and for him to lie on his side so that the exit part falls into the middle of the circle.
And make the searings similar to what was described for the stomach's searing process.
And if this searing is not before you, then make three searings on it with large olive wood searings.
And make the searing according to the amount of hardness throughout the entire chain; and treat that area until it heals.
Chapter xlii.
On the searing of the sciatic vein.
When pain occurs at the exit part of urine, and it's caused by his friction and moisture, the buttocks are cured with what we have said earlier without mixing, and after that, you should loosen the buttocks from large fluids using blistered pills or artificial pills or something similar; then proceed to sear that area.
And the method of searing in that place is according to two methods: or sear with burning medicines, or sear with fire.
There are two known methods, of which one is to sear that area on the width of the buttock with three triangular searings according to this form; and make those searings good depth. And between each searing, the size of the hardness as described should be there; and use the olive or large searings.
Make some wounds on the middle area over the end of the anus, for there should be four searings.
And if you want, sear with the circle described in the searing of the dislocation of the anus, that which contains and burns the hardness throughout the entire chain.
And this is the method of searing in case of pain that is attached to urine and does not extend within the thigh.
And if it does extend within the thigh, then sear that area with two searings over the thigh on the location where you will find the buttocks which is the pain; and make one searing in a square of four dits toward slightly towards the inner side.
And if it's with a surgical knife, then the depth of the searing should be according to the hardness of the entire chain.
And if the buttocks encircles where the pain is extended within the thigh area, then sear that place here, wherever you encircle, with a searing through three points or four or more if it's necessary for that.
And if the buttocks encircles such pain being below the knee joint, then sear that area here with a surgical knife searing.
And in all searing procedures, make sure not to end the searing until you burn nerves or large artery, and because of this, you should be careful not to improperly heal or constrict the buttocks.
And I have seen several of those who sear on the hollow space and complete in the searing process, and the fire-filled bed under which the tumor has achieved the foot, and the fire-pierced and corrupted whole foot. And it often causes strong stomach fluid, and through this, death occurs.
And if the pain is in two parts at once, sear each one according to this method.
And some wise ones say about searing of urine, this is the method: make it resemble a circular iron with its circuit being half a palm; and according to its aperture as wide as one finger or slightly less.
And inside that circle place another tool; and make the space between them as long as one finger; and those circles should be opened on two parts; and let the length of those cuts be one finger or two fingers, and make those marks properly on the circles; and this is its shape:
And it should be ignited in the fire until it heats up and produces sparks, and then place it on the exit part of urine, with the buttocks pressed against the side. And sear that area with three round-shaped searings in one occasion.
And for three days, gently lay the affected area; and cover it with plaster and allow the opened wound to heal for many days; and treat it with ointment until it is healed.
Diys Albucasis: oh child, for this type of cautery we have used it in regard to the treatment of these conditions, and for this reason we found those that watch over them.
The reasons behind the use of cautery on the sick who suffer from it, and finds that place on him.
The principle of cautery in medical practice is that you make two concentric circles with an incision hole in which the key of the lock is placed; its length should be as long as two walnuts or chestnuts along the circumference when applied to a human body.
And if the space between each is of the quantity of the thickness of the mentioned thing; open these on either side and above them, so that they contain themselves among each according to this form:
And if you place your hand on the water part of the patient lying above it, and press your hand on the water part; then take some boiled water and put it between the two circles, so that its quality is with a small fire, and keep that for an hour, - let the sick person chew and adjust themselves - until the chewing starts like from fire - when the chewing stops.
And raise your hand to the tool and remove all the boiled water from the water area.
And gently lay the affected area for three days and place it over the plaster where the color of adjustment is intensified, and continue this treatment for several days, let the wound drain; this lasts until old age.
And once healed, treat it with ointment.
And if the pain is extended inside the thigh or leg, place him in a position where he contains water as it is done with water equally.
And this is the method of boiled water, and I have already written about it in the treatise on the correction of medicines. Recipe of alkali and of the ashes not extinguished from both parts one, thrice use them in a new wave where the part on the left is pierced by a small tool, according to the amount that fits into your hand.
And on the bottom of the wave place another wave in the opposite direction, and pour over that alkali and live ashes with a thin layer of boiling water which fits into your hand, and once you have grasped those under your hand for good compression, let the hot steam from that sharp water reach the part left on the opposite wave.
And adjust all that water, pour it over another live ash and another new alkali, when those will then have a strong heat effect, which is administered in various medical operations and in the cautery of other members, this operation involves fire.
And there are some medicines among which the area is treated by cautery, such as bleeding and melting with fat in a pan that should be mixed.
And Gualia describes the operation and treatment of an ancient method used to treat water pain and sciatic vein pain, praising its effectiveness, stating that it doesn't require any other treatment, and that it heals in one go as instructed, allowing him to bathe and be comfortable with that knowledge.
And if it is near to a vertebra in the spine, and if no vertebra is found, take a recent fig; then carefully mix it with a little ash and place it on the water where there is pain or in the thigh, or leg, and bind it.
And leave it for a duration of three hours or until the patient feels relief from discomfort.
And after that bathe him in water, and when his body turns red, immerse him in the sun, until the pain subsides and he is healed.
And know that only one should use cautery with these medicines instead, it's about the body's evacuation.
And Escorides already said that when there is an injury to the vein, it's cauterized; and you should proceed with the person gently. And this is how you do the cautery: take wool and heat it in old oil, then place it between his feet and between his knees.
And after taking a dry goat's wound, place it in the fire until charcoal is formed; and then place him on top of wool until he feels stretched. And repeat this process, and don't stop doing this until the sensation of chewing reaches the water and rests the pain.
And this method of cautery is called cattle cautery.
Chapter 42.
On the subject of treatment by cautery for a second degree burn.
Some burns cause pain in the second degree due to various causes, such as impact or percussion or excessive evacuation, and by causes similar to those, through infusion of damp material.
And apply cautery only in this single type which is made through the effusion of damp material.
So, proceed with the evacuation of the patient using fitted pills and resembling them, which are made on top of the second degree burn up to three lines according to the width of it, because try out in each line one or more cauteries depending on how well-tolerated by the patient and the virtue of it.
And a point cautery treatment is done with a pointed cautery.
And if you wish, do a three-point or four-point cautery on the medial tibial spine following this manner:
Capitol 43.
From cautery to the beginning of lithiasis treatment.
Causes of this disease in young children; and the signs indicating its beginning in them are that it affects their bones, causing deformity and increasing height and mobility.
And there are abnormalities in the lower vertebral column of the back and on their shoulders that begin to rise above other vertebrae.
And when you do this and wish to prevent it, then cauterize that with a point according to this manner: let the cautery touch all parts of the vertebral column equally.
And if you wish, cauterize on the vertebral circuit with a point cautery two lines or three. And let the points be placed between them.
And then cure the area where it is healed with what we have said.
May ensure that cautery is not administered in lithiasis caused by nerve spasm.
Capitol 44.
Regarding the treatment of gout and joint pain through cautery.
When joint pain is caused by cold fluids that infiltrate every part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it's customarily called gout by doctors.
And how is gout caused by friction treated with the method of cure and without leaving behind any pains, it then uses cautery.
And you cauterize there near the evacuation in the joint's circuit on the foot with multiple points of cautery.
And an olive-shaped cautery, such as this is its form:
And if it's necessary to make points on the foot's surface, then you do a point cautery. And if the pains ascend within the knees or to other joints, and this is what doctors observe, then you should cauterize that over each knee with three or four points in total around this olive-shaped cautery.
And if the cauterys you apply are necessary for your needs, then you should cauterize that and not press too hard with your hand before, only around the size of the vein.
And if the pains go into both knees, then administer the cautery which we have described in its chapter.
And if the pains are only in one, it is called gout, then puncture along the circuits of the veins as they flow, puncture on those two lines.
And if the pains remain in the fingers, then puncture along the circuits of the veins on every bone and over the knuckle of the hand.
And if the pains remain for days near the ribs or in the muscles, then cauterize all parts of the aids.
And do not let the patient's health and medicine intake go wrong, for if good treatment is given and fever is relieved by this cautery, it will lead to healing, may God help us.
Capitol 45.
Regarding the treatment of wounds with cautery.
When there is a rupture in the lungs and discussing hernias before the surgeon, and this is how they begin from here, then advise that the patient leave his food for the day and use gentle means so that the opening of his abdomen would decrease.
And have the patient follow between your hands on his back, and command that he holds his chest where there should be a hole or the hernia appears.
And then return that to your fingers and feel the rupture on the bones of the elbow with the sign being similar to half of a circle in the lower parts of the body.
And then heat up the cautery like this:
Let it be moist and emit sparks. And then return the hernia or the bulge to its original size, and place your hand over the area to prevent the hernia from protruding.
You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs and placed cushions under them, one for their legs, another on their chest, holding their hands.
And then place the cautery on that sign with your hand over the point of cautery, and feel inside where you can touch the bones of the elbow in the middle of the body; repeat this process on another area if you have not succeeded in the first attempt to reach the bone.
And observe wisely the condition of the hernia during your cautery procedure, ensuring that you do not remove the hernia from the patient such that death or other serious harm befalls the person.
And know that when you have the cautery but do not touch the bones, your operation does not come to fruition.
And be aware that for children, the cautery should be fine according to their size and measure.
And then treat the affected area with balm for three days until the scab of the wound falls off.
And then treat that with other ointments until it is healed.
And the patient should lie on their back for ten days until the wound is sealed and the injury healed.
And make sure to adjust the nourishment for the patient according to the duration of their healing process, which stretches out over the belly, and ensure that the intestine does not protrude from the effort of healing.
And when it is almost time to remove it after about ten days, properly apply balm, and keep that area for another ten days.
And if it is reduced by work and food intake, as well as drinking and the use of strong drinks, so that when using this complete regimen for healing, it will be healed entirely.
And I will explain the healing of ruptures in other parts of the belly, at meals, and you must not let it heal on its own. Instead, cauterize that rupture with a pointed cautery according to the patient's quantity, so that as much as is expelled from the body should be treated like another part of it; and treat that which we have discussed accordingly, do not adjust it.
And already say some first that rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery according to this form, because it is done with effort:
and a line is made across the width at more than half of the rupture, and another line above it; and place your hand on a triangular cautery, where the first cautery is softer and better.
Chapter XLVI.
On cauterization of torsion.
When persistent pain occurs in certain limbs due to impact or percussion and the pain persists for a long time without responding to medicines, then make sure to cauterize with a pointed cautery.
And adjust the cauterization for each member according to its size and thickness, its effectiveness and development, as well as the location of the twist and pain.
So if it is healed by the first cautery, that's good; and otherwise, then iterate on this member with cauterization; for usually when such pains occur, they puncture parts of the body corresponding to that part closest to the patient, so make sure to use these types of cauterization until the patient is healed.
Chapter LVII.
On cauterization for leprosy.
Some ulcers on the skin are treated with cauterization due to strong youth, and more so if it is a type of leprosy caused by the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
And when you want to cauterize that, consider whether the leprosy is spreading and if it has healed according to what we said in the division of treatment and did not worsen or remain unchanged. If you are worried about the corruption spreading throughout the patient's body and his entire appearance, then cauterize that on top of the head using this method: one near the center of the head, and the second a little further down from there, place the forehead at the end of the hairline; and both over two horns; and one behind, on the back or neck.
And with your hand using this cautery for a little while, let her begin to make an impression in the mouth, and if she has been shifted, so that her expiration of thick vapors is relieved, then cauterize on the pus according to what is needed.
And if leprosy has already spread across the patient's body and is manifestly present, then make sure to cauterize that using these types of cauterizations as we have said for the head; apply cauterization on the end of the nose, and two cauterizations on each cheekbone, and two cauterizations on each collar bone, and five cauterizations on the backbones, and a large one on the lower back, and one on the waistline, and two on the shoulders, and one on each shoulder blade, and two on each hip bone and one on each hip bone, and two on each knee, and two on each muscle; cauterize that over all joints of those mentioned as well as the feet, and over each heel of his feet, and over all his scars.
And be careful not to damage the nerves that are on the base when you do this.
And some ulcers are cauterized with a single cautery on the sinus bone and another in the stomach mouth, and another on the gallbladder.
And know that the more finely you adjust the cauterizations, the more quickly and effectively they heal; and know that the patient does not feel pain in the cautery, like with their ears, because their body is already numbed.
And make sure that the cauterizations are large or small according to the limbs and joints as described by the types of tools.
And afterwards, treat the cauterization with corn flour mixed with honey and the other treatments until it heals.
Chapter LVIII.
On cauterization for numbness.
When a limb is paralyzed or numb and has been treated with medicines and bandages but does not heal, then you should cauterize the paralyzed limb using cauterizations according to whether it merits the size of the limb or its smallness.
And let your cautery enter a little into the thickening of the flesh. And afterwards treat it with ointment until it heals.
And some ulcers are treated by cauterizing a numbness which affects the feet and backbones and the muscles of the body, and enhances the numbness.
Do not judge this matter without one who is knowledgeable about the anatomy of the limbs and the exit of nerves throughout the moving body.
Chapter 49.
On the treatment of warts that are caused by a fever.
When warts are old and do not respond to any of the remedies in medicine, then you cauterize over that with a cautery for as long as there is a noticeable change in the whiteness and color within the wart until the color of the skin changes.
And then treat that with flour from beeswax and lentils cooked in oil and with leaves of arnagrosa, or with a decoction of doves or apricots, each taken separately and all mixed together. And cover a linen cloth with this mixture and place it over the affected area until complete healing occurs.
Chapter 50.
On the treatment of warts.
When warts begin to appear and you want them to stop, then cauterize that with a round circle of the cautery in the course of its movement around it.
And it is said by the wise that you should cauterize with the tip of the cautery in the middle place; however, I do not see this, fearing that it might be an ulceration, and I have already seen some cases like this.
And the pus is treated by cauterizing in a circular motion around it as we have said, or with a solid cautery.
Chapter 51.
On the treatment of ulcers.
When some ulcers are delayed in maturation, and this is due to excess or because of the patient's old age and decay, having few wounds, or due to time, and you want to hasten the maturation of ulcers; then cauterize with a solid cautery circling around it; and then let that which would speed up its maturation take effect.
If you want the perforation of it with a cautery, then heat the form of the cautery like this: and place that in the middle part of the ulcer until the needle penetrates.
And if the cautery is left in that place where the pus was, because it brings relief to the arm's circulation; and then treat that until it heals.
Chapter 52.
On the treatment of corroding (which could refer to a condition or medical issue causing corrosion, possibly related to skin irritation or damage).
Corrosion is the spreading decay in the member, which decays that as wood would burn when fed with dry fuel.
So if you see that corrosion in the place which suffers from it, then heat solid cauteries as needles and large ones according to what is suitable for that place where it corrodes.
And then cauterize the entire area until you eliminate all the corrosion and do not damage any part of it.
And then let that area rest for three days, and place over the cauterized spots a paste of oil mixed until all the scabs have been eliminated and all the corrosion has been eradicated.
And then treat it with meat healing ointments.
If after approximately three days the healthy flesh grows in the place where there was corrosion, that is good; but if not, then repeat the cauterization over what is decayed in those corrupted areas.
Corrosion is treated with some doses of acute medicine, which is half in the place of cautery. However, the cautery with fire is for a small amount of pus that has just begun to appear.
And I have already mentioned the treatment with acute medicine in the division, and therefore take that when you feel it necessary for it.
Chapter 53.
On the treatment of warts and other similar conditions.
Visible marks on the parts you have of malaise that are called warts, it's a big cause, it enters and affects the skin; and in those, cauterization is done according to two methods, one with fire and the other with boiled water.
Cauterization with fire is to ignite the cautery like a small coal of wood, which must be made of iron according to the quantity that contains the wart in its entirety, and it should have thin edges.
And then place the burning on the wart, and then rotate your hand with the cautery around the circumference of the wart until the cautery penetrates to the depth of the wart. And let that rest for three days until you start to feel relief in your arm. And then cover that with salted mussels mixed with salt, and let the bandage stay on that for a night, as it will be eliminated from its roots.
And then treat the area with meat healing ointment until it heals.
And if it does not convert, and visible marks occur on the surface of the body, especially on the breasts and feet, then you should perform cauterization with water in those places. And take a small tube or iron, or a small coal of wood, place that over the wart; and pour into the tube a little amount of boiling water, move your hand, and turn it around with the pressure of your hand on all sides, pressing the edge of the tube against the root of the wart, allowing the hot water to flow through the root of the cauterization. And wait for the patient an hour while they taste the hot water, then remove that, as the wart will be eradicated from its roots.
And thus perform those tasks, and bring another close to you from among all those that are within them in their bodies.
And treat those abscesses, for the pustules from the boils have been removed by this means of application where the flesh generates.
Chapter 53.
On the topic of the treatment with a cautery for tremors.
When treating a tremor due to injury of the nerves or fever caused by friction, or due to any other similar cause, then you should apply the cautery at four points or on each rib; and place one cautery on each rib; and another on their feet, and above their stomach, use an olive oil cautery.
And the tremor of the patient subsides, and quickens the healing process of the illness.
Chapter 54.
On the treatment with a cautery for chest accidents.
When there are pustules and channels in the body, which are formed of thick corrupted substances; then from the beginning when they appear, you should apply the cautery to every head of the fistula with a fine-pointed rod, the tip of which is extended towards the fire; or with long zizyphus twigs; or with a lentil-shaped cautery.
And some ulcers should be cauterized at the beginning of their expulsion according to this manner; they are not hard, and they are broken down by removing the excess, healing those.
However, you should have this performed near the drainage with phlebotomy.
Chapter 56.
On the treatment with a cautery for bleeding of chest injuries due to incisions in the ribs.
When there are ulcers that bleed from a chest injury that should be drained, or from pus bags or the cautery of a body part, then you should do this similarly and it is difficult to keep this from happening.
Then when something like this happens, you should touch with your hand to the opening of the rib, and place your hand over that part where you direct this, and stop any bleeding from ulcers within it, and do not let it continue.
And place over the fire the olive cauteries both small and large, in number many, and blow on those where there is a spark.
And then take one small or large according to the location and injury in which an artery has been broken, over that vein blow with diligence as soon as you have stopped your hand here, and apply the cautery where it will be cut off and restricted that bleeding.
And if the blood is expelled from the artery opening when you have stopped your hand and removed the cautery, then take another cautery touching it to the ones that are prepared in fire, and thus do not cease performing this one after another until the bleeding has been restricted.
And make sure that you do not burn the nerves here, and bring about some other mischief to the patient with this.
And know that when blood flows from the artery, it is not possible to restrict this in those, much more so when the artery is large, unless through four methods: or you use a cautery as we have said here; or if extraction cannot be done, which when it can be done leaves its ends burned and thus restrains the bleeding; or it is treated with a stick or with cords of strong tension; or it is laid upon medicines whose virtue is to restrict the blood; and it is strengthened by powder in compression.
Let him who administers gentle restriction to the patient use cords or through positioning of burning causes and similar circumstances, do not impose anything but a moderate heat.
If it must be done and the doctor is not present nor medicine available, then open like we have said about stopping in this way over the opening of that vein as we've mentioned, and understand to apply a great compression within which the bleeding will be restricted from the greater part of the injury, and above the rib do not let it be stopped; and above the rib sprinkle with water rubbed with a large coldness until the blood is cooled and thickened; and consider for what needs cautery or medicine is necessary.
On cutting, puncturing, and incisions; on phlebotomy and injuries; and their various appearances.
We have already discussed in the first chapter about all illness where cautery with fire is convenient and with medicine that causes combustion, and their opportunities and causes, and the instruments necessary for those cases; and I have arranged the chapters on internal operations into the limbs.
And I proceed in this chapter according to that manner, so that the one who desires this may be relieved, on what has been requested.
And before I start this, note that in this chapter we deal with what was in the first chapter on cautery.
And for this reason you should be careful, that in the operation which is in this chapter there are ulcers for evacuation from blood where life must be drenched with the application of veins or cuts on pus bags or on the appearance of discharge or purification of injuries or removal of arrows or cuts on hair and their various appearances. And for all of those, fear and trembling accompany, and in the breast of their animals death lies.
And I warn you that do not let this happen to you in which the station is, for some times you must use methods of men against the antics of diseases. And among them is one who will die from their disease and you should regard death for him, also because of the intensity of what he finds in his disease, and because of the length of his illness, and in his disease there is fear which means death.
And among those is the one who gives you his opinion and said it, you hope for that health, and their disease is harmful.
And so do not consent to that which you see from him in this manner; and your caution should be greater than greediness and your appetite; and do not presume any cause upon this but rather to the certain science that verifies what you must do, and to which success is achievable.
And use in the treatment of all your ailments with prediction and indication to which healing is converted, for in that it provides you assistance on acquiring fame and memory, praise and glory.
Oh, children, God inspires your mind with His understanding, and does not withhold from you direction and protection, for that is in His hands.
And I have arranged this chapter distinguishing by chapters according to the chapter on cautery, on treating the head for the feet, so that you may be comforted with what you ask of this and of which you need.
First chapter.
On the treatment of water that is contained in the head of children.
Know that this disease, which is common in children, requires treatment and when the child grows up, their head becomes heavy.
And some occur due to hidden causes which are not known.
I have only seen this disease in children; and for all those I have seen, it leads to death, and thus is the witness of destruction shown in them.
And I have seen that a child whose head was full of water, his head would always remain so magnificently, unable to bear the weight of his own head due to the size of his head, and more than increasing humidity leading to death.
And this moisture is either added between the membrane and the bone, or it is added from outside onto the skull.
And when the operation is necessary because the moisture is between the membrane and the bone, and the pus is little, then you should make an incision in the middle location of the head along a crack in the width, with the length of the crack containing two notches where the moisture flows, this being the form of suppuration:
And thus if the moisture is much increased and the pus is larger, then here are these two cracks according to this manner:
And if the moisture is outside of the bone, the sign of it is that you open all the head's seams from every direction and when you press that inside your hand to each parts inwardly, water will be squeezed out, not this which you have hidden. And when you cut open in the middle of the head with three cracks according to this manner:
And proceed to extract all the moisture; and strengthen these cracks with bandages and pillows; and on the fifth day apply wine and oil, then release the threads and treat the wound with swabs and ointments, and strengthen the head equally; and eat the disease with dry food of little moisture until the member is comforted and healed.
And it is another method of incision that you should consider based on the size of the pus and collection of water; some diseases are more in the back of the head, or at the front, or on the right side, or on the left. Thus pay attention to where the pus appears and how full with water it is, and perform this according to what best suits you.
And observe that do not cut the artery and allow streams of blood to flow, let the disease pass through this stream of blood with evacuation of moisture.
Third chapter.
When there are catarrh or swelling in the nose or throat, if it is prolonged and doesn't benefit from medicine treatment, then the preferred treatment here is the incision of these two arteries.
And when you want to incise where the disease causes pain in his head, first cover the area with coarse cloth so that the arteries appear, and then strengthen the neck of the disease with some cloth; and consider where the vein is; and on every other location above those near the ears, they might be hidden, but not in all men.
And then burn on the artery with an attempt, and penetrate each part of the body from the point of incision into the opening, and thus according to the size of the head.
And if you wish, insert the needle near your artery and thread it through to the points of incision on its surface.
And let the length of the incision be about two inches adjusted, so that when any vein is cut during surgery, a pulse is felt at its exit; it then beats quickly from beat to beat.
May it be so if the artery does not appear at the waist; then consider that you measure from the elbow the quantity of space for three inches, and burn on the attempt, and enter into the body.
And what is measured with the pulse is the amount of blood flow. And let the flow be as much or less than your own pulse, and all of this is according to the amount that appears from the virtue of the thigh and the filling of the artery of the patient.
And then consider the wound; therefore, if there remains on the bone any cause of pus, then cut this out so as not to develop a carbuncle.
And then strengthen the wound with bandages and with strips of linen cloth, and then treat that with oil until it heals.
Chapter III.
On the extraction of arteries located in the temples.
When an old headache or severe throbbing occurs due to moisture and quality in the veins of the temples, or old headaches that resemble those, if you treat them according to the methods of treatment in medicine, then we have been dealing with these illnesses: extraction of arteries in the temples, or cauterization of those as well as we have shown.
And the method of operation and extraction of those is that when the patient raises their skin which is on the temples; and understand the artery apparent in the temple area where it is shown by its pulse, and is hidden even in few people due to the forcefulness of rubbing.
And if it is hidden, then let the head of the patient be strengthened with some cloth; and then rub the area with a rough cloth or evaporate the area with hot water until you see the artery clearly manifestly. And then take the needle of which this is the form: And then you puncture the string with that in such a way that it reaches the artery; and then let blood out into your hand and extract that at the peripheral areas until you remove that from the string and discover those of the tunics which are beneath that, from all areas.
Let it be so if the artery is thin; then wrap that around the tip of a needle, and then cut from that one part according to the length by which its tips stretch and are compressed, and do not allow blood flow; for if they are not cut, the pulse will rise everywhere.
And let it be so that you drain of an amount of blood. Into three parts.
And if the artery is large, then consider that you divide it into two places with a double strength of thread or with cords long, and do not let it decompose in front of the healing of the wound and allow blood flow.
And then cut out the excess which is between two threads; do this either in that moment or another time.
And if you wish, cauterize that with a cautery inside the body with a knife until its tips are incised, and remain in place for this half-done work.
And it is better work if the patient has fever or is of shivering constitution; for cautery is caused by those factors that help in finishing moisture, so it is better in youth.
And consider the extraction of arteries that you place on the elbow's edge traditionally, they should be placed over your dry powder rubbed properly, and then let it be treated with dry medicines make flesh grow and within compression until it heals.
And if while you are working another wound blood from the artery escapes, then you should restrain that blood flow either with a cautery or filling it with your elbow, and keep your hand in order to restrain the blood. And if none of those causes is present to you at that time, then place your hand on the area while blood cools down, and soak the area with water from intense cold until its heat subsides, and strengthen it according to what is needed.
And the small amount of pus during artery extraction is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery having two needles, because you have punctured both areas with a point, and suspend which ever one, by fire, until it reaches the body and divides the vein into two places, so that what is between its tips does not get completely heated up by this cautery.
And this is the form of the cautery:
And let the heat of both needles be simultaneous. However, if the heat of them is more than two needles, then it's better, because if they are sharp like two needles close to each other, and they do not cut flesh at speed.
Therefore, in those there is some thickness, the heat of the fire in those and the flesh is cut slightly.
This work is better than all works even slightly.
And let the space which is between two thighs be equal to the size of the pregnancy of that person.
Capitalize quarter.
Of the treatment of diseases involving tears and acidic fumes in the lungs.
When there are acidic tears, and it's the disease of those veins which are on the forehead from above, and you don't find any cause for the cure of medicine in this, and sometimes the face of the patient already turns red and feels walking on their forehead as if it were a crawling movement of ants. The lungs emit exhausted fumes, are moistened by this, so that their skin is affected by it, and their eyelids are scratched due to the sharpness of the tears, these old ants become involved in the treatment of such diseases with this operation, and many people think highly of this cure as passing on.
And it is that you command the patient to scrape off the skins which are on their forehead, and then you proceed to make three equal distances cuts across the forehead according to its length. And if the length of the cut falls into two fingers: one cut is equally distant from the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second according to the length of a small finger's movement which are on the tear ducts, and the third from the other side.
And guard yourself against the beginning of the arteries which are in two sides, and extend your hand from the continuation of both jaws. And if the space at each starting point is the size of three fingers adjusted together.
And when you have a sponge or a drained cloth, apply them moistly over the areas where the smell emanates.
And insert the tip of two sharp points, this is the shape of the incision for it: which begins from the middle and goes to the second cut. Surgically remove all the string that's between two cuts near the eye which is above the bone, and make this cut move towards the second cut. And insert this point in the second incision with another tool which is called a knife, sharp on one side and not sharp on the other.
Place the sharp side of that sharp tool on the attached flesh and remove the string, and insert the other end inside where it's behind the bone, and insert this inside so it reaches the second cut, and sever all the veins that descend from the head to the lungs.
Continue the incision to this appearance of the string, and do this in the middle cut between the other cut.
And when there's an equal amount of smell coming out, squeeze the areas under the collected smell bags.
And stop at each old cut corner, and pause over those dusts collected in vinegar and oil and vinegar mixed together, and ensure that there's no formation of pus.
And on the third day dissolve the stitches and administer a large amount of water or sweat, and then treat this with balm in oil and others inside so that the wounds are healed.
Cap. V.
Of the treatment of tears caused by catarrh and the lungs descending from the partitions inside the head.
When you have inflammation in one vein and continue it, and sometimes the lungs of the patient are exhausted with coughing, and their examination is deteriorated, and their eyelids are ulcerated and from them their skin, and at the back of the head there's acute pain and consequent exhaustion, then understand through these incidents that the materials and catarrh do not come from any veins originating inside the partitions.
And the best cure for these is this: command the patient to raise their forehead, and proceed to make a cut in that area on the middle of the forehead, small according to its width (and start from the left temple cut towards the right; and the incision goes inside the bone; extend your hand according to the length of the temple where there's swelling due to chewing), so that the bone is exposed.
Dry all the smell with a sponge or on dry cloth, and then fill between the two edges of the cut with old cotton or on cloth pieces. And then strengthen it from above with dusts collected in vinegar and oil to ensure that no pus forms.
And when you remove that and several times that the pus has diminished, then take it for granted that you rub the bone starting from their navel flesh, and then treat this with a drying regimen which makes the flesh resemble a navel, so as if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of wax and mix them, and make plaster from them and administer it on these wounds similar to native flesh.
Cap. VI.
Of the treatment for what infects the ears.
All causes that infect the ears are of four kinds, some or it's gravelly mineral matter causing something like gravel, such as iron and salt, or it's plant-caused similar to peas, such as clover or fava beans, or it's fluid-like causing things like water and vinegar together, or it could be a beast.
And when gravel infects the ear or another similar cause among those causes that don't settle in the ear, suspend the ear to the sun. And if you find the gravel, then distill some oil of vinegar or garlic into this and proceed with removing it, make them sneeze so they can experience sneezing sensations, and hold their noses until they experience sneezing. And then pause near the lymph node circuit with some pieces of cloth or wool, and extend the lymph node to its parts, where the heated points are applied against these causes.
And if you are not heated, then administer the extraction with the tool called the epididymal surgical instrument under which this is its form:
And if it is heated with the gesture, well done; and otherwise, then administer the extraction with a slender instrument of few-folded wood.
And if it is not heated by this, then make a reed catheter and insert the tip of the catheter into the lymph node and seal around the catheter with wax and with soft, soothing oil, so that it does not open except for the catheter. And then extract from your leg vein with strong suction, where many heated things match what we have described.
If it is not heated in this manner, then take camphor or vinegar and on which are affixed needles that are just a pinch amount, pause that near the tip of your arm, and then wrap it properly around that for use. And then insert that into the lymph node with ease, and then remove the lymph node of moisture.
And if it is not heated by all the causes that we have recounted, then you should cut off that which faces such that it develops into an abscess or spasm.
And the method of cutting that is as follows: you begin by placing your hand on the back of the patient's vein and extract according to the gesture of its virtue, then make a cut between your hands and convert the lymph node to its various locations. Then create a small incision in the root of the lymph node place the grease of the patient under the area that was pressed by him. And let the incision be of lunar shape within which it reaches the skin, and if the skin is torn, hold that if possible with appropriate instruments; and around the incision in that moment at a quick pace, and cure that while it becomes healed.
And if the cause affecting the lymph node is one of the fats that grows and inflates it, then administer the treatment and extraction; but if you do not follow your advice, then take a thin spatula according to this shape: And apply with that the excision of that fat which is inside the lymph node.
And don't apply it when you think that it has already been moistened by the steam of the lymph node, and place that in heated spots, and then extract from those on your elbows or with a subtle surgical gesture, or according to the method we have described, where the extraction becomes easier.
And in the water that enters the lymph node cavity, let him use sneezing with coldness at the beginning, and fill his lymph node with a piece of old cloth, and place this water over the lymph node where the water is, and if it heats up like this, well done; and otherwise, then take small thin stones and balls according to the length of this, heat them slightly in fire, let him hold one of these near his arm's lymph node, lay it on a piece of that part and hit it with another stone over the stone which is inside the lymph node. So continue with the stones while all the water becomes heated.
So continue with the stones while all the water becomes heated. And once the water starts to heat up completely, take paper or a drumstick instead,. And place one end of it inside the lymph node and extend the other end into fire until its top is burnt.
And then place another drumstick and do this many times until all the water is heated, and cut it with a catheter as described previously to remove excess moisture.
And in the extraction of the beast entering that lymph node, if it is a small one, similarly bigger and resembling it, treat it as we have said in the division; but if it is a large one causing pain within the abdomen, then administer its extraction with gestures and instruments, and the cause of it is easier than all other causes that affect the lymph node.
And in the extraction of worms produced in the lymph node, when you treat it with the water that we have said in the division and within the distillation treatment, do not confirm your treatment, then cover that so you observe the lymph node under the sun.
And if any worm-causing appears here, then extract that with gestures or with slender instruments. But if no cause appears at all, then take a catheter and stretched out above wide of which this is the shape: And insert the subtle tip into the lymph node according to how much can withstand the back of his hand; and then suck vigorously through suction, and do this many times, until all the worms are heated.
And if you do not follow it with your advice, then fill and seal around the catheter with wax as we have described; then administer distillations which have already heated up in the treatment of worms, and find this within the distillation treatment.
And let your discharge be when you pour the medicinal oils into the lymph node with this tool whose shape is as follows: And make it out of silver or reed, keep it straight, in which there is a small hole, and place something on top.
And therefore let them be so that they are in the cavity of the canal of the abdomen where it is necessary here. And if you wish, take the rod and wrap it around the terminal part of their descent, and then pour oil into the cavity of the kidney, or juice from any herb, or whatever you want from these medicines in the canal - that one is in the ear - , and place the rod on the stick above and press with your hand until the oil is expelled in the cavity of the kidney and the sick person feels the oil inside.
And what is enclosed in the ear should already be cut with fire a little bit. And remember that the cause which you will distill in the ear should not be too hot, because the medicines of the ear do not tolerate this.
Chapter VII.
On the treatment of operations on the ears.
Some children suffer from small holes in their parents' abdomens that are not perforated. Sometimes this happens to some adults as well; surgery is performed on the edge of the ear by an infection or nothing within it; sometimes such operations are made at the entrance of the tube of the ear which does not allow contact with water, and sometimes they are outside the parts.
And that which happens at its entrance is difficult to treat due to its major dispositions.
And in that case where you can touch it, know that you place the ear of the sick person on the sun and observe it there. And if you notice a visible swelling, open that with a delicate blade of which this is the form:
If the end of it where the width is small, for which one part is sharp and the other is not; and the blade should have two long sides so that it does not damage the ear.
And if the operation is due to a cut or wound in the ear or within its meat, then use that with sharp blades and pierce deeply inside so that all the flesh is exposed.
And if the operation is at the entrance of the ear, then take a delicate iron and slightly heat it in fire for a while, and then place that into the meat of the ear.
And if you have felt a swelling with what the sick person feels with ease, due to the loss of hearing, relieve the pressure on it with ease; and remember not to harm the nerves of the ear.
And place in the ear a bandage according to the amount of the tube which you have wrapped with Egyptian ointment; do this for several days until you are sure of the healing of the wound; or take any and press that into hot water, pulverize it over it while it's still fresh and use it; and if the ear is already healed, then know that you should replace that with another which you wrap in a cerat bandage made from fried oil, so that the pustule heals inside; and care for that until it is healed.
If pus should occur, then immerse the sponge or cloth in hot water and place it over the ear, and use another treatment that stops the flow of pus, which is mentioned in the treatise on distillation.
Chapter VIII.
On the treatment of Athelizil which affects the eyelids.
Athelizil that affects the eyelids of the men; sometimes they are wet, and other times they are dry.
Then know that you should use them with a thimble or an onion, and divide those with a blade from their roots, and then place it on the areas while they are still fresh.
If there is pain with pus flow, then you should apply a cautery to those with a small lacunar cautery.
And the best cautery is to get close to the cuts and when there are recurrent cases return only if there remains some cause of their roots; and when they are treated with fire, those roots are burned and do not recur.
Chapter IX.
Treatment for a large condition that occurs on the eyelids of men.
Recurrent cases occur in the eyelids of men; there is a cause that accumulates into largeness due to its strength and hardness, and because of this large size it is named.
And the accumulation of thick moisture in the eyelid leaves and above.
So the operation in them is that you consider this if the largeness proceeds within it from under the eyelid and is felt on all sides; and the cause of it is slight.
Then cut it across its width, and then extract it from all sides with ease until it evaporates, and then hang that by onion and discard that.
And if the size is large, then you adjust it with stitches; and care for that until it is healed.
And if it is little, it will not cause harm with that which the healing of it restores that and colors it.
And if the greatest pain is diminishing inside the eyelid you must focus on the inside surface, then lift the eyelid and suspend the biggest pain by using one hand, another which you start with from beginning, press it from every part, and if the eyelid is stretched at the beginning, this should not be a cause for concern.
And at the start, wash the wound with salty water; and treat the area with water where it swells up until it heals.
Capital X.
From the treatment, remove in the eyelid above the wound.
Axcirnath is the gray substance that is produced in the tunics of the eyelid above, and especially affects children, it intensifies the irritation of those and causes them to have frequent catarrhs; and they cannot look at the brightness of sunlight because their tears run into those.
And you should repeatedly speak to those several times on their foreheads all the time, and on their forehead faces while sleeping; and on their eyelids of their eyes they have wet eyebrows, which are already covered with inflammation and a hint of reddening in the eye; and that whenever you press your fingers on that spot, you feel roughness inside those.
And in that certain way of surgery is done when the patient pauses their head on your shoulder, then pause a piece of linen and you make cuts with the knife, then draw a circle according to the quantity which contains pus from all parts, then pause that one on top of the other and press all around so that roughness can be added in the middle of the circle, then in the middle of that wetness make a cut parallel to the length, and the cut should not be larger than the cut made in leech suction.
Only in the preparatory stage may you cut through to the sinew entirely until it reaches the pus, where after the white fatty processes will proceed through the cut according to the shape of whiteness.
So, extract those with cloths that you enveloped between your hands on the protruding parts, and move them back and forth with your right and left hand until they are dispersed.
And make sure not to stick in the cut for fear that the opening does not reach the wound and you don't allow pus to enter.
Only if no pus appears at the beginning of the cut, then you should adjust inside the cut with a small tube so that pus can flow; and do this too as we have said. And further, soak linen in water, vinegar, and salt, then pause them on the area and strengthen those with powder.
And do this by sprinkling salt and placing them in the cavity of the cut, for that which is removed from that wetness.
And further treat it until it heals.
Only if an abscess forms in the area, then treat that with plaster bandages until it heals.
Capital XI.
Regarding methods of examining the wound.
When on the eyelids of patients, if these are naturally covered by their own natural skin and are old scars, then these cause problems with the eye leading to various issues such as frequent tears, swelling of the eyelids, and irritation in the area that is causing damage to the eye leading to a condition called ulceration of the eye, and treatment can be done in four ways: or through cauterization using fire; or through acute medicine as stated before in the chapter on cauterization; or through surgery by incision and suturing; or through tubes as I will say.
So cover the area where you place the edge of the ulcer on your shoulder; then turn the eyelid of the eye onto your left hand, and if it is turned, it's good; otherwise, stick a needle in that spot where pus from the eyelid part is present, and let the needle penetrate through that point, and this should be - near the edge of the eyelid where the skin naturally comes together - close to the skin, pull out the thread above on the eyelid, and turn it over to expose.
Then make an incision inside the eyelid so that the skin is adjusted to wet threads of the major lacrimal ducts into the lacrimal sac; then extract this thread and place a little powder of camphor or linen on the eyelid, then apply it to the eye like a leaf of myrtle.
However cover it according to the shape based on the amount of deflation in the eyelid, which has already varied among humans, which are those who allow an ample incision from the eyelid based on the extent by which the eyelid is softened.
And further make cuts with the thread on the two lines you marked, starting from the major lacrimal duct into the minor lacrimal duct. And if your cut is close to natural skin as thick as that of a king.
And further put the needle in one of the two corners of the cord, then scrape that completely, and adjust with the cut both lips towards the mouth or the tip of a thin thread, clean it, and if you want to have some causes for this, adhere what is superfluous from the threads on both eyebrows, otherwise do not treat.
And further let the thread cut by the needle heal inside for three or four days, and then treat it.
And if you want, let the wound be sutured, and treat it with that which dries and tightens, for when the eyelid is raised you should seal the wound and add to it; more suturing is better. And so say this to your colleagues of surgery.
Moreover, in such cases concerning the patient, it is a good operation and not out of fear for the patient.
And it is another method in diagnosis, and that the eyelid figure appears like a mint leaf, and then lift the eyelid by three fingers separating and gathering according to this shape:
And if it's not possible this way, hold the fingers, and if this isn't equalized, then take a needle with thread, insert that in the middle of the figure, and place the other filament near the larger lacrimal duct, and the filament second near the smaller lacrimal duct, adjust between your thumbs the filaments to be equal, and raise your hand with the elevation equal, lift the entire chain over which it is held thus as we have described.
And adjust the two wound lips with suture, and cure that inside that becomes healed.
And if gangrene occurs, you should start with your incision or cut, but treat that gangrenous area with wadding and make it resemble, and with unguents.
And some ulcers under the eyelid that their hairs be converted, then know to use on that what we have said about incision; more suturing in certain cases is more artificial.
Surgery for canals is according to this manner: And it is that you convert the eyelid and divide the figure that's inside according to what I recounted; then with skill make two canals or two subtle threads of which length is according to the length of the eyelid, and their width is more like the width of the nose. And you have already incised at the extremities of each section, where you have the threads.
And add each under what is superfluous of the eyelid in the patient, and tighten the threads of each section with firm constriction, and leave that for a few days; when the chain due to constriction dies and withdraws, it will fall out by itself.
And if it's delayed, then break the chain at the corners, and then cure the wound until it heals.
Therefore, when it's solidified, the eyelid is raised and the hairs don't stick.
And this is how you make two threads as described thus: And have the quantity of length and width neither too much nor too little.
Title: XII
Regarding the lifting of irritating hairs in the nose with a needle when the hair is hard.
When the hairs are unnatural, hard and sharp, in the nose then the operation for it is that you take a subtle needle and place at its sharp end a small piece of copper wire, then adjust the ends of it skillfully and pinch each one in a subtle manner. And let the length of the needles be about the size of a palm.
And then you prepare another subtle needle close to it quickly, and use the ends of that if you want.
And then place the nose's tip on your own spot, and be close to the sun so that your work may be made evident, for it is a subtle and small operation.
And then insert the needle into the seam of the adjusted hair which needs a tool, and let that penetrate the eyelid smoothly while you remove it from above the natural hair.
And then pull the hair into place and insert that in the seam, and have the hairs one or two or three but not more.
And then pull your hand into that place where the hair is pulled out from the seam in the eyelid with the natural hair.
And if it's pulled out from the seam and the hair isn't detached, pull it out from the seam in each section with the needle you have prepared for that, within which there should be pulled out from the seam of the thread.
And remove that from the patient's view, then you will pull out the thread and loosen all of it, and leave it for two or three days, so that the hair adheres to its place and grows over that good flesh.
And if the hair is shorter than natural, then adjust one of the longer hairs from your own, and lift it up to that, or leave it so that it grows approximately some space, then later you will lift that.
Title: XIII
Regarding the treatment of eyebrow lifting which occurs above the eyelid.
When it appears in the nose eyebrow lifting, which is when the eyelid contracts against itself or in one of its sections, to the right or left part, due to bad healing of wounds or cuts or cautery burns, and it's called leporine, this lifting can be either intentional or accidental, occurring due to the healing process of wounds or cuts or cauterizations, or through imitation of their malfunctions.
The method of the operation for it is that you cut through this consolidation and separate its lips, then place at it in what's between those a piece of lint cloth, and tie those together until they heal.
And do not use the patient's cure from the causes that dry up, constriction; for if you do this, it will worsen his illness more than it would have without your intervention.
Use in those remedies that soften like fennel for example. Infuse it in water to which the herbs are added, or with butter, which when mixed with some of the oils, you immerse the affected area in that, and cure with that.
And the treasure of your cure is that you puncture all cavities that are not consolidated according to their form at the beginning.
And this operation which we call, is simply a correction of an obstruction that does not return the form of the area according to what happens ahead.
Chapter XIIIV.
Regarding the cure of obstructions that occur in the eyelid, leave them alone.
This obstruction that occurs in the eyelid, leave it alone, which is called spontaneous obstruction; and it can be either natural or accidental.
Accidental obstructions are caused by injury, cuts, cauterization, or other similar conditions.
And the procedure for this operation is: take a needle with two holes and place it in the flesh, making sure to pass it from the left lacrimal into the right one, so that the thread reaches both ends of the flesh.
And then expand the flesh at the junctions above where the needle is, and pull the needle through it, making incisions on both sides of the needle. And if the shape of the eyelid returns as desired when he recovers, it is good; and if not, take a thread and place it in the cut, then transform the eyelid using this method, making both cuts at the edge of the eyelid alone.
And let the ends of the two cuts be at the intersection of the diagonal incision you made between them, and make an angle among them so that when they meet, it forms their figure.
And this figure is the Greek letter Lambda.
And then remove the flesh that corresponds to the size of the tip left of it, so that you keep the eyelid.
And then adjust the separated parts, sewing them with the thread of wool; and then cure them according to what we have said about remedies that soften and baths within which they are healed.
And if the obstruction is due to a cut, suture or cauterization, then you should make an incision on the flat surface of the eyelid according to what has been done beforehand. And then separate with the heat between two layers as we have said.
In the entire discourse on the treatment of obstructions that occur above or below, it should flow in your operation according to how it is prepared in the form of obstruction, and this form is in the shape of different parts.
And the skilled artisans always prepare cavities in every way possible that can fit within them to allow for the return of the shape to its natural form or close to it, and this patient according to what suits him regarding the operation and tools in their most suitable arrangements.
Chapter XV.
Regarding the adherence of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
When this consolidation occurs in many people, it seems that the eyelid is more solid above the white of the eye, and prohibits ease of movement and its natural actions. Therefore, you should insert the end of the thread left on the eyelid, lift it up or expand it with your finger.
And then you make an incision into the adhesion with a fine incision, which is not at the sharpness of the cuts, having made it bluntly small so that the patient does not worry about the operation and retain the incision without removing its sharpness from the eye's edge.
And let your incision gently remove that adhesion with ease, so that the eyelid returns to its natural form and all the adhesion is healed.
And then you put in the eye salty water with which you rinse it; or distil from juniper dissolved in water.
And then separate between the eyelid and the eye with heat, place wool infused in the white of eggs on the eye, and use remedies that promote consolidation for healing.
Chapter XVI.
Regarding incisions of eyelashes and the prominence of flesh of the tear ducts.
You should know that an eyelash can be in two ways, whether it is nervous and resembles a hard thin ciphac; or it is non-nervous, resembling white damp condensed, which when touched, or makes you take with your finger, is removed and the finger is not left on it.
And both these species only start from the major tear duct and gradually extend to cover vision, preventing light and eye movements.
The way to act in the incision is that the patient rests his head in its usual place and opens his eyes. Then lift the eyelid with your hand, and then pinch the eyelash with a small duplicate finger and expand it at the junctions above. And then take a needle and insert a horse's hair or a cow's hair or a goat's hair or something strong or duplicate the end of the needle gradually making it fit in the middle of the eyelash, penetrate that with the needle and hold onto it with your finger; expand this at the junctions above, scrape off from the hair the area around the eyelash which sharpens the pupil. And thus follow that within the thigh of the patient.
And thus you incise the remaining into the root of the tear duct at a fine cut or with small hooks, and exposes the tissue of the natural tear duct in such a way that it prevents continuous flow of tears during the operation.
And some of the veins extend from the sun's rays or from the heel, as we have said, and thus they are excised with a surgical blade, this is their form:
And remember that when working on the blade, do not touch the corneal membrane and ensure it does not rupture, and that the pupil is not pierced.
Near the incision point, you add a pinch or dab of salt or honey which soothes the area and leaves it to heal within another day; and then you take care of that where something is covered so that it heals.
And if the needle does not go through the nerve and you cannot insert it in that part of the sun, then using this type of needle, it is treated with medicine, and it heals as I have recommended and advised in this section.
And if you want to divide that, then open the cleft of the thigh and take a sharp surgical blade according to this form: in subtlety. And if you notice that it has thinned and mixed and entered into that duct, then pour from your mouth onto the cleft of honey made with vinegar or with raw honey or with ground salt, and let the cleft rest until the other day.
And then perform the operation again until everything that belongs to it is removed, otherwise if pus appears in the cleft, then you leave it, and treat from the beginning the pus until it heals.
And again perform your operation on that with reason until it is healed.
The pain of the tear duct flesh, if you notice by severe damage in the cleft, suspend it until the sun; and incise that part of that, and do not finish the incision so as not to incise continuous flow of tears.
And then pour onto the tear duct honey made with vinegar and let it heal.
Chapter XVII.
On incision of the thigh and on what is born from well-adjusted flesh in the cleft.
Some marks on the clefts of some people's flesh are born and overlie so they cover the pupil, or come close or strengthen near the eyelids and harden the eyelids to the parts in front and it is assembled to touch the edge of the eyebrow.
If the operation is that the thigh places its head in the place of the sun; and then open the clefts of that and collect all that flesh with suitable cuts for water, and do this with a pair of forceps or scissors; and then divide the flesh from the beginning until everything is finished with the scalpel, and be careful not to let go of any of what you should perform your operation.
And let your incision be on which you will divide those or with the blade which we have recommended in the incision of that needle, or with small hooks on which you collect asps according to how their form approaches this chapter.
And when your incision is complete and all that flesh has been removed, then fill the cleft with salted water, or pour in a powdered vinegar-like substance resembling the powder of corrosive medicines, and place on the back of the cleft with an egg white into which pus can be poured until it is assured to have pus.
And if there are any causes related to thigh and is pierced by needle, and you fear pus in the wound, then leave the cleft and treat that pus with water that softens that pus, and again perform this operation until it heals, and similarly do on flesh that happens in the cleft of this type.
However, make sure you remove all healing of the cleft naturally or by accident, act through iron, and do not put your hand into any of these operations until you see that that member suffers this operation.
Chapter XVIII.
On collecting the flesh in the cleft.
Sanguineous veins are those which are stubborn on the cleft and prohibit it from performing its operation, and develop the cleft longitudinally for days.
It is necessary at the beginning that you consider if the cleft in which there is sanguineousness is strong and in it is not another ailment but only sanguineousness, then you collect that sanguineousness.
And it is that you command the thigh to place its head in the sun's place, and then suspend those veins over an arm or two according to your judgement; and let that arm have a fine duplication according to this form:
or even have two arms gradually in one body according to this form:
And then collect those veins with fine forceps, with subtlety, and remove the pus bit by bit, until you see that veins are removed from the cleft and have been turned.
And be careful not to let the cleft touch the ends of the blade; and if your operation is in the middle morning facing the sun, and concentrate on your operation so that you cut only those veins.
When you have completed, then you let the cold sweat or vomit out in order to reduce its intensity and wash away what has been expelled from the sword.
If it is not possible to gather everything in that hour, then you apply a plaster over the area causing your pain, and leave the patient for several days until their pain subsides and the abscess heals.
And later, treat the patient according to the healer's method until they are healed.
And this is how a scythe should be:
Chapter 19.
Regarding the reduction of nasal obstruction.
When you treat arisati with a cautery or with hot acute medicine following the narrative of their condition and if they are not cured, then it is not in them but where you should make incisions over the abscess, wait for its maturity so that you can extract all the moisture which is within them. After uncovering the nostrils.
And therefore, when the nose is uncovered and there is corruption or blackness in their body, then you should treat them with a purgative such as this:
And this is named rough bark, and it is made of iron indigo, and the cap should be red just like an iron which is made pierced by a saw cut or finely ground (just like in the following form).
Place that over the corrupted part of the nose, and then rotate it with your fingers, gently pressing your hand little by little until you know that that corruption is scraped off.
And this should be done with several applications, and then restore the area from causes of drying and coagulating.
So if the area is consolidated and it's in their good body flesh and it has removed the wound from the healing and rested for 40 days, and it's not renewed or healed and doesn't happen any accident to them, then you will know that they are cured.
And if not, then it's not in their body but to reduce the crack to the shape of the nose, and according to this method: you should uncover from the second nostril with iron or with acute medicine, and when the nose is uncovered, then take care as follows:
The end of the iron should be triangular, and the shaft of it should be primarily extended into the extremity as seen here.
And then place that on the nose, and let that be close to the lacrimal; and extend your hand a little of the way back, and then rotate your hand according to the groove until it penetrates all the nose, and that feels the patient when their hand finds an air outlet as they do with themselves.
So then restore the area with coagulating medicines, such as those that dry out and harden.
And thus when the flesh and the area have hardened, then that material which excretes to parts further away returns to the nose, so that this is pus more concentrated on the face.
Chapter 20.
Regarding the reduction of the prominence of the nose.
When the nose protrudes in its entirety and does not cause irritation or diminution, then you must soften the face, proceed with it, and place ventilated cuts on the neck's scarification and bleed through good extraction; then place a liniment over the nose made of acacia and aloes, and reinforce the plastering around the nose with powdered paste.
The method for the powders is to take cloths of lion's hair, and each cloth should be doubled into four pieces; then make it from those hairs.
And place those one on top of the other according to the amount which the nose requires. And reinforce them with a strong bandage; and apply the suction pads to blood extraction; and leave those suction pads on for one day and night.
If during this time the ligament is softened, then you should make it straight.
And hold the ligament for one day and night as we have said.
And if the nose has already been reduced, good, and if not, then continue with the plastering and powders and bandages until it is cured.
Chapter 21.
Regarding the incision of the prominence of the uveal membrane.
When there is disruption in the uveal membrane, and it becomes prominent and protrudes outside of the eyelids like a degree of swelling, and its shape is likened to this, and you want to make an incision here, then your operation on them will be as we have recommended, that you insert the needle into the slit of the uveal in the part left of the part above, and then insert another needle where there is a double filament from the lacrimal part, and let this penetrate and place the first needle according to its position; and then make an incision on the double filament and remove that part of the uveal from around the needle, and reinforce that with thread.
And then remove the needle and place wool soaked in egg white over the nose, let it rest until the thread falls into the eyeball.
And then treat the nose with what will soften that until the wound is healed.
And in several applications gather from all parts into the circle of cloth around the nose to adjust its prominence greatly, and then puncture it with a fine needle that reaches to the base of the nose, and drain the cloudy moisture, and descend the nose and enter soon after.
And then strengthen so that it may be healed.
Chapter XXII.
On the treatment of harelips.
This illness, which is called harelip, is nothing but a disease that comes out in the mouth like water flowing down and it is not that one.
The method of treating it involves having the patient sit on the padded seat and lean forward straightly. Then take hold of its head with both hands from either side and guide that towards where you see the disease entering your parts, and proceed to dry it out so it doesn't descend further, and end up with lightness, the patient sees these happenings in this way.
And if it does not descend down below, know that it is water.
And if it is not made ready for the descent of the disease with what we have said, then make the patient sit between your hands and proceed to apply a fine spatula over their belly, cutting out a small piece from the continuity of the conjunctiva at the tunica cornea in the corona (within the place you wish), where you remove the disease.
Once it's been removed, then you boil in the mouth a caudal stream of water that you've mixed with honey or water into which you've cooked fenugreek and honey.
And proceed to cure from the other causes within until it is healed.
Chapter XXII.
On the treatment of descending water in the mouth.
We have already mentioned the ingredients of water in the division and which one is suitable to use when explaining the case, then choose this according to your health.
Then have you make the patient sit between your hands on a hard bench and tie their head securely.
And place your left hand close to the eyelid of their mouth, if the mouth where there is water is the mouth on the left side; or with your right hand, if the mouth is on the right side.
And with your right hand take garlic if the mouth is on the left side; or with your left hand if the mouth is on the right.
And place the end of the garlic near the crown by the swell of the tear duct in the mouth's saliva on the side of the nasal discharge, and peel the garlic with its virtue and turn your hand towards it.
And proceed to penetrate into the saliva of the mouth and feel that garlic has reached the cause because you see.
And have you make the measure of the path of garlic to the source be equivalent to half the size of the space, which is from the pupil to the end of the blackness, this being the crown of the mouth; so that you will see within the pupil with your vision through the clarity of the cornea.
And place garlic in the spot where there is water and draw it down once towards another direction, and so if the water descends immediately, then you will see the patient sitting up right away with their vision and garlic in their mouth.
And rest for a little; therefore if the water has descended, then you should release that other direction before garlic becomes too hot.
And so when it is too late and doesn't descend, then you remove garlic with ease, and turn your hand a little at a time towards it, and dissolve a small piece of clear salt from the gem into water; and wash inside the mouth with that water; and place the mouth close to or stop or wool soaked in olive oil and albumin and mix it with the water.
Use those that are of our time, they pause on this like thyme with almond paste.
And if your garlic does not fit into the mouth due to its hardness - which is characteristic of some individuals whose mouths are hard - then have you take the spatula known as almond, this being its form:
And penetrate with that conjunctiva, and do not let your hand reach the throat, and do not allow it if you make a way for garlic to the subtle location.
And proceed to insert garlic as we have said.
And finish your task, ensure that the patient rests in a descending sleeping position where they lie on their back in a dark room and forbid all movements.
And rest on the nature of water so that its essence is cleansed, and do not let his head touch either the right or left part entirely.
And let it be done according to their disposition within this third day.
And proceed to clean that in this dark room and expose the cold vision, and show him some causes, and return his condition within the seventh day.
And don't forget to do this at the time of treatments or shortly after infusion. Remember that you must remove this yourself so that water can flow slightly due to great and vigorous examination.
And if it happens that there's an abscess, then remember to clean the mouth before the seventh day, and adjust this with water that eliminates abscesses.
And have you completely remove his vision and rest on the face of his oral cavity which regulates the circulation of his saliva for some days, existing in this dark room.
And proceed to gradually get rid of that room and discuss it regarding its causes.
And know that in an operation, it is not excusable for the disciple to miss seeing some parts, and thus you should be diligent about the procedure.
And it has already arrived to our knowledge some of those that are in the Artach, and someone says that by applying fire to an Ayra in the magdal that is perforated, water will be obtained.
However, I have not seen anything like this in our land which has perfect water, nor is there a legal right to any of the ancient texts; it's possible that this water could be new.
And these are the forms of the varieties of magdalens, so that they may be over those which are unknown to them:
And they should be made of wood or iron properly, and their extremities are of this subtle triangular shape, the sharp tip also is like that; these are their forms.
Chapter XXIV.
On healing flesh, nothing in the nostrils.
When in the nostrils are diverse types of flesh, some of which is caused by an assembly that gathers like a scorpion's sting or a pebble in the stomach; this illness is called a polyp which resembles that pebble representation. And from him is crooked flesh, reddish in color; and from him is that the flesh is lion-like not of red color.
So in that which is in these lion-like flesh, not fraudulent nor crooked, know to make the patient sit between your hands and place them under the sun, and expose his nostrils, and pinch yourself with a needle in those parts of the flesh. And remove that from the parts outwardly, and with the part you have understood of those in a sharp fine hole between one part, know that all flesh has been treated; if there is any cause remaining that can be cut off, then use this tool to facilitate its removal so that no cause remains. And if you feel pain or have an infected boil, then stop this to the patient; or it's from malignant boils, then you remove and cauterize that area where the infection is removed and all cavities are treated.
And if there is an opening in the nostril near the incision, add water or wine. And if the nose has opened and there is moisture inside the palate from it, know that it is already healed.
And if the moisture does not penetrate as you feel, then know that inside him is no flesh in the pus above your nostrils where an incision has not been made.
And you know to introduce a piece of wood into him where there is any lump, moisten his stomach with water, and pause between each nut the amount of the said or monthly, and make the patient sit and insert an end of the wood in his nostril at the ray or at another cause which might be possible for him.
And after this has happened, let him inhale his scent so that it reaches the canals of the nostrils, and be sitting above his bowl; many children who do these actions when they have the flu often cause illness to those who want to do such things.
And remove the two ends of the stick, one end that sticks out above the nose and the other that goes into the nose, and administer flesh bandage to the muscles that are in the stick, and do this so that you know the flesh is already in the muscles of the stick.
And remove the stick, and place in the nose near the removal of pus a tube, and do this for three days or more so that the vinegar may consume all that is rotten in the flesh.
And at the end of the treatment, place a lead cannula in the nose for a few days until it is healed.
If you are treating with drying out, use that method.
And this is the form of the device for making nose washes where oils and medicines are distilled in the nostrils:
And do this of silver or of wood which is similar to a small open lamp, like a small basin, and the material similarly.
And if you want, make a closed cannula like a stick, and the cannula of the device for making nose washes is flat, exposed; at which there is a handle at its backside, with which you take that when you soak in oil or whatever you want from the solutions and extractable causes.
Chapter XXV.
On swelling near the extremities of the nose.
Swollen lumps are found near the extremities of the nose, it becomes swollen and oiled over a few days during which the condition of the patient is observed.
And for this, you should introduce that in the beginning of his appearance, and extract all of it. And then place above the spot or cautery or burning medicine which is at the location of him.
If its manifestation is delayed until it becomes magnified, then consider if it has become pus-filled, hard, of dark color and with little sensation, then do not touch that on iron where an abscess is; those reddened spots under the one who incised this abscess must be avoided due to their great malice towards the one whom that abscess belongs.
And if the abscess is leonid-like and not of dark color, and incision can be done throughout that area, then evacuate the patient and make that incision with caution, and treat the location where it drains until it is healed.
Chapter XXVI.
On the suturing of the nose and the lips, as well as the earlobe, when continuity is dissolved by disease or by injury.
Know that when you encounter a loss of continuity in one of these cartilages, you hardly contribute to that operation but rather in some individuals.
Then, when it comes to any cause of those, you should consider if there's fresh inflammation in its root, then adjust the two edges of the wound for suture and treat that until it heals.
And if the lips of loss of continuity are already separated, and any is made healthy, then take care that you remove each part of their apparent trunk until there's no inflammation. And then adjust the two lips for suturing and strengthen them, apply powdered dragon's inflammation over those, and put on oiled wool, place a small amount of diafinicon plaster or another stabilizing plaster on top of the powder, let that plaster heal for two or three days, then remove it and replace the plaster to continue healing until all the scabs fall off naturally, and treat with oil until it is healed.
The method for suture is that you add the lost continuity or like we have advised in the stomach suture using needles, or add the lost continuity with wax and inform it.
Chapter XXVII.
On the extraction of those causes that occur within the two lips in their parts.
Reddened spots under the reddened areas of their lips in their internal parts such as hard abscesses resembling fats, and some are smaller while others are larger.
So you should turn the lips and cut each of those hard areas from every part, then remove the abscess by filling the space with oiled wool until the inflammation is reduced, and then wash it with warm water and treat the area where it was tied until it heals.
Chapter XXVIII.
On incision into the adjusted flesh in the gums.
Large spots appear on the gum that has been adjusted which the ancients called milk. Thus, you should suspend that with a string or whatever you have at hand and make an incision there in accordance with its size, and allow the healthy blood to flow or let the inflammation pass.
And then place on that area oiled wool or other coagulating or stimulating powders.
And if that flesh returns, then make another incision and cauterize it there, for the cauterization will not recur.
Chapter XXIX.
On tooth extraction with iron.
When sharp edges, grooves, and some spots are blackened inside the tooth parts, and in front of them, as well as between gums, when they appear yellow or white, causing a deterioration process visible through this decay, then teeth become affected.
And then you should separate the patient from their servants and place their head in your lap, and remove teeth that show those sharp edges and similar causes with sand while ensuring not to break any important part of them. Do this for blackness, whiteness, and other changes until they become modified.
And then if it is the same as in those of eating habits change, it's fine; and otherwise, you should continue changing the diet on these other days and the second, until it reaches your desired final statement.
Know that teeth require various forms of restorative materials and figures according to how your operation is prepared. And for what reason the razors used for the tooth within are different from those used to shave teeth according to other forms. And these forms of razors should be prepared by you, which you will see soon:
Chapter XXX.
On the eradication of teeth.
And when you heal the tooth for its pain from all ends and in every extraction of it, know that there is no reason to fill up the hole made by it when extracted, which is a substance that evaporates during its extraction.
And when the patient feels that tooth must be removed, you should firmly certify which is the painful tooth, for reddened spots cause pain and fall off from a healthy tooth. You extract that one and until its extraction, the pain does not cease while the unhealthy and painful tooth is still in place; as we have seen this through operation on rabbits.
And how should you certify which is the painful tooth, and this you know well; then understand that when you scrape in the circuit of the tooth to any spot with hardness, until it dissolves from the tooth and gingiva on every side, and then remove that with your knives or fine forceps gradually until that scrapes off.
And then strengthen the patient's limbs with large muscles for good speech or strength, place the head of the sick between your palms so that it doesn't hurt you to touch it, and properly position the teeth according to rectitude in manner that doesn't pierce them, nor cause more pain to the sick person.
And so if it is not being expelled, then take one of those instruments, and place that under them from all parts with ease and effort in removing this thing as soon as possible.
May it be if the tooth is decayed or corroded, then make that hollow in which you place your finger and tighten it at the tip of the slender end so that it doesn't get stuck during your compression on that while holding them.
And make that you open exquisitely in the scarification throughout the area of the gingiva and maintain your strength so as not to pierce it and damage a part of him, and return on the patient for the malice that should be greater than his first pain.
And be careful not to do as some ignorant barbers do in their rashness and audacity regarding the eradication of theirs, which they don't follow what we have advised; the large diseases that they can bring upon men are greater than those that get stuck, and all their parts overgrown, or some of them, or if you extract that among certain bones of the mandible as we have testified.
And properly after the eradication of this, wash his mouth with vinegar or add salt to it.
And if there are discharges of pus for a while, like those that ooze, then sprinkle some quantity of garlic and apply it to the wound; if this garlic doesn't work, apply cautery.
The shape of the forceps and delicate tongs with which you apply pressure to the tooth at the beginning should be elongated end, short handle, and thick, so that they don't bend when using these.
And should be like those with thick handles so that when you use them they don't bend, and have short ends.
And they should be made of iron from India with straight ends, and the ends of those are hollowed out where some fit inside each other and open with strong compression, and some of them are shaped like the bill of a bird, which is called stork, and they have strong constriction.
Capítulo XXI.
About the extraction of teeth and crushing of the bones of broken jaws.
When you need to extract the tooth that is stuck, place your finger on the spot and press it with one or two fingers until the area softens; then insert or apply some instrument like the bill of a bird called stork or a kind of tongs into that location.
The ends of those should be made hollowed out like a chisel or an axe.
And if these forceps or tongs don't comply with your intention, then place your finger on the swelling and remove all the flesh, and insert this tool called an atali, which is a small lever of this form:
And it should have a short end that's thick on one side and isn't beveled to prevent it from getting stuck.
So if the swelling is being expelled by this method, it's good; otherwise, help yourself with these other tools among which these are the forms: the shape of the first tool has a triangular end in which there's some thickness:
The shape of the second tool is such that it has a triangular and especially delicate end.
And already, with this tool having two ramps as you can see in the following form, have been helped: And with other tools that precede in the cleaning of teeth; for youth, this tool is made which resembles an ox's horn, and this is its form:
From the triangular bent or short end, there's some thickness in it, and it isn't beveled to prevent it from getting stuck.
And know that other tools for the teeth are similar to these as well as the other instruments.
May those artisans be wise and subtle in their art, finding for themselves according to what it means to the operation and various diseases of the body; among these diseases are those that the ancients did not describe nor use specific tools for, due to the variety of forms.
May it be if the bone of the jaw or other bones of the mouth is stuck, then weigh your hand on that at its place with what suits him according to the tools and forceps which we have said in the extraction of the swellings of teeth, and help yourself with this gesture:
And be gradual with it if there's any thickness, and secure or hold it in the mouth so that it doesn't escape or flee until the bone is fully expelled; then properly restore the area with suitable medicines for this.
May it be if there's a small pus in the bone, then remove that pus and its darkness, and treat the area inside so that it is healed.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
Of the cure of dental prominences above others.
When the teeth are prominent not according to their natural course and form is set, especially when it affects women more so than others, particularly the venerable ones; therefore consider this: if a tooth has nothing close to another tooth, and there's no possibility of extraction or application of ointment for it, then that one is deeply rooted. More so if it is not attached to another tooth; then you should cut into that with this instrument whose form resembles it, and it looks like the removal of meat from a hog, made of Indian iron having an extremely sharp edge.
And if your cut is on the part where you should cut into that tooth for too many days due to its hardness, and it doesn't resemble another tooth's prominence.
And if the tooth is excessively prominent to be filed down, then file that with an Indian iron file whose form resembles this:
And it's all made of Indian iron; the groove follows the tooth. Use needles and files as well, to file down the tooth little by little over a few days through facilitation, so that another tooth doesn't resemble it and gets infected. And continue to shave there until the end, then adjust that with some scissors.
And if it's a tooth where part of it is eaten away and the tongue touches it, then consider that you should sharpen that groove within which the roughness of that portion sticks out and gets evened up, so that the tongue doesn't irritate it or the words don't get corrupted.
Section 33.
Of restoration of decayed teeth in gold or silver.
When it happens to teeth before their extraction through percussion or impact, and the patient cannot strengthen themselves against what is eaten, and you have treated that with stiptic medicines, but your treatment was not effective, then consider that in those that are weakened by gold instead of silver; for silver turns green and remains for several days, whereas gold never changes.
And the gold should be of such subtlety and roughness according to the quantity that can enter between the teeth; as for the shape of the restoration, take the gold and place twice its amount between two healthy teeth. Let it grow between the two curves of the gold inside each decayed tooth, whether one or multiple, so that it reaches the tissue to the healthy part of the other side. And repeat this process inside the part from which you started, strengthen your hand with ease and knowledge so that it doesn't become decayed.
And when strengthening the gold, you must keep the tooth's roots from being disturbed.
And adjust the excess ends of the gold with forceps or cut them off, then place those back in every location while handling it carefully, and blend those and the hidden ones between healthy tooth and decayed tooth, so that it doesn't cause injury to the tongue. And adjust that like it's been pulled as if with a lever.
If it has slipped off or broken, strengthen that or those with another gold piece in such a manner throughout the entire process.
And this is the form of teeth and the figure for restoring two healthy teeth and two decayed ones, as these are often tied:
And when you return one or two teeth in their respective places and they have grown back as we have described, and continue to grow.
And do not make this mistake, for only skilled artisans understand it well.
And for some defects, one might adapt the bones of a cow as suitable causes for teeth, and they are made in this way like tooth shape, placed at the location where the tooth is missing, strengthened in this manner just as we have said, and stays there serving its purpose for a long time.
Section 34.
Of the lump in the tongue that causes speech impediments, and prevents speaking.
This tissue in the tongue that leaves you certain defects, or is naturally present at birth, or occurs accidentally due to an illness which has already solidified.
And the operation on you is that you open your mouth at the patient's chin; and lift their tongue, then cut into this nerve tissue as far as the tongue's recent position allows.
If there is any hardness or knot in that area, and this has been due to the consolidation of an illness, then you apply heat and divide it longitudinally from where you have cut into the tissue until it dissolves the knot.
And remember, do not create a crack in the front of the flesh and cut here so that bleeding occurs.
And after that, wash the remnants of the incision with vinegar or with salt water or with rubbing alcohol; and place your tongue in a place where the patient leaves their tongue every night so that it does not become hardened by another defect.
If bleeding occurs, place your palm over the heated glass; but if blood does not flow, then cauterize the area with a long-rod cautery that you apply to it. And this cure should be applied with other causes until it is healed.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
For removing a hernia, you should leave the tongue.
Some blisters occur leaving the tongue pustular resembling a small boil, preventing the tongue from performing its natural operation; and strength is increased until it fills the mouth.
And the operation with you is that you open the patient's thigh sixty in front of the sun and consider the pustule.
And if you find it of dark color or black, hard, as which the patient does not feel a sensation, then do not touch that which is painful.
And if it is declining to whiteness, in which there's moisture, then you put the incision on you, and cut through that under the thin pus, and cut from all sides; and if you detect a smell during your operation time, then you stop for half an hour, with this being glass, within which the smell is contained.
And then return to your work within which you have treated according to him, being washed with vinegar and salt; and treat that according to the other treatment until he is healed.
Chapter XXXVI.
Regarding the removal of pustules from both ears and that which is nothing in the gallbladder, as well as other pustules.
When it affects the gallbladder, those are glands which are gathered like cotton, and they occur outside and are named two ears, which when you treat them with what we said in the division and if they do not heal, then you consider if the pustule is hard, of dark color, with little sensation, then do not touch that with iron.
And if it is of reddish color and the root is thick, then do not touch that with iron due to the flow of smell; gently flatten it until it matures, then either you drain that, or it will rupture on its own.
And if it is of white color, thin, and the root of him is subtle, then that which should be considered to be incised.
And the operation with you is that you consider, before your operation, if it has rested for the pustule of him, after the rest complete or if it has diminished by some diminution; and then have the patient face towards the sun, his head in your place, open his mouth, and the servant takes between their hands the tongue of him leaving on an instrument noble with which this is its shape:
And it should be made of silver or gold, and it should be as fine as a thread.
And when you press on that tongue and show him the pustule, and cover it with your hand, then take an incision and place it in the hollow, and pull it out from all directions as much as you can. Or another thing that you should remove is some cause of the tunics, and then cut with that tool whose shape this is:
Or another thing that you should remove is some cause of the tunics, and then cut with that tool whose shape this is: And it resembles forceps, however the extremities of them are curved, so that the opening of each one is in the direction of the other, very sharp, which should be iron inlaid.
May it be that this tool is not in your possession, then cut with the flat surface of the instrument which has its shape: It should be sharp on one side, not sharp on the other.
And after you have cut one side, cut the other according to this method of cutting, and then when you cut the patient remains clean from rubbing with water.
May it be that there is a flow of smell, keep clean from the water of decoction of the boil or of pine needle and resemble that among the causes of bleeding so that the flow of smell is contained, then treat him until he heals.
And some blisters occur in the gallbladder other than those two ears, and cut them according to how I have said and directed in the cutting of those two cuts equally.
And I already treated a woman with pustule which was native in the gallbladder of her, that pustule tended to dark color, with little sensation, which had closed the gallbladder of her, and the woman breathed with the throat stretched out, and she had prohibited you from eating and drinking water, and she was already near death if it were a day or two more.
And the pustule had become so large that there were two cloves inside which would pass through two fingers.
And I cut it and removed it with one of their incisions, and pulled it out, and the large portion was expelled from him, then I cut that incision which is understood in the other side, then I made him open his mouth, and held his tongue, then I placed the incision in that pustule.
And I removed a large part of him, and it only flowed out with a little smell from him. And absolutely the gallbladder of that woman began to drink water again, and soon started eating food, so I did not stop cutting off a few times for long periods with that pustule, and another pustule formed in place of it, which cut until that was prolonged.
Then I open and cauterize the wound on him, then proceed to addition; and later I walk around not knowing what God did with that part from this point.
Capitol Thirty-seven.
Of the beginning of fever when it is infectious.
When a phlegm attack occurs in the throat, and it is infectious and prolonged, then it is named as perpendicular; and if there is a thick and round lump at that location, then it is called a boil.
When it is cured with what we have said in the division, and you do not confirm your healing, and repeatedly after that you develop a fever again, especially when the fever lasts until you are slightly better, then there's an instance where you should treat that lump which has been added roundly; and if it extends along that length, and is bloody, with a dark color or black, and does not relieve your illness, then suspect the beginning of your fever, because fear over your health appears in that case.
And when you do that according to the method I've told you about regarding its whiteness and length, make sure to examine your health and press the tongue of him using a tool that fits his shape closely, then place the needle in the new spot and pull that out. Then, cut that with one of two tools as mentioned in the beginning for cutting two veins.
And know that you should not cut that lump but only what is adjusted over the natural end of your addition. If you cut more than this, you will damage his speech.
And when it comes to cutting, use the one that we recommended for cutting two veins and cure it inside until it is healed.
If your health is frightened by the cutting of you, know that you should use a tool during his fear in the cauterization process. The way to do cauterization doesn't have anything else but hot water. You must place the tip of your health on your body and press the tongue with the tool we mentioned, take from this water which we have talked about in the chapter of cauterization, and apply it until a living cause arises, pause not when it is thick or thin. Then fill the cavity of the instrument that has this form:
Let the end of your cavity be in which medicine is placed like in a cauterization trench, and place the tool on the medicine over his mouth, your health on its own so that saliva or a moistening comes out from inside his mouth due to the internal medicine, so as not to spread any unnecessary cause through the wound of him and make him feel it.
And then keep your hand on the medicine and press it for about half an hour until you see that it is being degraded and soothed by the chewing of the medicine.
And if you want, take and wrap that around the end of the ray, immerse the tip in the medicine, insert the ray into the tube through which the tip adheres to that tube. Do this as many times until you achieve what you desire from the cauterization of the uvula, and then let it dry and fall off about three or four days later.
And if you need to repeat the medicine, do that, and after cauterization clean inside the uvula canal with a moistened tip, adjust what is in the canal of his medicine, wash it with water and cleanse externally with salve, and heal internally with remedies until he is healed.
And this kind of cure is safe that you cut and are far from fear.
Some inflamed uvula is cured with that which is too subtle for cauterization and cutting, when it's healed through subfumigation in this manner: take calendula, ivy, rue, thyme, powdered gum arabic, chamomile, hyssop, and similar herbs; adjust all these causes or some of them into one mixture, immerse them in strong alcohol and let them boil. The liquid is then strained through a cloth, leaving the residue behind. In the middle of this container place a stick on which you place a metal instrument dipped in wax according to this manner; it should be made of silver or gold.
And immerse the tip in your health's mouth until steam rises to the uvula over the throat, until the uvula is quite reddened.
And then reapply to those red spots until they dry out. Be careful not to do this treatment right after the appearance of a fever, as it might irritate the fever itself, instead you should declare that there is a fever and cauterize him accordingly.
If you don't have this instrument, then take a stick and apply a piece of charcoal at the end of his health, in such a way that your health's mouth is filled with smoke, so the steam from the charcoal doesn't burn his mouth.
And this treatment is good for health.
Capitol Thirty-eight.
Of the extraction of thorns and that which sticks in the wound, as well as other causes.
Red spots stick in the wound or thorn of a plant, or any other cause.
So when you extract what is obvious from those, on which the sight falls, because when you press the tongue with a tool in front of yourself, it will be declared to you what is inside the wound.
And that which does not appear and is hidden in the stomach, you must make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach; this way, any cause related to the stomach will be treated by vomiting; or make the patient swallow a lump of bread or a handful of lettuce leaves or a piece of dry bread; or give the patient a handful of dried sea sponge and tie it firmly with string. Then have the patient pass this through their mouth, until they reach where their spinal column is and are able to pull out, then it will be treated by vomiting. And take a toad and hold it with your hand tied, place it inside the table and gently remove it; or take a reed and gently put it in and gently pull out.
If you are unable to treat those causes as we have said, then use a lead tool according to this form:
And if it's larger than small, and at the tip of it there is a cavity which you should insert into its throat to facilitate swallowing.
And have him raise his head, and watch that you touch the inside of his throat's opening, to ensure it reaches his body and to apply pressure where needed on the bone or spine, or that the doctor applies their hand.
But have the patient apply honey, because of their expertise in locating the site of the attached cause and insert it downwards, then have them pull on their hand towards the tool, all according to the amount prepared within which they need to treat by vomiting.
Chapter XXXIX.
On the extraction of gallstones attached to the stomach.
When gallstones are treated as we have said in the section of recovery with medicines and it does not respond, consider instead looking for gallstones in the stomach of the patient under the sun, since you should see if their tongue has been affected by an instrument that we previously recommended.
So when you find the gallstone, remove it properly whether it's small or through subtle means.
And if it's not possible for you to remove it from there, then take a concave cannula and insert it into the stomach of the patient, and place in the concavity of the cannula an ignited iron rod, and do this as many times (until the gallstone is dead and leaves the stomach) and make sure the patient drinks only water for the whole day.
And then take a glass full of water, open the mouth of the patient in it, and wash their mouth with that; do not swallow any cause from there, instead let the water sit on your hand for an hour or two while washing your hands, until the gallstone senses the water.
If it's not treated by vomiting as we have recommended, then fumigate the patient with garlic or with castor oil using the instrument that we recommended for fumigation of the uvula.
Do this, and see what happens next.
Another method of operation in fumigation involves taking an oil with ignited charcoal inside it, covering the oil halfway with a cloth that has a string attached to it. Place the end of the instrument into this string, then place the oil under the fumigation. Have the patient hold their mouth at the tip of the cannula and close their mouth so that the fumigation does not cause vomiting until you know that the fumigation reaches the gallstone, for when the gallstone will sense it and react accordingly.
And if it doesn't work, then you should repeat the fumigation several times. Keep the patient from drinking and eat salty foods instead. Don't drink water either. It's necessary that this treatment be done properly.
This is how the tool looks when treating gallstones in the stomach if they are visible; it's somewhat like a pair of forceps, but with some curvature instead. It is placed at the stomach's opening, and its tip resembles the bill of a stork; it is handled like a pliers. The ends are sharpened with a file to ensure that when any object is grasped, it doesn't slip away.
Chapter XL.
This concludes our discussion on the treatment of boils and in the section about them.
Boils are specific types of skin swellings that occur as part of certain diseases, according to memory from various sources in this book.
They are various in terms of their location and nature, depending on two methods. One is the method related specifically to boils themselves; it involves taking into account the moisture content.
The second method relates to areas where bodily accidents occur. If a boil occurs in the head, it's different from one that might occur in the anus; similarly for boils occurring on flesh versus ones at joint locations. Each has its own procedure for operation.
Some boils require that they not be punctured until they are close to ripening or maturing, either inside or in relation to them.
Other boils require that they be extracted when they cross over and are not yet ripe according to their own maturation process. For instance, boils close to joints; the moment a boil gets close to a joint, its nature is prolonged until you can place it where it affects the circuit of that area, causing corruption of the muscles or nerves in that joint leading to contraction of that limb. Or if there's a boil near a main member, and if you delay the puncturing until it matures too much it can affect the main member; or if it's close to the anus, then puncture the unripe one; don't extract when you see bleeding from non-digested food but rather that which is close to the anus as it could extend into the digestive parts of the anus and create a fistula. Or if it's in the tip of the boil that isn't cured, do not puncture then either. Knowing when to perform the puncturing of the abscess is crucial, which happens when it has ripened.
And know that it ripens when the pain and fever subside, and close to the reduction of sweating and pulse, and the sharpness of the abscess head, and other signs.
And when you know that it's time to puncture near the pus point of the abscess and where pus comes from the cure of the prominence.
Puncture at the right length of the flesh or body, when abscesses are in parts of the joints or feet, and on spots of boils, along the tendons, nerves, arteries; and, finally, everywhere equally where they don't reflect. In those that do reflect, puncture according to that member.
When the abscess is in a fleshly area, then it's that you perform the puncture inside until digestion of it has been confirmed according to the meal, as we've said; if you pierce there before this, it extends the length of the pus and induration, and hardens the lips and depth.
Such abscesses should be punctured according to the width of the flesh or body as necessity dictates, or according to what each member requires.
And know that you should administer small punctures for small abscesses, and large or wide punctures with pus-filled areas according to the variety of the size of the abscesses.
And for other abscesses in which you should return the obstruction and seal it up when done this way with bread, as soon as it sustains it, like what happens with many of stones and lumps.
And for those that are cut into a section with three corners; and for others which is where it's cut like the shape of an olive leaf, as in the abscesses of gout.
And for them there are sections that are administered round and lunular, resembling those.
For the one that doesn't have this like superficial lion abscesses, it's known that you should puncture there with superficial puncturing, or flatly enough only.
And when the abscess is thick and has already hardened into healthy pus, puncture it and don't worry about extracting all the pus at that moment; take out a part of it first, then allow the abscess to settle in another day, then extract a larger part, and let it drain until you make cuts and drain according to stages within which it is drained.
Especially so if the patient is weak from fasting, or a young woman in her period, or a small child, or an old person in decline; when the animal spirit's unhealthy pus is resolved with the release of healthy pus, and hardens the body, then you should operate them.
Take great care with this chapter, and in the place of your puncture where you are puncturing these abscesses, know that you cleanse them, considering whether the pus in the abscess is small or a flat section; then administer remedies as they require or according to ancient practice. And if the abscess is large, and the wounds from the punctures are indurations, then it's known that you should place metal in each trough until they reach time.
And if in the abscess you have removed a part of the obstruction or have hollowed out that part in the channel, then it's known that you should complete it with old string or thread made from linen fabric, as when you are pulling breads or thongs, moisture; strengthen it on the third day; then proceed and treat that until what cures under the ointments becomes healed.
And if it happens that there is blood flow during your operation, then you administer water washes and vinegar in the ones where you immerse a linen cloth, and place that over the area of the bleeding spots.
And if the blood flow persists, then it's known that you should administer treatment and care, as well as powders which I have recommended in places like this our book and division.
And if it's during winter, and the site of the abscess is in an area with nerves, then you should coat powders in vinegar and oil, and place those on the areas.
And if it's in summer, and the areas are fleshly, then you should apply ground powders with water and oil or with vinegar and oil, all of which is rubbed until the third day, as we've said, and then it's known that you let the abscess drain and cleanse that and administer care for its healing under what suits it until it becomes healed.
And this is what's necessary for the knowledge of treating abscesses universally, but according to the path of distinction that I've already said about every abscess on how treatment proceeds for it under individual chapters.
Chapter .xli.
The chapter is about the section of abscesses that occur in the channel of the head.
In the channel of the head, small abscesses occur, which are special nodes containing linings that are characteristic of them; and the characteristics of their indurations.
And from them come pus, and those that contain moisture similar to lime. And of those ones that contain moisture resembling dust, and are like them; and of those ones that are hardened, hard.
And in the section of all, and in the extraction of those ones, there is no fear, just as you should extract those without causing dissection of arteries.
The operation in this section is that you apply the tool of that form to your eye as closely as possible, which is called an intermixture, so you know it contains something.
And if what is contained is moisture, then divide that in sections according to length along the surface section as shown below:
Start at the section of line .B. between the lines .G. Then as the moisture is drained away, then you remove that skin which contains that moisture, and do not leave any cause from all, for when it returns after being removed, if there is any cause left from that.
And then immerse the affected area in Egyptian oil if it is present, and if not, in water with salt; fill that with the wound and leave it to rest for another day, when you will dissolve all that has corroded from that skin.
And then apply the Egyptian oil on that skin again and again if you require it, provided you are confident that there is not any cause of corrosion from that skin; then treat the wound with oil until it is healed.
And if pus contains fatty nodes, then you should incise there according to this form: In the section with a cradle shape, make cuts between two edges of the section and cut all around it. Strive to extract the tissue which contains that.
If when you are operating there is opposition, then do what I have already instructed you to do first.
Similarly do this for the soft and cured wound sections as well as in their treatment according to what we have told you; the section over a soft and cured wound is a little bit of pus, which has few injuries and little moisture.
And some of these pus pockets are in the head in certain men for whom there is not any moisture; this cause is that I incise on a wound in the head of an old woman and pinch away the pus like a hard, white pebble which could not be drunk. If with someone else it was done to such an extent, it would have healed the wound.
And in the other accidents in the head besides this one, like those pus pockets that come on the heads of children and behind the ears, it's just the section of all these is superficial.
And stop the incision at the lower part of their body where it can relieve the body from the parts with low pus.
And then treat those according to what is suitable for the process of healing.
Capitol .xlii.
Of section concerning scrofulas that occur in the neck.
These pus pockets are found in the neck and behind the ears, as well as in the armpits; some are found in other parts of the body.
Those are the ones that occur in the neck, and they are masses that originate within themselves, and all scrofula of those is inside their own tissue, just like with the lumps and pus pockets on the head, as we have recounted.
The types of these scrofula are masses; some of them are soft, and others contain moisture, while others are malignant which do not respond to treatment.
And in that one where you make good preparation with the touch, whose color shows is proportional to the color of the throat and is visible everywhere, it's not attached to the neck muscles, nor to the veins, nor to the pulse, and it's not rounded when you incise it from the dry surface above to the part below on the line of .G. between the line of .B., you then burn that completely throughout the area, expand the edges of the throat tissue in a single piece, or use pieces of onion if you need them as we have described for the pus pockets in the head, and extract that little by little.
And more caution is needed to not incise the vein or nerve.
And if the tool is not sharp enough that your hand fits well during the incision or calms down the patient, then do not incise what is unnecessary; if you were to cut a vein or pulse and are prevented from completing your operation, then stop the searing of inflammation or other powders that still cause discharge, strengthen the wound, and leave it for when the inflammatory pus subsides and the wound becomes softened, then start turning into pus. When the blood is completely drained away.
And return to your operation as soon as you have completed it.
And then ask yourself if there is any cause of the other small scrofula as described by me; therefore, incise and cleanse those.
And if it is in the vein of the large scrofula, then you should not incise that scrofula from its root. Before the end when you have made it with a firm fold, and let that one fall by itself without your aid.
And then fill the wound with old cloth which you have already submerged in Egyptian oil, and then treat that.
And if you incise that scrofula completely, then make sure you adjust the two edges of the wound and create just enough pus so there is no excess or abnormality.
If you find there is excess pus due to the size of the scrofula, know how to drain its source, extract that lump, perform suturing, and do as it has been said.
For those of the scrofulas containing wetness, puncture that at the superficial opening where it appears in your area of maturation for them, and place an opening for the pus below their body, as we have said.
Then perform puncturing, prepare and resemble those, so that it corrodes what is decomposing from the pus. And when you find that the wound has already healed, then treat it with meat-generating ointment until it is healed.
Title 43.
Section on the section of the boil occurring within the groin.
The ancients performed this section in the inguinal area, and we have not seen anyone in our land who has done that.
And this is the description of the operation of those.
If in men there is a curvature, then avoid the removal of the inguinal area, because if it's done incorrectly, all the veins and major arteries are here.
If those who have boils in the mouth or groin or both ears, when the inflammation is not in the canal, use the section of the inguinal area to avoid losing it which is done through puncturing.
So when we want that, puncture the inguinal area leaving three circles of the inguinal area's circles, or four in the smaller section by latitude for that which is between two circles by quantity, that the section should be on the skin, not on the cartilage. This location is suitable for operation as it lacks muscle and its blood vessels are inside them.
And if the doctor is cautious, then at once extend the groove of the groin to one side, and later make an opening in the groove that reaches the canal. But avoid blood vessels if you see any from those areas.
Then puncture the muscles as we have recounted; and it signifies on the section of the canal by the swelling which is from that expanse to what is of its burst, and by the rupture of the vessels.
And leave the wound open for some time.
So when the time is ripe for that puncturing which is feared, add two layers of the groove of the wound, and cut only the cartilage.
And later administer medicines that cause new flesh to grow until it heals.
As Albucasis stated that the full description of the operation which we have recounted is merely this: some of those boils have reached the groin of the groin, and the groin has gone into death, and his life was cut off. Some would puncture the epiglottis so that the air could pass through their throat over the area of the wound for a breath, and thus be saved from death.
And for this reason it is commanded to leave the wound open until the mischief of the inflammation is consumed; and the mischief of him lasts for three days; and then it is commanded thus with the wound, treat that until it heals.
And that which I have seen with my own eye is that a servant caught a cat and kept it in her groin, and punctured part of the canal of the lung there, and I was summoned to treat him for this. He died as if he were among the dead, opened the wound and bled from what was inside the wound little by little.
So I confessed that it had not pierced a vein or artery, and the wind escaped from the wound, and treated that until it was healed.
And it didn't happen to the servant girl nor in the vessels at all, and later return after several days to treat their conditions.
And I say that there is no fear in the section of the inguinal area.
Title 44.
Section on the section about boil occurring outside the groin, which is called the groin hernia.
This boil named as groin hernia is large according to the body's color, and moves in women.
And it follows two manners, whether it is natural or accidental.
And in the natural case, there's no need to cure.
And the accidental follows two manners of which one is similar to fatty nodes, and the other manner is similar to boil which happens due to obstruction of an artery, and in that there's fear. And don't assume he would get sick from it like iron unless the lump is small. And you should touch it and investigate it as directed, and if you find that it is similar to fatty nodes, and is not suspended by any of the veins, then puncture it like a node, extract it with that which contains it in the skin and serosa membrane; but if not, then thoroughly examine its entire being, and later treat the area with what cures during healing until it heals.
Title 45.
Section on the types of nodes.
Of the nodes there are various kinds, and I have already described all the kinds in detail.
And I will recount this difference between a node and an abscess to clear any doubts.
Then I say that in fever and heat and strong pains within which suppresses the boiling of excess; and the process of decomposition is completed when at that time the fever, pain and heat cease.
May it be known that there is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and consider that lion's tooth which is in the upper stomach.
And it depends on the color of the body, and the start of their condition is like a sickness and is done likewise to emptying oneself, whether more or less, and they depend on two species, fat or containing moisture, and the colors of the moisture are spots, as I have said in the division.
Then consider, when you come to the treatment of disease, that extract it and inquire about its beginning at the point which is called penetration, according to how its form will come in the head which is close to this.
And this is the method of inquiry for abscesses and all diseases, and you should take hold of that point and introduce it into the pus-wet spot which you find in the abscess, and you will twist your fingers inside little by little until you know that the point has penetrated the chain.
And then finish your hand according to the size of the abscess, and then extract the penetration and consider what is left in its wake.
And if the moisture escapes, regardless of what its color is, then you should incise it on the superficial section as I said in other abscesses.
And if there is no moisture left from the penetration point, then you know that it is fatty.
And over it, on it, make an incision in the form of a crook according to this shape: Just as you have been taught, and suspend it on the cord, then scrape away the chain from all sides with ease, and keep the skin or bag over that if possible, and remove that cure from the disease.
May it be that if it is broken during the operation, it is not possible to extract that cure, and spots drained accordingly, then you extract it piece by piece without leaving any cause for concern.
That if some or too much remains from it, the disease returns according to what is right.
And if you find that some small part remains from it, then complete the disease with some corrosive and sharp powders, strengthen the disease, place over that which is a pus spot cauterizer, cure that before another treatment until it heals.
And if it is a large disease, then cut both of its lips and cure that according to what is inside.
May it be that if there is a pulsating one in opposition, or not-pulsating, then you cut and treat the area corresponding to the trissat which is the vein, smooth that stretched part for two days or three until the disease subsides and stops the boiling of the pus; and then return to incise what has broken from the node.
Chapter 46
Regarding the necessary forms for an incision and puncture.
Of those are the forms of penetrations, and they have three species, from which one is large, and from them there is another that is smaller, and from them there is a small one.
The form of large penetration is this:
The form of small penetration is this:
Make them with iron, with lead, with the ends of dropped extremities suitably, so that I tighten the inner part in the abscesses.
And these are the forms of the experiences, and they have many names, and one of them is called red.
And they have three species, which among them are large, moderate, and small.
The form of the large experience, its form:
The form of the moderate experience, its form:
The form of the small experience, its form:
It is necessary that they be for those abscesses, diseases, and fistulas, and boils so that among them are from the bones and other causes.
And they are rounded tools, large, lion-like, just like large needles to which the thorns are sewn, and they are made of copper, or bronze, or silver, and the best ones are when they are made of citrine metal.
And they are tools like black feathers, which it is remembered that for those the fistulas should be opened in the cavity where reflections are made, that they should reflect on their levitation at those reflections.
And they have three species, where some of them are long, and others are moderate, and the others are short, according to the amount of width of the fistula and the constriction of it.
Form of the large experience made of lead:
Form of the moderate experience made of lead:
Form of the small experience made of lead:
The forms of the needles are of special spots, which among them are some simple ones, which have only one curvature, and they have three species: large, small, and moderate.
And from these there are hooks, and they have three species.
And of those there are two curves, and they have three species.
And from them there are three curves, and they have three species.
And all of these are necessary in their place.
Shape of a small single stone, that's the shape of his:
Shape of a large stone having two curves: Shape of an irregular half stone having two curves: Shape of a small stone having two curves:
Shape of a large stone having three curves:
Shape of an irregular half stone having three curves:
And these are the forms of the scalpels on which cuts and slashes are made to the glands and abscesses, and they have three species; among them, one is large, irregular, and small.
Shape of a scalpel (large):
Shape of the scalpel (irregular):
Shape of the scalpel (small):
The ends of those (scalpels) on which cuts are made are sharp, while the other ends are not sharp. They are not used in such a manner, but rather when performing incisions in the excision of glands there is the fear of lacerating a vein or nerve, and through these treatments improve the patient's condition and find tranquility for a short time due to this adjustment that you find during the excision of abscesses.
And these are the forms of needles, they have three species: large, irregular and small, like thorns.
They are made from reeds and resemble arrows on which alcohol is applied.
And it's in the tip with a pierced end and an inner tube hidden, and there you go to the divisions inside and outside, as you want, just as you see.
The forms of spatulas that you hide between your fingers are used for puncturing abscesses and not allowing the patient to feel discomfort, they have three species: large, irregular, and small. And these are the forms of those (the medical instruments mentioned previously):
The forms of the suction devices on which blood discharge from diseases is removed, they have three species: large, irregular, and small; these are their forms.
They are made of reed like a citrus fruit, round with some length, and they are delicate.
And you should have these varieties of suction devices, large, irregulars, and small ones, because with those you can remove the blood discharge from diseases quickly in necessity, and then when your first medicine did not help.
However, do not use those to remove blood everywhere in the body, and use them only on fatty areas, just like on the bumps of the lungs and thighs, and on the lumps of the breasts, nipples, belly, kidneys, and similar to the fatty bumps.
Some treatments are made with those instruments and smaller pieces resembling pricks according to this form; when blood is removed through phlebotomy, or in case of laceration of a vein or artery.
Some treatments are made round according to this form:
Chapter XLVII.
On treating the breasts of men which are assembled by women.
Some treatments cause the breasts of certain men to swell when they start becoming hairy, and similarly make the breasts swell. They are assembled by women's breasts, and are comparable to pubic hairs, distant.
And for those who seek this, know that you should incise these according to the lunar section on this form, from the line of 'B' into the line of 'G', then thoroughly scrape the roughness, then fill the sore spot with ointment medicine, and adjust the two lips of the sore spot by sewing, treating it until it heals.
If the breast drops into the parts left and is softened by its size just like in women, then it should be split into two halves of pus there, with two cuts resembling a lunar figure, each contained within the other. The larger line should contain the smaller one according to this form between the lines 'B' and 'G'. Then scrape the seam which is between the two lips of the sore spot, remove the swelling, and administer what we have said about sewing and powders that are necessary in the treatment until it heals.
And if you do not complete the incision of what should be cut due to the discomfort of the patient and blood discharge, then know that you should immerse the sore spot in corrosive ointment and treat it until this corrodes which is related to fatness, and similarly heal it when it has healed.
Chapter XLVIII.
On the piercing of abscesses that cause vibrations.
These abscesses that cause vibrations are from the species of scrophula, hard ones, which contain a ball that is squeezed.
And among those are some that contain moisture; and for those containing moisture you should make incisions according to this form: from the line of 'G.' to the line of 'B.' And when all is drained out of the ball of health, then you complete it with a cold compress and treat it on another day.
And after that, let the hand be kept and treated with a suitable ointment for water, until it is healed.
And if the abscess from the glands and the catarrh is present, then you cut on that surface as we have said in the section about catarrh, similarly.
And if the wound spreads to an extent that causes fever, then administer with cautery as we have mentioned previously.
Chapter 49.
Section on abscesses that occur due to surgery or through veins.
When the wound from surgery is ruptured and the blood clot (causa) becomes solid under it, then pus abscess occurs. These are the signs by which one can determine if inflammation or an abscess is due to an artery or a vein: when an abscess is caused by surgery, it extends deeply into the body; and when you press on the pus area with your fingers, you feel a whistling sound in that region.
And the one that's due to a vein is easily recognized by its outward manifestation.
And this section concerns such an abscess, particularly when it comes to distinguishing its symptoms, and in the case of lymph nodes, and in the throat, and in localized body areas; and it is large, therefore iron should be avoided as a treatment for it, and that which is located at the extremities, or at the head, should have its treatment avoided.
For one that results from swelling of the arterial orifice due to inflammation, divide in the section of the artery longitudinally; and then cut into the vessel with scissors and cut near the artery, delivering from the tunics where it is exposed.
And then take care of that needle and allow it to penetrate into the other side, strengthening the wound with thread twice in two places -- this causes you to feel when removing both wounds which are located at the temples.
And then pinch the area that is between two ligaments inside the body where all the pain is until the abscess dissolves.
And then apply treatment where pus is formed until the ligaments fall; and later treat it with appropriate ointments until it heals.
And if it's an abscess due to vein section, then consider having your hand positioned like this that touches the area of the abscess at the site, and insert the needle into the place you have with your hand, allow it to penetrate; and in that thread, make a double loop inside until you extract that from the other side, and later tie up the abscess with two ligaments as I've told you on that thread that has two parts at both ends of the thread.
If you fear that we might remove the thread, then insert the needle into that area with this needle all through the abscess until you reach the initial location of the needle, and strengthen your threads in four places.
And then drain the abscess in its central location until you reach where all is pus, and then cut off the excess of the cord, leaving what remains from that area.
And then place over the powder which you have submerged in wine and oil, and later apply the treatment that is done with bandages and ointments until it heals.
Chapter 1 of the abscess caused by nerve torsion.
It occurs just like an abscess in arteries and veins, and similarly, when it occurs due to pressure on nerves or unnecessary work on them, and by similarity.
And the method is as follows in areas adjacent to the joints or at the base of the fingers, or anywhere where the joints are swollen.
And it is a heavy abscess, and its color resembles that of the other body, and it occurs in the larger parts of its disposition seats, and when pressed with vigor, you feel numbness resembling fainting in the patient.
And it is not an abscess that extends deeply into the body, and here it releases pus everywhere, it swells in all parts and does not advance forward or backward.
So for those that occur at the joints, do not apply iron to it, as strong remedies will cause contraction.
For one that is on the head or forehead, allow the pus to drain through a slit. And if it's an abscess with little pus, then take care of it at the corners and cut off that root.
And if it's large, then suspend it with a string, scrape off that area, and keep it elevated; adjust the wound with stitches, and treat it until it heals.
Chapter 50.
Section on the chapter of abscess that occurs due to coughing in the abdomen.
Notice these symptoms often found in the stomachs of such individuals and other parts of their bodies that are referred to as fungal due to similarities with fungi; here is where the root is thin but the top is large. The lips of those involved are red, it's from those who have a small abscess, and it's from those which have significantly increased in size.
And I have seen one myself where in the abdomen there were two parts that resembled fungi, and there was no difference between those white ones, with their small root.
And already the lips of these were inverted and split open, moisture flowed from this continuously.
Then I insert and thoroughly examine each in the foot up to eighteen inches. And the other up to two inches.
And in the operation during their insertion, you consider if the patient is wet, and the color of the wound is white, moist, with subtle redness; then you insert up to the joint line, and apply a point cautery over your own presence, where the heated part should be used to expel the infected section. And if the infection is there, apply the cautery to that area.
And if you find the patient fearful and alarmed, beware of inserting with iron; instead, take lead in its molten form, heat it over that wound, using the method we have described; leave that area for two days.
Then adjust in the seam of the lead thread; therefore, do not stop reinforcing the large lead until it has detached and fallen by itself from that part.
And if the wound is thick with pus, then during its insertion there is some cause for fear and alarm, especially in those located in the abdomen.
It's possible that you will detach much pus from it, and then apply the cautery to prevent it from returning.
Then treat that until the wound has healed completely.
And remember not to insert anything of a dark color, with little sensation, and under careful observation; for such are likely to be cancerous.
And I will come back with further reminders soon.
Chapter 52.
On the treatment of the belly button wound.
The belly button wound is caused by various reasons; either through cracks in the stomach that's above the abdomen, and when you open the skin or intestine according to what should happen in other ruptures; or due to infection which flows from veins or arteries as previously mentioned, or due to constricted breathing in it.
If it's due to a tear in the stomach and when the skin opens, then the color of the abscess is similar to the color of the body; and there is intense pain, and it appears at various locations. And if it's due to the protrusion of the intestine, then that place towards which we have recounted is in your belly with greater intensity, and when you press on that area with your fingers it disappears; and later returns. And forcefully apply lubrication and intense work.
If due to wetness, then it's painful and doesn't disappear when you press with your hand, nor is it constricted, nor does it swell.
And if due to infection, then these signs appear on the abscess turning blackish and declining.
If it's caused by nothing but flesh, then the abscess is heavy, large, and hard, and its size indicates a quantity.
If it's due to wind, then touching it feels painful.
And in the operation concerning it, you consider if the belly button is due to arterial or venous infection, or due to wind; henceforth refrain from treating it where fear and alarm occur as we have instructed in the chapter where I spoke about abscesses caused by arteries and veins.
And if the belly button is due to an intestine or skin problem, then command the patient to hold their breath and stand spread out. Then test in all directions of the belly button area, and command them to face you between your hands on each side. Also encircle with a lead thread around the perimeter of the belly button over the place where you tested; extend the size of the abscess to both sides up to about two inches; apply strong or soft lead around the circuit and use the method of applying it straight down.
And then open the center of the abscess spreading over the membrane and insert your fingers into that spot; if you have found or can see the intestine through it, then you must remove it immediately and push the intestine inside towards the inner parts of the abdomen.
And if you have found the skin, then take it with a thread; and remove any excess of that (probably referring to pus or abscess material).
And if it's contrary to your artery or vein, then surround that spot, and proceed with the operation again. Take two needles and make them into strong threads, then insert the needles into the circuit you made around the abscess in a cross-like manner, causing them to penetrate. And reinforce the abscess in four parts above the needles.
And if you wish, keep the needles in place until you can place extended flesh over it and let it fall naturally; or insert that when it becomes thinner and settle properly, then treat that area with what heals from the ointments until it is healed.
And if the belly button is caused by nothing but flesh or due to wetness in it, then you should open the abscess as we have instructed and eliminate the infection or the moisture found within, which you will find there. Then treat that area with what heals and reinforces the location.
Chapter 53.
On the treatment of wounds.
As we have stated in the division, about different types of wounds and how they are treated using medicines, that healing with iron without causing it to be ulcerated is desirable. We have also discussed wounds generated through the negligence and carelessness during their treatment.
And it was said by the ancients that some diseases of children are in places where their eradication is possible, thus such as in the brain which is in the breast or on the thigh and similar to the parts allocated for extraction throughout, and more so when they start small.
When it is old and severe, don't try to heal him, for I cannot cure anyone of this once it has reached that point, nor have I seen anything else, nor has it been transmitted to such a state.
And the operation on him is as we have said, that you proceed and leave the patient pure of black fever, removing some diseases, and then aim for that, if it's obstructed I replenish any apparent manifestation.
And then prepare the patient for the preparation in which the operation is located, and prepare by cutting the veins that lead to that; and then hollow out from all sides with good excision so as not to damage any cause of the patient's pain. And let the cure flow, and do not remove it lightly, press the spots, and cleanse the pus completely with your hand or with an instrument from which you are able among the tools.
And if it causes you an opposition to thick pus inside the vein or artery, then cauterize that within where the flow of pus has ceased, and then treat that in the other treatment where it is healed.
Capitalize Liv.
Of hydrocele cure.
We have already recommended in the division, of the species of hydrocele water, and the signs of each species, for the cure of them we use medicines.
And that which is cured with iron is none other than the species of mere heat alone, and it does not approximate to the species of tympanists nor to the species of erysipelas, for this one is fatal.
And when you have already treated this species of hydrocele tympanistre with medicine and does not respond to your treatment, then consider that if the patient has already developed debility or is affected by another malady other hydrocele, thus if it's in their chest or belly like those, then be careful not to treat them with iron as there might be a fear about this.
And if you turn the patient's condition due to excessive vitality, and in him there is no other malady but hydrocele alone, neither child nor old, then the method of the operation for him is that you lift the patient between your hands, and you minister him so that his belly protrudes from him with your hand, expel the water towards the exit part of the scrotum, and take a thorn spade according to this form:
It should be two long parts with acute ends, like thorns. However, it may be in him of some shortness little by little, so that during the operation with this one you do not penetrate into the intestine, and that you handle this gently.
And then consider if the generation of hydrocele is from parts of the intestines, then you should examine that in the section near your navel for a length of three fingers to the exit points, in front of him towards the scrotum.
And if the generation of hydrocele is due to illness in the uterus, then your examination area should be on the left side of the navel for three fingers.
And if the cause of his condition is due to milk, then your examination area should be on the right side.
And do not let your examination area be on the side where the patient wants to relieve their urine, in order that excesses do not accumulate at that location.
And then puncture the entire canal with the instrument, and insert into that area, lift your hand to the thorn between the canal and the scrotum, and you scrape this area; if it's the size of a nail or around.
And then puncture through the scrotum so that the thorn reaches the desired location, which is where the water accumulates. And then extract that and insert an instrument of this shape: And it is similar to a delicate silver catheter. It's made of silver or horn or bone, where at the lowest part of its body there is a small needle, and on its sides are three needles: two from one side and one from another side; and made it so that the end is cut like a feather according to this manner:
And at the top of its end is a plug that once the instrument reaches the water starts to come up right away, so it drains a medium amount of water from the mouth. If you drain too much before this, it weakens the patient due to the resolution of their animal spirit, or you might cause them to faint leading to death.
And drain from it according to the vitality of the patient and according to what you understand about the disposition of the patient's condition regarding the vitality of his pulse and the goodness of his health.
And then remove the instrument, and collect the water that causes this issue; it is due to the canal which holds back the needle that you place over the scrotum where you have noted that you should puncture it according to that manner.
And then repeat the instrument on another day if you see that the patient tolerates this, and extract a small amount of water each time, and do this for several days with caution, and be careful not to remove too much water but only a little.
If you fear for the patient's life and let out a large quantity of water, then treat that by burying them in hot sand, applying sweat baths, and waiting long under the sun; and treat that with drying medicines until they are healed.
And apply a cautery on the stomach, and heat up the bile close to water extraction, according to what I have read in the preceding text.
Capitalize: Lv.
Regarding the treatment of children whose kidneys have not perforated the urine locations.
Some of the children exit their mother's womb, but do not perforate the head of their mixture (or they are pulled straight or do not reach their location).
So, when the child is born, make a small incision on the perforation for them as soon as possible according to this form:
And place a small thin lead rod inside the child and hold it in place for three days or up to four days.
And when they want to urinate, let them relieve themselves; and then return that (the lead rod).
And if you do not hold the lead, it may be possible that the urine which goes over the location does not close this seam.
Take care of that which when the child is pulled straight uses a lead rod as we have said, for too many days inside until it grows large.
Take care of those in which the pull is not at its location, let it be, the cause of which is the same as that of others, that when they are born and the child pulls it up through the head of their penis, so that they cannot urinate inwards; and it does not concern their generation, because their sperm cannot reach their mother according to rectitude, and this is a malady that stops at birth.
And the method of the operation for them is that the patient lies on their back, and you extend the head of the penis with your left hand with vigorous extraction, then cut the tip of the head of the penis at the place of the prepuce with a sharp knife, as if it were done with a feather or without touching any part; so that half of the blood flows like the head of the penis and that the pull falls into the middle location according to how you do.
And remember that in your operation for blood flow, what kinds of blisters occur here; and hold it to them at this point where you cut the blood, and treat the wound until it heals.
Capital: LVII.
Regarding whiteness which occurs in the prepuce at the head of the penis and pus, discoloration, and adhesion of the prepuce to the head of the penis.
Blisters occur in this whiteness on the foreskin, it is an indication of impeded flesh growth.
And one of them is malignant and the other is non-malignant.
Non-malignant, take care to hang on a thin string and cut that between which that extends completely; then place it over that small area submerged in Egyptian oil; then treat it with oil until it heals.
And if the whiteness is malignant, observe its color, then you should apply cautery close to where it begins and at its base.
Take care that if whiteness is in the foreskin at the head of the penis in uncircumcised individuals, and one part of the whiteness is inside the foreskin and the other part is outside; then you should remove the whiteness which is inside until it consolidates; and afterwards you treat the outside part, so that when you treat this time the foreskin, there's no guarantee that it won't be torn.
And also blisters occur in the testicles and on the foreskin with blackness and hardening; then you should remove all that has already been degraded, that is about to corrupt or that has already corrupted; and make a line over it around that area, which is treated with honey, which is rubbed with flour made from bran, rye flour, and sieved flour.
And then treat that with the other treatment until it heals.
Take care if there's blood flow, then apply lunar cautery according to this form:
The application of youthful cautery is in two simultaneous positions, that is during blood flow and when the wound becomes corrupted.
And if the head of the penis is corroded and destroyed completely at that time, then you should insert a lead catheter into the inner part of the foreskin so that the patient can urinate through that.
Regarding the adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis (this adhesion occurs only in that which has a sa-like foreskin, and on it circumcision is not performed; and when adhesion occurs due to wound or abscess) you should scrape with blunt blade until the lymph dissolves and the head of the penis is released from all parts.
And if it is difficult to remove those thoroughly, then you should scrape with the tip of some cause from the head of the penis and foreskin, and thus it is that when the foreskin, when it is thin, fort light it is perforated by its thinness slightly.
And then separate between the foreskin and the head of the penis with a thread of its thinness, which has already been moistened in water to prevent any other blistering.
And then it is treated with a firm bandage until it is consolidated.
Chapter 77.
On the creation of children and the treatment of what happens to those who are circumcised.
Circumcision is not a solution like other diseases for continence: rather, it's because of our operation and will, and more so in the case of children compared to that, it is necessary to assign better operations and loss more lightly towards health.
Therefore, say that the ancients did not practice circumcision in some of their free members where they don't use it in their laws, but rather because we have acquired this through experimentation, which is the reason why I have found that most artists and barbers use circumcision and castration on the penis and testicles; and they use a ligament for the male and an incision for the female.
And I have tried all these methods and found that better circumcision on foreskins works best, using the ligament of the male and an incision as in circumcision like the female. This method avoids the chain further up, where the chain of the prepuce is made of two tunics, and allows the lower part to remain. The foreskin's tunic is firm enough for another incision and a sure pain relief. And in circumcision which is done by surgeons, it's done digitally, as carpenters do, the incision at the tip of the male member isn't secure, as it forcibly enters the vessel.
In the operation like in circumcision, a strong iron band can corrupt your operation. And the foreskin of a child is short by nature, and cuts aren't made in such a manner that it needs circumcision, I have seen this.
The circumcision that is done on foreskins and the male's band, its excellence, I've discovered through experience, where the foreskins have a proportionate incision, so that the sharpness above is like the sharpness below; therefore, when you press your hand it has two sharps proportions, cutting according to a comparison in one time; and this makes compression of the male's band into a figure containing the foreskin from all parts, at which there is no error throughout.
And the first way of the operation is that you must have the child stand up significantly if it's one of those I understand to be small, so you don't do anything but hold the male in its foreskin just there, and let that inside on another day.
And then make that happy in all that manner which is within your capability of receiving its intelligence. And then have that person stand between your own servants ready prepared, and don't let him see a hundred; hide the foreskins in your hand or leave them on your chest, so the child doesn't see those nor any other of the tools.
And then place your hand on the male's penis and blow into the foreskin, pulling it in until you expose the tip of the penis, and then proceed to correct that which is added there for impotence.
The form of the foreskins during circumcision is as follows:
Let the first few cuts be uncut edges and the others be cut, so that no hair remains from the root of the clitoris, and let the length of both cuts be as long as the length of two handbreadths equally.
The mistake in circumcision is if you forcibly remove the whole intrinsic foreskin or part of it, you should make an incision.
Therefore cover that from your hand to your penis before the foreskin's retraction, and cut that according to equality.
And if you cannot hold it at your penis, then cut that from the one and cut that.
And if it has been three days, and left that swollen from the penis's retraction, then you should let that in until it softens the retraction cyst, clean that with ease, and cut that according to what is prepared for you.
And guard against the tip of the penis, which will not be for him.
And then treat that with the powder that we have recommended in the section on powders for healing diseases.
And if it has been cut from the foreskin beyond measure, and follows along the lines above, that doesn't bother him.
And treat that with what we have said until it heals.
Chapter 78.
On the treatment of retained urine in the bladder.
Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by pressure due to stones or clotting blood, or from placing something inside or a suture, similar to what we have discussed regarding treatment methods in the division section.
And if it is not dissolved with what we have said, then forcefully apply the cause to the patient, so you should give him an extraction from him using a tool that is called a syringe of which this is the form: It's made of silver and very fine copper alloy, just like a needle from a syringe, with slight length in similarity to a handspan and half, to which there is a thin wire at the tip.
And the method of withdrawing urine through him is that you bend the needle and fasten it at the end with wool or thread for good grip; and insert the ends of the needle into the place where you left off from the syringe, then cut any unnecessary cause of the thread, but forcefully enter it into the syringe. Then press down the syringe towards the bottom and against the belly area.
And have the patient lie over the table, and cleanse the bladder of him and anoint his anus with oil, olive oil, and water.
And then insert the syringe into the opening in a convenient way that reaches the anus; and then fold the anus above the belly-button area; and then push the syringe inside; and then push it inside until it reaches the bladder, and then move the anus so that it comes into contact with the empty cause; and do not follow this order exactly, but rather do what is correct according to its curvature.
And then extend the needle gradually with the thread little by little, for urine soaks the thread.
And then extract that and do with urine therapy, use the syringe, don't stop doing this and use the syringe until the bladder and patient find relief.
Chapter V.
Regarding the quality of bladder irrigation with chloride and with similar instruments which are compatible with this.
When there occurs an ulceration or abscess in the bladder, or if there is congestion within it, or if it is constricted by pressure, and you want to distill water and medicines inside that area, then it should be done with a tool called a chloride applicator. This is its form:
And if the end of it is flat, then it is closed. And in that there are three parts: two from one side, just like times (which likely refers to 'twice' or 'two times').
In the beginning it's a concave place, where this is placed inside, and as much as you fill that space up to how much you've filled, add on more, within which when any cause is pulled out of the humidity, it is also pulled off, and when it's expelled from there, it is also pulled off. And when it's expelling long (that might refer to a duration or length), then it behaves like a chloride applicator where naphtha is poured in naval battles.
So if you want to avoid moisture in the bladder, insert the end of the chloride applicator into the moisture, and pull off what has been filled up above that area; for when the moisture is pulled out from the cavity of the chloride applicator.
And then insert the end of the chloride applicator into the anus according to what we recommended in the syringe; and then pull out the moisture as you pull it off; for as soon as that moisture reaches the bladder, the patient is affected by it.
The form of a subtle enema through which the bladder is irrigated, and this is its form:
And it should be made of silver or tin, where its tip is similar to a small feather, and let there be a tube inside that.
And then take the bladder into motion, and pause in that with the moisture you want to irrigate in the bladder, and then tie that between two with a strong thread tied around the needle, and heat up that moisture over the flame.
And then insert the end of the enema in the anus.
And then place your hand over the bladder with the moisture inside, stretching downward until the patient feels that the moisture has reached the bladder.
And if you do not have access to a bladder, then take a piece of pork and make it into that circle; and puncture the entire roundness of it; and then insert a strong needle in all those parts when turned; and add the circle similarly as it would be added with fat, because you place inside whatever moisture you want from the fluidity, oil, and water.
And then you place that in the tool and do that similarly as you did with the bladder, having your hand so that the moisture reaches the bladder.
Chapter LX.
Regarding the extraction of pain.
We have already discussed in the division the types of pain and its treatment with medicines, as well as the difference between pain caused by stones in the gallbladder and pain caused in the bladder, along with their signs.
And we have discussed the field on which I operate and its section.
And the field produced in the bladder properly is that which is formed within the bladder.
And I am explaining that with clear exposition and abbreviation.
So I say that the field produced in the larger bladder mostly goes to children; and as for its signs, it is like water in its transparency when urine comes out of the bladder, and it appears there as sand. And the patient rubs their penis, and boils and pustules form, and they are then discharged; and on that way through the anus come feces made from those things.
And it is easier to heal children within that period of time they have reached fourteen years old; and healing is difficult in the elderly. In the young ones, it may be because of what is between those.
And from that for which the field is larger and healing is easier; if it's small, it goes against that.
So how do we achieve the healing of that, we start with the beginning of that which modifies the patient through crucifying them until they remove all the opening which is in their intestines; for that opening sometimes prevents the field from developing you have to investigate whether there's any obstruction preventing its formation.
And then make the patient lie down on their feet and get them to squat until they release the field into the bladder, or let it jump out from any other place, or through various boils.
And then make that cauterizer between your own hands ready, and let the patient's hands do their things as they should, so that the bladder can be fully made to decline towards the parts of their body.
And then remove that whole field and everything associated with it.
So if you feel the field in the space, then right away cover the area above it with a section.
And if you cannot touch it all with your finger, then apply oil to your left hand's index finger, if the patient is an infant or a young one, and insert that into their anus. And remove the field as it stands with your finger inside. And convert that small thing gradually into the neck of the bladder.
And then press on it with your finger, and force that thing out from its parts outside; note the section where you have done this.
And tell the attendant to press on the bladder with their hand; and tell another attendant with their right hand to extend their legs upwards from their parts above, and with their other hand remove the tie which is left by the legs in the place where you have made that section.
And then insert a large spoon inside, as this is its shape: And divide that thing between the anus and the legs, not in the middle place, before the left thigh; and let the section be on that field and your finger is in the anus, and made as a transverse section, so that the section outside is wide and inside stretched according to how much I remove from the field, but no more than possible, for when our finger is in the anus, you must allow this section, which should follow the field and be removed with difficulty.
And know that there is some part of the field which has an angle and edges, because its passage becomes difficult due to this.
And from that part which is like a lion with horns, and it is round, and it makes its passage easier.
So if it's that one with an angle and edges, adjust in the crack.
And if it's not like that, then cover it with your invention or strengthen over it, the tip of which is like a file where you strengthen on the field and don't leave from it; or insert this delicate instrument with curved tip.
And if you cannot over it, then enlarge the tool a little, and if you feel pain in your hand, cut on that with hot vinegar.
And if the field is more than one, then at the beginning you push your hand into the opening of the bladder and insert it gently on it; and then push a small thing close to that. And similarly do this if there are several boils.
And if it's a large field, then ignorance is that you insert this with large sections, which happens to the patient in one of two causes: or it remains or it evaporates due to continuous urine distillation, so that the place is not completely consolidated.
And administer expulsion from it once it's been removed, or invent in the crack of it with scissors through which you extract that in pieces.
And once you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with extracts of aloe and dragon's blood, and strengthen that. And place over it a cloth soaked in oil and vinegar, or in used oil and water rubbed together, so that the scab may be released.
And then make the patient lie down on their back, and don't remove the bandage for at least one day.
And once it has been removed, wash the area with water and oil, and then heal it using finnish balsam and balsam of diabolicon until it is healed.
If an abscess occurs in the wound, it is painful and corrosive, resembling when the body's fluid is frozen within the bladder and becomes urine-prohibiting (this is known as causing the body to eliminate this fluid through urine). Then intervene with your method in the wound and remove that fluid. If so, the bladder causes the bladder to deteriorate and decay due to it.
And when you wash the wound with hot water and salt, against all kinds, with this that agrees for your treatment within so it may heal.
And cover during all parts of the entire healing process, that you apply to both thighs and adjust the medicines which are placed over the area.
And if the lump is small and is located in the middle of the penis, and urine flow is prohibited there, then treat that with what I recommend before you reach the section; and in this cure you will find an indication of where to stop; and here I have described how it looks like:
it has a triangular end, sharp, located at the tip.
And then take care, making sure not to let the lump return to the bladder when you remove it from the penis.
And then insert the needle into the penis, making sure to facilitate the process so that the needle reaches the lump. And turn the needle with your hand in that small lump, and you make the opening on one side so that the other side can penetrate immediately; soon urine is liberated.
And then press your hand on that which is hard in the lump from the side opposite the penis, when that is squashed and drained by urine, and the patient is healed.
If this treatment is not appropriate for any reason preventing that procedure, then leave the lump alone and another needle on top of it. And then place above the lump in that penis between two threads. And then remove that. And then untie the string and change the frozen body, which is done in the wound.
And it is not necessary to leave the needle with the lump, only so that it does not return to the bladder, and the other string above but when this is untied, the needle nears the exit of the lump, the thread returns to its place and heals the wound.
And for this is necessary when you have the needle above, that you lift the thread from above or you should fulfill your job and heal the wound like we said.
Section 61.
On extracting a lump from women.
Lump in women is rare.
If you see a lump in any of those, then it's difficult to treat her, and it's prohibited by various methods.
One of them is that the woman should not lean too far forward with her hips.
And the second is that you won't find a woman who knows how to describe if she has been with a man or if it's from a woman having had marital relations.
The third is that you won't find a woman who knows this technique, especially the operation with her hand.
And the fourth is that the location of the section about lumps in women is far from the lump's location, so you have difficulty with a circular cut, and there's fear in that area.
If necessity compels you to do this, then cover that you take an experienced woman who is available.
If you are lacking that, then come to an experienced and subtle one, or present a woman who is knowledgeable about women's affairs, or a woman who has part of this skill herself.
So make that presentation, and command her to do everything you tell her, from the inquiry about the lump to the beginning; which causes is that she look if the woman has hips, then cover that she puts her own thing in the anus of her and wants the lump.
So if she finds that one, keep her with her own thing, and then command her to insert into that.
And if it's not hips, then command the matron to insert her own thing into the patient's mouth and inquire about the lump, because place her left hand over the bladder, and squeeze that with good pressure.
And if she finds that, then cover that gradually reduces the patient from the opening of the bladder to her hips so that with each movement reaches the edge of the thigh.
And then insert into that position at the edge of the mouth you should reach the edge of the thigh for any part is where she stops and center the lump in that part, so that her word isn't disturbed by the lump keep it with her.
And the section should be small at the beginning; and then insert her finger into that section, and if she feels the lump, then adjust in section according to the amount she knows that the lump will fall from that.
And know that the types of lumps are spots: those of which there is a little and are large, rough, long and round, and have horns.
And then know how many types she has for this so you can indicate about what you want.
If you want to drain pus, adjust it in the location of the puncture and keep it there for an hour until the pus is removed, then proceed with your operation once the wound has been cleaned out.
And prepare with yourself the tools you mentioned in the removal of pus in men, so that you may be helped by those during your operation.
And if you want to drain pus, and you know that the expulsion of pus is from the artery that is incised, then you dust powder over the area and strengthen it with powder and tightness. Do not continue this; leave the wound as it is, do not forcefully remove this, for it could cause death in the patient due to too much bleeding. And then heal the wound.
And once the inflammation of the pus subsides after some days, and the area heals, then you resume your operation while ensuring that the wound is cleaned out.
Capitol sixty-two.
Section on inguinal hernia.
Inguinal hernia is nothing but an accumulation of moisture in the white muscle, which contains the testicles and is referred to as the scrotum. It is named the scrotum.
And in some cases it's within the proper skin which your body naturally forms during the passage of urine, once it gets cut when there's already another urine; and it is the part of the genital between the white scrotum which we've mentioned, and it isn't this but rather a fold.
And the creation of this hernia is due to overstrain on the genital organs, causing this substance to accumulate there. Sometimes it occurs due to blows struck to the genital area.
And this moisture has various shades of color; its color either becomes yellowing or reddening, or reddish, or turns black and fatty, or is watery white, and this is what is more common.
And the signs by which one knows where this accumulation of water is in this case: if it's within the scrotum which we've mentioned, then the pus appears to extend somewhat along its length like a urinary figure, and you can see the testicles, for the moisture encompasses them from all sides.
And if the moisture is within the proper skin, then the pus appears at the passage of urine and that's why one assumes there's another urine.
And if the moisture is between the part of the genital organs and the white scrotum, then you'll notice the swelling.
And if you want to know the color of the moisture, then you inspect the color of the pus in the swelling from inside, through the incision where its shape is made; and according to how it stands in the trace of the incision, judge what's inside.
And then when we come to the treatment of this matter, you instruct that if it's possible, perform lithotomy on the patient and increase his urine production, and let his body be full.
And then have him lie on his back for some minutes or so, and place your clean cloths under him.
And then sit on the left part of him, and instruct that your assistant follow to his right side. He should extend his hand between two sides at the genital organs and at the division of the belly button.
And then take a fold on the side and divide the part of the genital organs through the middle from the left to almost the navel.
And do this section according to the correct method, making equal distance from the line that should be at the level of the scrotum skin, until it reaches the white scrotum.
And scrape that, observe and take care of this so you do not go too deep; your scraping on the part that you scrape should appear hanging towards the urine more and minutely inspect your scraping according to how much you can.
And then pierce the scrotum full of water with an expanded hole, and extract all the water.
And then separate between the two lips of this section with scissors and extend the scrotum towards these parts above. Do not touch the area that includes the testicles, but cut the scrotum in such a manner as is possible for you. And cut it all or in pieces, especially its delicate underside. If you do not inspect the incision of this carefully, it is not ensured that the water will not return.
And if urine begins to flow outside of its scrotum during your operation, once you have completed the section of the scrotum, return inside and properly adjust the two lips of the genital organ's scrotal area with stitches. Then treat this as you would any other wound until it heals.
And if you find that the urine is corrupted by other illnesses, then inspect that you cut the veins which are under the scrotal suspension, remove the urine, and then treat it as we have said.
And if the water is accumulated in two parts at times, then know that there are two hernias; therefore cut that part as you did with the other equally; and if it's visible to you that it's an operation, then do this.
And then you clean off the pus, and between each section use wool submerged in oil or in rubbed oil; then put aside another piece of wool which you have submerged in vinegar and oil, spread this over two testicles and the belly button; then place over it dry cloths and powder, and lay these over them according to this shape:
And have two cloths prepared and fill them with boiled wool according to this manner; then place the extremities on which pressure is applied either with a cloth or with moistened wool, add them to the structure in the crotch of pants, one extremity takes from behind into the other, the second goes at the opening of the trouser leg, two extremities over two thighs and two others over two knees, all tension should be adjusted within the pants' waistband.
And sometimes this hernia is artificially treated with a cautery in the place of section by iron; and you take a fine surgical cautery and make an incision at that point on the genital area, and it is lit according to what we have recommended inside where white bile containing water is discovered, then you take the cautery following this manner: And it resembles Greek writing.
Then pierce that bile, and it is lit inside so that all the moisture is expelled.
Then stretch that bile with hooks, scrape with hooks, and scrape with the lit fine cautery; then cut it as far as is possible inside where you can remove all of it; and be careful not to let the flame touch it.
And know that this operation is safer and further from the source of infection than an operation on the section.
If it displeases you that there is an abscess at the time of section or during the cautery, or if there is a discharge from infection, then determine how this condition affects you regarding which treatment is suitable for them, apply that cure to them as stated.
If the patient is anxious and does not anticipate a second operation due to its horror, then administer puncture according to what I have recommended; and this is when you should be informed about it, based on what we have discussed regarding the meanings, that this hernia is watery.
Then determine to have the patient lie on an elevated bed, then pierce the abscess at the lowest part of it on the side, and continue the puncture according to the length of the body.
And make the opening wide so that all the water can flow out.
Then place your hand on the wet area and smooth it, so that all the remaining water can drain away. And then treat that area until the wound is healed.
If the condition is against water drainage in that moment you puncture it: and this is not done unless white bile within the wound causes a problem and prevents water from exiting, then determine to place an instrument inside the wound with which water is extracted from the hydrocele, its shape being provided; or adjust over the wound's surface a small piece.
And know that water returns, and is gradually drained approximately over three or around those months; and as it accumulates, then puncture according to that method, so the patient will pass their days.
Chapter 63.
On section about fatty hernias and their treatment.
And know that during section on this hernia, there is concern about infection in the major areas; because I see the cessation of it and being saved by that better.
And I remember the operation in that and the specifics of abscesses.
Therefore, state that abscesses occur in the areas of the body where the genitals are located and this is done due to these causes: or from sudden overabundance of pus, which infiltrates into the genitals, or by impact.
And the color of the abscess is according to the color of the body, it does not appear with its pain, and it is a heavy abscess.
And a thin one is an uninfected abscess, whose color is dark, and does not have pulsation in it.
And sometimes it is done due to blockage of the arteries, and by swelling of those already noticeable in memory, or by swelling of veins.
And this is due to swelling of the arteries, known when pressing that area with your fingers; and don't determine that you touch it.
And this is done due to swelling of the veins, not spreading from any cause you should only apply pressure with your fingers.
And it is possible that for this type an operation can be performed on the other carnal parts; and you make the incision of the genital area, then stretch your hand to the upper parts, extract it from white bile, release the suspensory ligaments of the vessels, tie them, and cut off the pus sac as you remove it from all parts of your hand.
Therefore, if your hand is already within those solid areas, then determine to remove the hand and make incisions.
And if there is adhesion due to some cause within the bile sac, or between what is between the layers, then determine to release all that adhesion and make an incision there through a round cut.
And if it is a native growth of flesh in the place of adhesion which is behind, then determine to make an incision of all that is from it and remove your hand as we have said.
And once your operation is complete, then fill the wound with oiled and scented wool; and then treat that like any other treatment until it heals.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
Concerning the treatment of hernias involving vitals.
Vit is an abscess enclosed by some kind of sheath resembling a bud, affecting the ability to perform exercises and walking on the thigh.
And in treating this type of thigh ailment, it is due to the anticipation of what comes before it that requires recall or reflection.
However, they say 'operation' in the context of doing the first one.
And say that when you are performing surgery on the thigh, place your hand over an elevated pillow; then remove the scrotal suspensor to the parts below; and position the tendon of the thighs under your thumbs where they press against the pubis; and have those other ministers assist you, extending them in vigorous extension.
And then make an incision longitudinally through the area across where the veins are exposed within them.
And then carefully remove from all parts whatever we have described in the extraction of stones which are found in the temples.
And then place in those locations a needle with a double bevel, insert that at the first of the areas where the abscess occurs on the thigh, and do so again further along them. And then make incisions in the middle of them longitudinally according to the length of the body, and extract that which has accumulated from the cold and corrupt fluids.
And then treat the wound with healing for the other wounds in which you wish to be cured by letting the veins that you have left one or two thighs flow, which is not harmful.
If an abscess occurs throughout the thighs, then say that the testicles should be removed or that the testicles due to this are cut off from the veins, so that they lack all nutrition by the incision of the veins, and they become hard, or that it is without youth in those.
Capitol .lxv. (This seems to be a numbering marker for a chapter or section, possibly related to surgical procedures or medical knowledge.)
Regarding the treatment of intestinal hernia.
The occurrence of this hernia involves a section that develops under the stomach when extending on the belly from the parts of the intestines in the abdomen, so pushing those contents into some of the cavities.
And this rupture is from the stomach or from an abdominal cavity; it happens in these two species due to various causes: from impact, or from a jump, or from shouting, or from lifting something heavy, or from being pressed.
The sign of this (when due to the expansion of the stomach), is that it occurs gradually over a long time and does not happen suddenly; it's an abscess evenly spread within the peritoneum where the stomach compresses the cavity.
The sign of this (when due to the section of the stomach), is that it causes intense sudden pain at the start; and it's an abscess varying in appearance near the abdominal cavity. And this is by displacement of the cavity, and the body of him is ahead of the stomach's parts further away.
Some areas are outside the cavity with the membrane, and this condition is called intestinal hernia by backsliding.
Some are made due to wind, and some go into the cavity opening, here it gets stuck, this is a great discomfort in the thigh, and some become ill wind and more so when they are pressed.
In the treatment of this type of thigh ailment, it requires caution, so you should avoid strenuous activity in that area.
And the method of performing surgery on that is to command the patient to return the cavity to their hand at its place inside its cavity if it returns to its normal position, and then envelop them under their chest between your hands, and raise their knees.
And then tighten the cord, which ties the scrotal tendon above them, and make an incision all along the length of the scrotal tendon; and then place two edges of the cut in the middle according to what you need to open the section at those points.
And if the opening matches the amount that is possible from that, so that the section is open.
And then remove that part of the stomach which is left from the scrotal tendon, within which a white hard stomach should be exposed from each side.
And then you intervene with what your hand finds in that place which cuts the testicle, that's between the white stomach, which is left of the sperm duct, and behind the stomach, according to its side, and free from that adhesion that is at the opening part behind the sperm.
And then bring your hand to the scrotal tendon on the sides forward, and do so by extending the white stomach along your left hand, and lift the sperm upwards towards the stomach at the section's side; and command the assistant to lift it up while you dissolve the adhesion behind with a complete solution.
And check with your thumbs that there is no cause for the cavity being wrapped in the hard white stomach. If you find any reason in him/her, then you must pull that towards the belly from there.
And then cut into the part left of the chain of the testicles through a section where blood and health flow as we have recommended in what we have said.
And then apply wool soaked in oil, and place it on the wound; and apply the ligament as we have recommended (and some white threads are cauterized, which is what we mentioned nearby when discussing the place of blood flow, where those threads come into play) and bind the ligament so that it falls by itself.
If the healing of the patient is delayed, then use warm water to bathe them, and place something over it as we have mentioned when discussing how it should fall.
And in the meantime, treat the wound with another treatment for wounds until it is healed.
Chapter LXVI.
Concerning ventral hernias.
In this hernia, it has not been seen that any of them was heated during the treatment of it.
And the first ones would say that it is done in this way as we have recommended for the hernia that is in the middle; which means you tie the veins close to the section about that facilitates the patient; and dry off around the center area of the abscess, in such a way that opens this place, where the veins fall.
And treat the wound as we have said until it is healed.
Chapter LXVII.
Concerning the disturbance that occurs in the kidneys.
Some threads may break in the kidneys as we have said, and you should leave the area.
And do not let any cause of the intestines reach the genitals; and if they do, it's little; and return to this always.
If the time goes on with this, a fissure is made in the penis so that the intestine falls into the penis; and this happens due to the expansion of the penis which is in the kidneys as we have said, the cause being that the penis is stretched, and the area becomes soft and inflamed causing it, you leave.
And the treatment of the patient is with a cautery as what was followed by the story of the patient.
And some threads are healed with iron according to this method: and what the patient is lying on their two buttocks on your own cushion, and then dry off the area of the rupture of the abscesses you place it at the section by the width according to the size of three fingers.
And then strengthen the white penis that is below the chain so that it becomes exposed.
And then take hold of the thread and place it over the most prominent part of the penis, and press that to the belly button.
And then pinch the two most prominent places on the tip of the penis, and adjust one of those to the other with suturing.
And then remove the tip of the thread, and do not cut all the way through the penis, nor pull the hand too far or any other cause as I know to be relevant in the treatment of intestinal hernias.
And then treat that with the treatment of wounds, and as you cut into the limbs, clean that and restore the wound until it is consolidated; which means that the penis contracts and does not adjust the prominence of rupture.
And cautery is better in this place, which is closer to health.
Chapter LXVIII.
Concerning the softening of the chain of the testicles.
Some threads of the chain of the testicles in some men become soft due to this and because the muscles that are within that area also become soft; and you need to take care of it.
It is necessary for the one who is taking care of this treatment to have the patient lie on their two sides, and lift all the chain that becomes soft over the natural chain; and also adjust two lips to the suture.
And if you want, pinch in the beginning the excess of the softened chain with three or four stitches and make a tight suture.
And then cut between the stitches; and then treat with the treatment of other wounds until it is healed, and let the limbs fall.
Chapter LXIX.
Concerning castration.
Know that castration in our law is excommunicated, but for some reason I remember this to you in this book; and it's not necessary to remember this otherwise than with two methods, of which one is so that when a doctor is questioned about that thing, they know how to treat the affected person; and the other method is that we need castration from time to time for the young ones of other animals due to those reasons, just as in hunting, dogs, pigs, and similar beasts.
And so it's said that castration can be done in two ways: either through gelding or through incision to section.
In the one where it is done through gelding, the way of the operation is that we make them cut the beast in cold water so that the genitals of the animal soften and swell, hanging down. And then take those with your hand until they are resolved and do not show any touch marks.
In castration done through incision and severance, you must have the beast and press on the base of the testicles with your right hand.
And then attach the suspensoriums, and cut on each one where two testicles would be located.
And then cut out all the pus that you will have excised. And do not leave any cause on those of the scrotum, but rather the subtle scrotum which is over the veins.
And this method of castration is better than the one done through gelding, for it does not leave any cause from the testicles so that the animal desires copulation.
And then treat the wound until it has healed.
Chapter 70.
On the treatment of hermaphroditism.
Hermaphroditism in men occurs in two ways: the first is where they develop into a space in the base of the testicles, in that which appears between two testicles, resembling half a female with hair.
And some discharges from that occur urine located in the base of the testicles.
In the females there is a special case: it's that the female part above the vulva is like two testicles of a man, somewhat smaller in size at first, like the prepuce of a male and two testicles.
And the treatment is for three kinds: of two for men and one kind for females. And it's that you must cut into those tightened muscles so that the discharge of that comes out, and then proceed to treat those wounds with the cure of other diseases.
And in the second type for men which has urine, if it's located in the base of the testicles, there is neither cure nor operation needed for that.
Chapter 21.
On leucorrhea and the inflammation of tissues caused by female conditions.
Severe leucorrhea is adjusted to natural causes that are increased and need attention; some discharges become more significant in certain females to the extent that they spread like in men, penetrating during intercourse.
Then you must have the excess of leucorrhea with your hand or on a finger and cut it.
And do not conclude with cutting, especially in the opening of the vagina, to prevent discharge of pus.
And then treat that wound with the treatment until it heals.
The vaginal mucosa is the tissue that does not emerge in the mother's belly until it fills that space, and severe leucorrhea appears at those parts like a penis (thus they initially called this condition "caudal dysuria"); then you must cut it like how we cut leucorrhea, treating it until it heals.
Chapter 72.
On the treatment of arthritic conditions.
Arthritis is when the female part isn't punctured or it's only slightly inflamed. And it can be natural or accidental.
Accidental is due to dysuria that has preceded it, and this one is done or by poorly adjusted vaginal tissue or by a subtle scrotum or thickening.
And it can occur in the opening of the mother, or at her sides, or in excess pus inside her, or in lower pus inside her. Strictly prohibit coitus and pregnancy prevention, and heavily prohibit menstruation as well.
The diagnosis of that is made through examination by the midwife, if the prolapse is evident, then it's severe. But if not evident, then you must feel around with your fingers or inside her.
If the prolapse is due to a subtle scrotum, and it's near the two lips, then you must hold it and force it back.
And you place your hands on the two lips, and then press with your thumbs on both breasts.
And the female is on her back, her thighs spread apart, and you then spread both lips forcibly until that subtle scrotum is ruptured and the prolapse opens.
And then take wool and soak it in oil and place that over the area, and let him rest at home for a day so that the cut area does not get infected.
And if the scrotum is thick and dense, then you must cut that with a knife or with a leaf of myrtle.
And if the prolapse is due to fatty tissue, then you should hold that up with a finger, and cut that area.
And you should use the medicines that help stop pus discharge such as saffron, dragon's blood, and garlic, adjusting them with broth of chicken.
And then administer a wide lead catheter to prevent the wound from being lightly consolidated.
Hold that for several days and administer hot baths to it.
And let this be cured with the other treatment of consolidation until it is healed.
And some veins occur during the main birth of other muscles, and then cut them as indicated in this manner. If it's due to a boil, for the boil which is in the main area, don't mix iron with anything else.
Chapter 73.
On the treatment of hemroids, tailaches, and red boils that occur in the womb of women.
Hemorrhoids are an ailment of the openings of varicose veins where blood flows continuously from them; and old hemorrhoids, when they occur, manifest themselves in this way.
And I have already explained in the division of those and their symptoms, and also to say about which ones receive treatment and which do not.
So I say that during pregnancy, when hemorrhoids and such do not appear with the feeling, then there is no need for treatment with iron in those.
Those are the ones that are on the openings of pregnancy where you feel a sensation; these are the ones that receive treatment.
And let you place the woman in mustard baths and then spread butter on her thighs or on hard linen, or under rough cloth, cut those with the razors.
And when you have cut those, apply powders over them from one of the medicinal powders in the form of a bite, like ginger and similar to those.
And let you rub her feet for an hour, then place her in cold water.
And if the bleeding of the blood persists, then have her drink a decoction of suman and dried mangoes, pomegranates and similar.
And let you take flour of sugar-cane, mix it with honey and wine agreeably, make a poultice from this over her back.
And if the blood is eliminated, drink it; otherwise, apply to two bandages, and on her nipples do incisions.
And take wool and immerse it in the juice of castor, or in the juice of arnica, or in the juice of gaultheria with wine cooked, and apply it to the place; then treat the area with ointment until it is healed.
And treat it until it is healed.
Chapter 74.
On the perforation of ovarian cyst during pregnancy.
Various types of abscesses that occur during pregnancy, such as those caused by inflammation, stone-piercing abscess, ulcers, abdominal abscess, worm infestation, fistula from hemroid, hernias, and other abscesses. And I have already explained these ailments, their types, and their symptoms, as well as their treatments in the division.
And let me explain that I will speak about the treatment of abscesses when they occur during pregnancy and which are related to healing; if you want to know how the operation is done in this way with iron.
Therefore, consider if the pain of the abscess at its beginning is sharp upon percussion and pus, fever, and sometimes it turns red; and if you feel a sensation over it, then note this for perforation of it, and treat it with what helps in maturation until the intensity of the accidents ceases.
And then let you cut the woman on a board that has two boards; lie her back on this and adjust her feet to the remaining part of the stomach, and spread her thighs apart, place her hands behind her knees, and tie them with bandages in accordance with what is convenient.
And let the midwife follow with the left hand and administer the tool through which an opening is made in pregnancy, its shape will come about in those causes that we will explain.
And when you want to administer this tool, fix it in the middle of the belly of the woman, and what goes through the instrument into pregnancy should not exceed the belly and harm her. If the tool is larger than the belly of pregnancy, then let you put powders on the texture of the belly of pregnancy so that it prevents all instruments from entering the belly of pregnancy.
And let you put the fluid that runs in the tool of pregnancy above it and have her hold the tool while she moves this fluid inside until the opening of pregnancy is opened.
And when you see the excitation, and it is touched with the hand and is warm and moist, then let you stop this with his head in the wet sand.
And when the healing is evacuated, let you place a wet bandage in olive rubbed or olive oil in which there is some heat; place the heel in this area of pregnancy.
And let you leave the belly exposed and over the belly, wool cloth wet in water where mandrakes have been boiled.
And after this, let her be cured about two days with ointment which agrees with what is necessary until she is healed.
And some treatments involve washing the whole body and applying a poultice to the infected area that is saturated with water and honey, then adding water in which herbs or powdered garlic have boiled, and subsequently returning it to the application.
And if the infection is deep inside the inflamed area, then it's advised not to treat this case with iron, instead use the treatment we have discussed in the previous section.
Capitol. seventy-five.
To teach the midwives how to best nurse the newborns when they are sick according to an unnatural figure.
It is necessary that the midwife understands in the eating process the figure of normal childbirth through signs from her, and when you have a female to give birth and she urges for air, as if overcome by the exertion, and she breathes heavily according to where the pain is localized on her body, and accelerates the expulsion of the baby, then you know that this birth is according to natural figure, and it is her breathing above her head, and the second one at that point suspended or hanging from the umbilical cord.
So when you observe those signs, then it's important that the belly of the person is compressed by itself so that the baby comes out slightly lighter when lying on its head, and present her with the second one, and it's necessary to remove those excesses for good improvement.
That which is another case for this unnatural and impractical part, when the baby is expelled onto its feet and the body of the person is positioned in front of their head and feet, and one hand or at the foot of that person... Or when the head of the person is expelled and their hand or it's at the belly, and they are lightly turned onto their back, resembling figures that are impractical.
It is necessary that the midwife be knowledgeable and discerning in all these matters, and avoid errors and deception.
And I am showing you every figure of those cases, and what is the cause in those cases for it to be significant and its state to correspond with it.
When the birth is expelled on its head through natural strength, and it's vigorous with the woman and causes difficulty in her part, weakening her virtue, then she should perform this maneuver, or what the women have at their disposal, evaporating the moisture of their body with fennel oil and olive oil.
And then the midwife should intervene between her navel and small opening with the second one, or dry that area with alcohol in which there is moisture. And presses on the belly of the woman so that the fetus expels itself.
If it doesn't expel itself, then it's necessary that the woman be treated with fennel water and fennel jelly for the cure.
And then command her, and guide her breathing, that she is compressed and make her sneeze with the conditions; and keep her mouth and nose open for an hour, so that the fetus can emerge quickly.
And if both ends of the fetus are expelled at the beginning, then it's important that you reduce those gently to facilitate the process gradually. If you don't follow the instructions, then have the woman lie on her side and lift her feet up, and then place the stool under the ground; and make sure the woman is held so she doesn't fall due to the concussion.
And if the ends are not turned and birth doesn't occur, then you should insert those and remove the fetus's head or make contact with its body using a cloth and extract it equally; so that it can emerge.
When the fetus comes out through her hips, it's necessary that you push those in, and then gradually turn the fetus slightly, try to equalize that situation, and take one of its feet and spread those hips gradually.
When it's expelled into the thighs, then you command her to expel herself, make her sneeze under conditions; if God wills it, it should be able to emerge quickly.
And if it doesn't emerge quickly with what we've recommended, then you return the fetus bit by bit so that you place it according to its natural figure; at this point it will be able to come out more gently.
And if it's forbidden to do everything we've recommended, then take fennel and dissolved gum, crush them well in the mortar for good pounding, then mix with the moisture of the woman, the bottom pus of her belly. And then make her sneeze in hot water so that she gets under her armpits.
And when the parts of your body are softened, then have her undergo a sub-fumigation with mint and place her under it. And after an hour of sub-fumigation, then make her lie on a stool, and have her sneeze and open her mouth wide, lift her up, press gently on the lowest part of her belly, so that the fetus can emerge quickly.
The fetus should be suspended laterally with one of her hands. It is to be skillfully performed in reducing the hand of the patient. If you cannot reduce that hand, then raise the woman and let it go.
And if it won't go down, then place her on her side, and vigorously squeeze her thighs, and administer remedies that I have recommended for purges.
And if the birth has come about, then have her lie on her side, and study over the reduction of the hand, and guide the fetus according to its natural figure, make her sneeze, and command her to push herself while it is being expelled.
Position the fetus on or over the collarbone, spread out her hands and the surface of her body as much as possible relative to her mother's. Make sure the midwife holds onto the hand of the fetus and gradually turn that little one bit by bit, making it easier.
And as soon as they are equalized, then pause on the chest of the one that we have recommended using oil and for purges.
And then command her to gently push bit by bit, and when you have done this, have the patient lie on one side and command that she be inclined towards the right hip, and then command her to push herself; make her sneeze under these conditions. The fetus after being prepared exits onto the side.
When the horror from the mother occurs according to this manner, take note of it, and then you must immerse the second finger into your nail while it is being evacuated of moisture.
And if the fetus is suspended over the face and neck of the one, then you must immerse that of the belly button, so that it is not retained and stays put.
And then push the fetus towards the lower parts inside while pausing it according to what you observe, and command the woman to push herself for a few times, and let it be expelled gently if God wills.
The expulsion of twins or multiple fetuses. Know that twin births occur naturally, and some may require three or four tries, but this is strange and difficult to achieve; most of these are caused by natural factors, not by will.
And count those, whether they be multiples, a second one, and are separated by ciphers, distinguishing them inside the navel tissue for each of these. Some births occur naturally bit by bit, and others require forceful efforts like we have recommended.
And if some are difficult among them, you must assist in their birth and proceed with the figures we have mentioned for unnatural cases. Then you treat those as we have recounted.
And if the midwife is subtle and does what makes it easy and subtlety, and with delay, and skillfully according to every figure as she has been prepared by her craft leading to health.
Recollection of what forms within the womb from embryos and abortions.
Some veins are formed in the mother once, twice, three times, four times, five times, six times, seven times, and more than ten times. You should verify that one female who aborts does not get pregnant again, and another one has had all these formations, which is caused by measuring the glorious sages.
And all of this conforms to what is in the science of midwifery that it allows for that little resemblance to be applied to such things, and then pauses when it observes that there is progress.
Chapter .lxxvi.
On extracting the fetus when it is dead.
When you care for the dead fetus in the way we have instructed in the division of medicine and it is not expelled naturally, if you are inclined to use surgery with your hands, then consider whether the woman is of good health and does not suffer from any accidents that might bring about her downfall.
And then consider that the woman is laid on her side over her back, and that her head is tilted forward and her thighs are elevated.
And let the minister hold that of both parts or tie her in bed so that her body does not extend towards the extraction of the fetus.
And then you moisten the mouth of the one for her with oil and with purgative juice, as well as with fennel and seeds from it.
And then smear the midwife's hand with those oils and purgatives, and insert her hand for facilitation in the one, and place her hand where the nails will rest on the fetus.
And places convenient in that: then you consider if the fetus is prepared to descend over its head, and then you place the nails on the cheeks of it, or on its neck, or on its mouth, or on the palate, or leave the beard, or on the cleft of it, or near the back areas, or leave the lower ribs.
If the discomfort is in his feet, then near the heel, or in the middle of the back.
And have the hand on the right side of him, and hold the curve of his body in that place which is between the last two fingers of my left hand, and insert the hand for ease, keeping the foot in one of those places we've mentioned, as it goes down to the root cause.
And place and keep it in the position of his other foot, or heel if necessary, so that there is an even pull, and not just extension according to its straightness.
And may it be applied throughout the entire part, so that the pain of him is relieved as much as when in teeth the eradication of them is done.
And apply it where the extension is softened; and if any part of him is being held, then consider that the midwife applies some of her fingers with oil and insert those skillfully, then move around in that which is being held.
So if the part of the fetus is outside, then let the hands be placed near the spot which is pus filled; and do this while all the fetus is being removed.
If the hand is deep behind the other one, and it's not possible to reduce that by restraining him, then consider having a cloth cover over that; and remove that while all is being removed, and cut into that or at the junction of the hand or at the side.
And do this similarly for the other hand and in both feet.
If the fetus's head is large, or it gets restricted in the passage, or if there is excess water at the head, then consider inserting between the fingers, prick into the head, and drain the water, or look for that with an instrument which is called "the scalpel", its shape will resemble the shapes of other tools near this one.
And similarly do this if the fetus has a large head by nature: and consider cutting that with string, or take that with scalpel as we have said; and then use forceps to extract those bones.
And if the head is stuck and restricted at the sternum, then consider making a cut in order that the moisture which is in the feet be dissolved.
If it's not complicated, nor causing pain, then consider cutting the head immediately as is suitable to you.
And if the breech or the water is stuck or in him, then consider piercing that where the moisture flows within him.
If the fetus is above his feet, then consider that the pull of him is slight and the direction of him to the mouth of the mother is slight.
If it's restricted at the belly and feet, then consider to remove that with cloth which you will have covered over your hand, and cut the belly and feet in order that what flows within them be allowed to go.
If the other limbs remain and turn the head, then consider that the midwife inserts her left hand; but if the mother's mouth is open, then insert your hand into the vagina, and surround that with the head, and pull it towards her hands, and throw him towards the mother's mouth, and prepare to insert another hand or two of them.
And if the mother's mouth is restricted by pus that occurs in one of them, then consider not to be lifted over him; before this consider administering exhalation from wet fatty causes. And apply bandages; and continue the patient with waters that soften and moisturize.
And if the fetus is on his side, then if possible it should be cut: and the water that we have said about in the living fetus should be administered.
And if this is not possible, then it should be cut with forceps, and extracted.
And see that you do not leave any cause within the second.
And when you have completed all your operation, consider administering what we have said about the treatment of abscesses caused by pus from the mother.
And if bleeding occurs, then consider it in warm waters and administer the other treatment.
And I have already seen a woman in her belly with a dead fetus, and near that there was another pregnancy, and the fetus itself was dead. A long time ago an abscess occurred in his umbilical area; and inflates so that the fetus swells up, and began to move.
And I was called for his treatment, and treated him for a long time, and the wound is not healed.
Then I used several strong pulling plasters on him, and extracted one bone from him, and after some days, extracted another bone; and I was too amazed, because there is no bone in the belly.
And then I considered that they were of the bones of the dead fetus.
And then I washed the wound, extracted bones of the dead fetus from him, and the woman was in such a position that she could move around for a long time, correcting his movement by half a foot.
And I did not consider it strange, rather that in this there is knowledge and assistance for what the doctor does with his hands when administering treatment.
From the forms of the tools that are necessary for extracting the fetus.
Form of vomiting from which the belly is opened:
This is the form of strength from which the ropes are equalized, to which equality two vomits in both ends of each fetus. Yet let this vomit be more subtle than twisting, and let it be made either of rope or of wood.
And let the width of each rod be two inches and the edge of either side be one inch, and the length of each is a hand and half; and in the middle of two rods there are two joints of those wood rods which are already made, of which the length is almost a hand and a little less, and the width of each is about two inches or a little less.
And these two additions should be inserted in the opening of the mother's belly so that they open when you rotate the two prescribed vomits.
Another form similar to that one, more subtle and lighter:
It should be made of ropes or wood according to the resemblance of forceps. Yet at the extremity of it should be two additions just like that, and the length of those additions is about a hand, and the width of each is two inches.
And as you wish to open the belly with those, then cut the skin above it while she is lying on her back with her feet hanging down, opening that which is between her thighs. And then open your hand with the tool in such a way as you do with scissors equally according to the amount that you want of the opening of the mother's belly within which she measures to do what you want.
The form of vomiting as the ancients described:
The form of pushing from which the fetus is pushed:
The form of assistance, in which the large head is turned:
And it resembles forceps with teeth at the extremity, just like that, and sometimes it is made long like forceps according to this form, just like that, which has teeth like reed teeth in which it is inserted and turned. The form of assistance for a little:
Form of a spoon with one spine:
Form of a spoon with two spines:
The form of a spatula with two ends, from which the head is severed:
The form of two spatulas laid out:
All those instruments are practiced, and when more varieties of that are multiplied and prepared you should use the experts, the lighter to their operation and more autonomous regarding their quantity.
And do not use those instruments already if you need them yourself, for the necessity of those is not excusable.
From the extraction of the second.
When the second is retained you must give birth, then open so that you command to the mother to keep her urine, and make that sneeze with the condition, and strengthen your hand on her mouth and her nostrils, and if by this it goes out naturally, good.
And if not, then take a sponge and perforate in the cover one hole and pause on that herbs to open the mother's mouth, like camomile and rough, nettle, chamomile, powdered gum Arabic, cinnamon sticks, and thyme. All these herbs or some of them should be submerged in water on the sponge, and pause that over the fire.
And then place a pipette of cassava in the mother's mouth, and let that be within which the vapor escapes to the cavity of the belly.
And then make that sneeze as we have said, and the second comes out spontaneously at speed.
May this treatment continue and if it is not successful, then you command the midwife to submerge her left hand in saffron oil or in rose water extract, and then insert that into her womb and let the second come out with that, and when you have found it, take it little by little May it stick in the mother's uterus, then insert her hand as we have recommended, and when she has found the second, remove that little by little according to rectitude so that the mother does not fall from the strong urge. Before it is made easier on both sides of her breasts and left side.
And if the mother's mouth is constricted, we have already recommended treatment with sneezing and with medicinal use of the sponge herb.
And if it is not out of all the causes we have recommended, then watch that you do not tire in repetition of abstraction, but rather open so that what escapes from her reaches to the thigh of the woman, and then anoint and apply tetrapharmaceuticals; which will make it dissolve over several days and come out naturally.
And when you put it on, it raises her bad odor to the head and stomach, and this drives away the mother; and then open so that they are administered sub-vapor treatments and suitable for this.
The translations are as follows:
Forming an instrument through which the female is subjected to subfumigation, you should retain the menstrual flow and the secondary menstruation:
The translation is:
The translation is:
The translation is:
The translation is:
Translation: Translation:
Translation:
Translation:
Translation:
Translation:
Translation:
Translation:
Translation:
Translation:
Translation:
Translation:
Translation:
Translation:
Translation:
Translation:
Translation:
Translation:
Translation:
Translation:
Translation:
However, some might say that certain people are healthy in certain ways.
And concerning the treatment by which youth is expected in them, it is that you apply a subtle cautery according to the size of the fistula, as previously described, and insert that flame into the fistula inside where it reaches around the inner organs; and then repeat this process two or three times until you know that all those tissues adjusted to the fistulose have already adhered.
And then treat those areas wrapped in bandages with hot oil until all those tissues that have adhered heal. And similarly, treat the affected tissue with medicines for healing and strengthening it; if it is healed, it's good; otherwise, there is no further cure in most cases within a certain time period.
And if the infection goes inside and does not penetrate your mentioned area which is in the anus, and between that and the one that is slowly filled with meat or scabs, and you let the fistula drain where its surface meets the rectum. Then dry the rectum from the beginning of the fistula, then see if it dries on the outside, and if so inside the fistula, where the drying reaches the spot where the extremity of the infection drains out, and then the infection is relieved and heals.
And then purify those fistulous tissues which resemble the feathers of an eagle, and do not cause any damage to them.
And when there's a discharge of pus between you and your operation whenever those tissues are inside your body, then make sure it is done and remove any small amount of pus with the slightest instrument possible: apply fire or an acute medicine cautery to this; among these fire cauterizations, they have two benefits: it adheres to the tissues that are adhered together, and it cuts off the pus by drying out its moisture.
And then treat those areas with hot oil or thick paste until the affected area gets warm. And later on, similarly treat the wound with hard meat medicine that heals and strengthens it.
And when dealing with medicines involving constriction and discharge; once this process is restored, it's already healed and there won't be any need for another treatment.
And if the fistula already penetrates into the anal canal and is elongated from its surface on the body, then insert your mentioned tool in the anus and inquire about it.
And then if the infection has hardened or is slowly filling with meat or tissue and it's close to penetration, then it's not an operation in them but rather according to hope and faith.
That condition requires administering one of the three methods: either to cauterize that, as we've said; or to dry that off so you can reach its cavity and thus it will be possible for you to insert a few things and allow the healing process to continue within the body; do not directly heat any drying areas in case they contain internal organs and cause harm to them, act according to your desire and intent on where this injury was inflicted by force; then dry that area off as we said, making it strong so that it becomes healthy. Or elongate that gradually and drain that pus that dries off inside close to the anus, as we've said, either on the infection or with another sharp tool, then thoroughly purify those fistulous tissues which are in this drying section; try to restore all of the wound area through heating, if pus above the opening is not consolidated, and continues to leak from the opened fistula near the anus, a small amount of pus will drip down from there. And some instances when the fistula ends in this way: when you insert the needle into the fistula, and it is at the edge of the anus near the body's surface and around the anus margin, then it takes on the appearance of a perforated needle end, which is similar to sewing thread preparation in this manner:
And insert the needle into that skin covered by several layers or around those areas; then insert the needle into the skin within the fistula until it reaches its cavity.
And if it penetrates into the edge of the anus near inside, then you pull out that thread as far as your mentioned tool can go until you insert your mentioned tool in the anus; and cut off the end of the thread and adjust both ends equally, strengthen each one, let this process happen for one or two days, and when more of the thread is being dragged into the flesh, strengthen it inside where those tissues are being dragged between the two ends of the thread and they fit together.
And then treat the wound so that it becomes consolidated and healed.
And if the opening of the fistula is not penetrable, then make it penetrate in any way that you have prepared, but rather towards inside where it's not accessible to you so as not to harm the organs; and then proceed with healing it from within.
The method of applying a spike to what's split by the fistula: its curvature is mostly sharp on one side and not-so-sharp on the other, so as not to harm unnecessarily that which isn't necessary, just like how it sometimes happens.
Sewing of hemorrhoids where pus runs in the opening of those.
Hemorrhoids come in two ways: either they resemble coal inside the anus or they look like butter of figs when it comes out. And those are small and large ones. Pus from inside the body comes out at a time and is uniform in quality, it's impurities, and it comes out of the anus, and also at its extremities.
Those are the ones that occur in the buttocks according to the few wet months, from which sweat is discharged or a little of blood mixes with water continuously, and according to the color of the body.
The treatment for that which is inside the stomach is to command the patient to lie down and to press internally until the stomach boils and the ulcers appear before you. So you touch them and suspend them with your fingers or whatever you have near your finger tips, and then introduce those needles into their depths.
If the needles are not near those due to their wetness and softening of those parts, then take those in dry cloths or in a cloth or in a wool blanket, and remove them with your fingers, then introduce those and grind over them some herbal powders near the incision; or cauterize those according to what is described in the chapter on cauterization. And after that, treat those with another cure until they are healed.
And if the buttocks do not respond to expulsion, then cauterize the patient with a cautery in which there is a small bite, and wash them with that water which is in the stomach and which facilitates expulsion slightly when the patient is pressed.
If the ulcers are outside the buttocks, then the cause of them is slight, so you should take those with your finger tips or those with needles, introduce those, and then treat those with what we have said until they are healed.
And when you have made the incision, follow this method in administering stitches: take a coated needle and insert it into the wound, then remove the ulcers from above the parts affected, and make that penetrate through the needle at the depth of the other part, and wrap the two ends of the cut edges of the thread around the part laterally; and strengthen the ulcer with firm stretching, and then burn out the needle and extract the needle.
And do this to all of them, and leave one out, for so that the excess blood will flow from that.
And place a cloth soaked in rose oil or in wadding over the buttocks; then place that on top of the stomach and command the patient to rest. And let that be in place until it heals; and when it's finished, treat those with ointment or another cure until they are healed.
And since they are old and do not benefit in that medicine, then you should open those with the point of thorns or with your finger tips until they become moistened and let the pus from those cover them, which prevents their consolidation; and then treat those until they consolidate.
And you should drain those with vigorous pus until the first ones are infected and become irritated; then treat those until they are healed.
Know that to ulcerate is the key, and it's not something else but turns red resembling a piece of knuckle, and it happens throughout the body and especially in those parts beneath the feet and hands, and because of those you should feel the pulse.
And you should feel that which is in the circulation of the knuckle, and hold it with tweezers or needles, and remove it from its depth; and then treat that.
And if you want, cauterize it according to what is described in its chapter.
True warts are small, rough, round ulcers on the surface of the body, and moles that occur through nature in most children.
And to treat it you should extend or introduce that, or strengthen it with a needle or with wool until it heals. And if you want, cauterize this, according to what we said, with fire or with quick medicine.
A ant bite is a small, soft or ulcerated large lump on the surface of the body that moves in pregnancy; and when you find that it is red as if bitten by an ant, it happens around the body.
And to treat it, you should take a needle of goose feather or of vulture's feather, make it firm, and place that on the ant so that it contains the circle of its parts; then move your hand with the needle until you introduce what is in the circulation of the ant, and place that at the base of the flesh, and remove the ant from its depth.
And if you want, do this with an iron needle or as follows:
Let the part above the needle be drawn in with subtlety, silently (meaning not perforated), enveloped by what appears on top as if it were removed and the movement of that.
And if you want, cauterize the ant according to what was previously stated in the chapter on cauterization for anthills.
Regarding the form of the instruments that are used to give cauterizations.
Some remedies are made from silver or copper or melted earthenware or hammered metal; and some remedies are prepared with small and large tools depending on those used for administration. The ones used in the treatment of young children's illnesses should be small, and for those who have swollen or painful testicles, the remedies for these should also be small.
The form of large and few remedies:
The tip of the catheter above where the bag is tied should be wide according to this method; and in relation to where the bag is tied, it should be done similarly sometimes.
And the end of the pus inside, which penetrates the anus, should be soft (i.e., non-obstructive) like a lion; and with subtlety, behind it, there should be two cuts on one side of the buttocks, and on the other side, one cut. The width of the cut should be according to the thickness of the rays and for thicker ones, make them slightly larger.
And the bag in which medicines for the bladder of beast or sheep skin are placed, and its size should be as large as a hand.
And it should have holes made in the same way as they are turned; and if the space between the cuts, its thickness according to that.
And then insert a strong piece of raw lard into each cut, about the thickness of ten lards or so; and adjust it to that; when placing the bag in him, stretch it at the tip of the catheter between two marks firmly, and insert the catheter into each cut: The quality of inserting it is that you fill the bag with medicine, which should be heated according to the tolerance of the patient; and remember not to make too long a hole nor too short.
And then let the patient lie on his back, raise their legs and place a person or a pillow under them; and smear the end of the cautery with oil, or with hen's egg white, or with fenugreek or basil paste; and gently insert this into the anus. Then the doctor takes the bag, presses out that substance in two doses each time with vigor until it completely evacuates from the intestine; and then remove the catheter and lift their legs onto the wall.
And if the medicine forces it to excrete, use as much as you can; and if sleeping under this for an entire night, it is better later in adolescence.
And if you insert the catheter in the belly ailments and the patient's discomfort lasts, then you will repeat the cautery until they are healed.
And if there are hemorrhoids or abscesses in the anus, then use a subtle and lion-like catheter, similar to those used for children's treatments.
Regarding the treatment of infections.
And I have already spoken about the treatment of infections in relation to freedom, and I also prescribe these treatments with me and medicines according to their effectiveness.
So, I say that the infections are diverse according to how they occur and according to the location where the infections attack.
And the causes for which wounds occur and cause infections can be due to exposure to air, or injury of skin or bone, or impact with a spear, or a stick, or an arrow, or due to these kinds of wound-causing factors.
Infections that occur in the body parts are like scalp infection, or neck, or foot, or belly, or groin infections and so on for other body parts.
And I recommend the treatment of some infections based on that reasoning and principle for other infections.
And I will start with simple scalp infections, where the memory of compound treatments will come in the introduction of the next chapter.
And I say that when an infection occurs on the head and there is no fracture, then consider: if it's due to exposure or a similar cause, and if it has been drained sufficiently only, resulting in a large scalp infection with concerns about potentially forming an abscess underneath, then you should perform cephalic puncture and bloodletting immediately; do not delay this. Then drain the wound according to the amount of its effectiveness if no other contraindication for bloodletting exists, especially if the blood coming out of the infection is minimal.
And the bloodletting procedure is contrary to the part of the infection; and take care not to overeat or consume too much alcohol, or heavy foods.
And if you have avoided any causes of discomfort, then reduce the food intake and do not get close to meat or alcohol.
And while resting on the infection, if an abscess forms, apply it to hot oil-soaked wool or in wine which has been made stoptopic.
And if you are sure of an abscess forming, then rest on the infection, if it is recent at their wound and air has not changed that powder which I recommend slightly.
And if the air has already changed that, then rest on applying ointments until it is healed.
And if the infection is large or due to injuries and inflammations, and if their lips are not adjustable with pins, then adjust those using suture according to how I will explain about the suturing of these.
If the sickness has already been discovered within and without the body, and it is not a retention of any substance but rather a small suspension, then you need to intervene with that. Proceed by cutting there and immediately treat the affected area with medicines and restore the flesh at the site of the wound. Then instruct the patient to eat vegetables that are good for health: cabbage and beets, resembling their natural form within them until they become part of it.
And if you find corruption in the wound and it does not adhere to the bone, then you need to cut out all of this pus and drain it, and immediately treat this area.
If in these wounds an artery or vein where the flow of blood could occur is found, and it cannot be removed with medicines, then you need to investigate around the artery. If you find that part of it is not cut, then you need to cut there on top of a flap, or seal it; and if necessity compels you to do what we have advised does not connect as desired, then you cauterize until the blood is congealed.
And if these wounds are simple and small, then the cause of them is minor. Apply this powder over those areas, let it harden before the air changes them.
And the method of the powder is this: take one part of oil from beeswax, two parts of dragon's blood, and three parts of ash; mix all together thoroughly and sift it, then apply that mixture over the wound, bind it well with good compression until it sticks to that area when pressure is applied, and it will coagulate with blood.
And then cover that with dust and let it rest, do not remove it until you see that it is hardened; when the medicine has fully absorbed into it, then it will be healed.
And sometimes if you alone use this cautery, when you do not have beeswax and dragon's blood in stock.
And perform this surgical operation on large wounds when you leave it to rest on those and strengthen them, and on recent wounds in their blood, which the air has not altered.
And if the air has altered them, especially during summer, then it is not advisable to apply this powder in its usual position. Instead, treat those with what we have advised, and when you place some more digestible ointments on those, or when you place powders made from flour of ashes into water and honey until they turn to paste; then treat those with another cure until they are healed.
If an accident occurs and there is a fracture in the bone, and it is small, then you need to extract that with force.
And I will tell you the treatment for skull fractures as they are poisonous.
And about wounds of the neck.
If a wound occurs in the neck, then there is no difference in treatment, just as for a simple head wound.
And if the nerves or artery of the neck has been cut, then when it is nerves, it should not be treated with medicine that causes strong constriction, such as garlic and sayings that are similar to their noses to the nerves, which constrict those. And do not cover the wound with anything that might hinder it completely, for the substance of nerves is fluid and the continuation of this extends to the brain, which is the source of all parts.
And if it is treated with minor medicines like washing in lukewarm water, or some emollient dissolved in either crushed or uncrushed oil, and thyme when washed in lukewarm water, and the rest of the poultices according to this method, and ointments moisturized.
And if the wound is large, then you should perform suturing or tighten the lips of it, and proceed to treat that with powders until it is healed.
And if there is depth in the wound or it occurs at the lower part of the paste, then puncture that in the deepest area.
And if there is already an incision in the wound and blood flow has been obtained, then separate or dry that part, or seal it, or cauterize it if necessity compels you to do so.
And if you have already incised the tendons of the leg or all parts, and veins in the neck are saved, then adjust the lips of the wound with suturing over the artery channel and do not touch that; make sure to straighten it and reduce it back to its natural shape, and reinforce it with decent tension, let it rest for a few days; treat it with ointments containing constriction and stimulation until it is healed.
And if the wound has already penetrated into the bone, then you need to puncture it. And if there are pieces of bone in this, extract all those that you can from them; and what is not suitable for you, let it rest until the wound heals, separate it, and make its separation from it better.
And if the wound is recent, then apply the recommended powder over that area. And if there is a fistula in the wound, then treat that with what was mentioned previously in its main part.
If it's a spear strike or a cudgel blow, and you measure its depth from the patient, then assess whether there is windiness at the wound when the sufferer breathes; then know that the wound is fatal.
And if there is no depth in the patient and the wound is recent at their arm, then you pause with the first hour of powdered herbs, and don't allow that for fear that it might retain the disease within the depths of the wound and return to the body causing harm to the patient. Instead, pause with a healing ointment, and remove those two times over the course of the day.
And if the ointment is not at your disposal, then you pause on the wound's opening to let it drain what comes from the moisture; and make the patient lie over the wound so that it can drain whatever is in their condition.
If it has been three days or more since the wound occurred and no seizure, cardiac shock nor constriction occurs in the patient, and if you consider other good dispositions for him, then know that the wound is saved; and then treat it with rest and among other treatments until it is healed.
If the healing of the patient is justified, and it has been opened for all times, then know that a fistula has already been formed; therefore treat that according to its head.
And if the wound is from a spade or a cudgel, and it is simple on the surface of the foot or leg, then treat that with what precedes suture, if it's large, or with powder, if it's small.
And if there has already been a fracture in the bone, and your patient is cut into pieces, then you press the wound and remove those pieces if they are separate. And if they aren't separated, then wait until the wound heals, as their extraction becomes easier.
And for other wounds and incidents in other limbs, juvenile healing is the same as what we have said.
Regarding abdominal wounds.
The indisposition which occurs in the abdomen is either large, or small, or mixed.
And for the small disruptions, it is made difficult by another method, and I know that their return to their place is more difficult, if you do not take care of the introduction of them back to their location immediately, as it expands causing difficulty in making the inner material.
And therefore, the best disruption is mixed, where neither the return of the intestines is difficult, as it is in the two species mentioned above.
And know that suture of the abdomen is according to four methods, but these two sutures are common and suitable for sutures in other types of wounds in the body.
And the other two suture methods are specific for communicating with other types of wounds, but they are particularly specific to suturing the abdomen.
And I advise you, without reservation and declaration.
So say that when the wound is small and causes some obstruction of the intestines through it, making its reduction difficult, then this situation occurs in one of these two ways: either by the diminution of the disruption as we have said, or when the intestines are swollen due to cold air.
And when this is the case, take care to immerse it in this way that you submerge a sponge with wet tea water alone, or that you take it in hot water squeezing, and garlic, and onion, and crush them within the intestines until the swelling resolves.
And some openings do this with vinegar where there is astringency, and it's better than water alone in the resolution of swelling.
And when you have resolved the swelling, then you moisten the intestines with water in which there is tea and bay leaves, for this makes the inner content of them ease to some extent.
And if the inner content of it is justified by this treatment, then divide the disruption with a small instrument in which are incised strings.
And the first treatment is better when it is appropriate that it is not dry, and there should be no necessity for drying or deficiency.
Regarding the instrument, if its form is this:
The one part of its shape is sharp, and the other part is not acute. Its extremity is subtle, but not as subtle as a needle's point before it becomes blunt for only a little bit.
And when the wound is enlarged and comes out of the intestines, take care that its return is according to its natural form, in its proper place. If it's possible over this, which is better.
And when the disruption is large and occurs in the lower part of the abdomen, take care that you make the patient lie on their back, and place several other limbs above their head; and if it's in the upper part of the abdomen, then pause the head and feet further than the sides.
And similarly if the disruption is in one of the two parts of the abdomen, then pause your understanding and consideration at all times so that the part with the wound is easier than the other.
And thus cover that you administer this in large sores and in medium-sized sores.
And in small sores, apply this to what is your preparation, and have that person administer it between your fingers. The one who does this should hold the whole disruption with their hand and adjust the lips of the wound, and then proceed to uncover from there to there if any suture material causes another adjustment nearby.
And this is the common method of suturing: when you take the needle, or count the number of needles according to the width of the wound; and then smooth out from the tip of the ring finger's disruption, hold tight with one hand, or another that does not put the thread into both ends of the braid, on both ends of the thumb where the thread is left inside. And you make it penetrate through that opening; and now you have added both ends of the thread and both ends of the thumb, then do four rounds.
And then hold the thread double at the loop of the needle, and sometimes in both parts simultaneously, add both lips and wound with a reasonable addition; and smooth out the thickness of the finger and insert another needle there, and tie that off as well as you did with the first needle. And continue doing this if necessary among the needles until you complete the whole tension of the wound.
And let the needles be medium in stiffness and subtle quality, because subtler needles easily penetrate flesh; and thicker ones are difficult to insert into the thread, so that they should be medium in subtlety and thickness.
And don't let the needle be stuck at both ends of the thread close together, because then flesh would not be cut easily and the wound would reopen in front of its healing.
And don't extend stitches unnecessarily so that the wound doesn't prevent its own healing process.
And then cut the ends of the needles so they don't penetrate too deep into the patient's thigh; place powder from all parts over the stitches, which have the needle ends; leave them there until you know that the wound has already healed.
And these methods of stitching with needles in the usual way are appropriate for small wounds, which until now have used one needle or two or around them.
The second suture method is common: and that you administer during suturing the four ends, of the thread and both ends of the index finger, in one go, with a needle where the thread is wrapped equally in subtlety and thickness.
And when you have the needle penetrate these four ends, return the needle from that middle part where it began, so that the thread retracts from the pus part towards the wound, so that the suture follows the suture of cloth where the cloths are held tightly.
And pause between each stitch the thickness of the finger's length.
And this suture is what I know how to do.
And in such a suture, I healed the wound that happened to a man in his belly, which was pierced by a stone, and it was the largest rupture of a palm-sized wound. It was situated among two palms from my finger's location around two palms from the middle point; and thus, after the intestine had been reduced for twenty-four hours since the hernia had emerged through the wound,
And the wound was healed within fifteen days or so, and cured that one and it's well; then live by the advice of these remedies for many months, and is discussed in his instructions.
And the other doctors judged that it was not healed; and by miracle only, since I did not cure that with ointment, which was in a place where neither oil nor any medicine was absorbed, merely covered for about two rounds of days daily, and washed regularly with honey water until it healed.
And I will tell you two types of suture that are mine according to the narrative of Paulus.
And this is how you begin with the suture of the thread, and introduce the needle from the outside part to the inside part.
And then, when the needle penetrates into the thread and places tacks according to rightness and length throughout the whole body, leaves the end of the index finger where you introduced the needle; and make the needle penetrate at the other end from the inside part to the outside part in the other end of the wound.
And when you have made that penetration, then make another round in that middle end of the index finger from the outside part to the inside part; and leave the end of the index finger which is at this side, and make the needle penetrate into the other end from the inside part to the outside part.
And make the penetration of your needle into which you made this penetration in the index finger at the end of the part, where it is within his finger, so that all of this penetrates.
And then begin from this middle side, push that in at the end which is of the index finger on this other side, and remove the thread needle which penetrated, then return that into that thread and push the end of the index finger which is at this side of his finger; and pull that out from the thread which comes from his part.
And do this once more and another time, and do this with another instance between them where you cook all that is different according to that example.
And the sum of this surgical method is that you sew with a needle in the skin where you stitch the skins; now, you cook once the part from the end of the thread, and you let that second stitch until it is completed.
May the second type of surgical stitch that you will use is called Gualia; this method involves considering and following the body's instructions for it. So you sew according to the similarity in their parts with what some surgeons do, meaning they add all necessary components to their respective parts as per natural order; they connect one end of another part with the other end of that part, and this is done based on my advice to you.
And when you hold the needle at your fingertips of the outer part, make it penetrate inside that part from that side, and leave two ends of the thread; then rotate the needle and make it penetrate from outside to inside at the two ends of the stitch.
And rotate those loops again, making each part penetrate inside the other two parts from outside at two ends of the stitch other than those on the opposite side.
And this method of sewing is better than the common light sewing, and it is a type of stitching that requires prior knowledge.
This is called Gualia in Latin.
And as they might say, the belly's stitching is corrected with two needles. So you insert one thread into each of these at their ends, and begin by inserting the needle from which you are to sew, making it penetrate inside that other side according to the sewing method where I have equalized the bodies.
And know that when a disruption is in the middle of the belly, then sewing it becomes more difficult than in other parts of the belly.
The judgment of medicine for gout is the judgment of the other plagues.
And the cause is that when you catch gout early in its stage before air changes it and you reduce the swelling, then you stitch and heal it properly. Then place on it red flesh powder.
And if the air has already changed the gout, then place on it some ointments which you have at your disposal so that they make hard wax and harden the threads, and solidify; and treat it like this as treatment for other plagues until it is healed.
And if you don't have the medicines at your disposal, then place on it immediately, since it starts to ooze pus and old blood. Switch those two stitches each day, as you were taught, until it is healed; when you do not need any other treatment for simple plagues in such positions.
And if you fear that the gout will spread to the main limbs, then cover a lion's wool in oil of high quality or in fried oil, and place this on the circuits of those areas between the joints and let these be there.
And if you feel pain or putrefaction in his swellings, which stitches are used here, then apply this with a stinging black vinegar on the wound, especially if the pus is inside the swelling and causes penetration through the cavity of the thing.
And know that that which comes from a large swelling is light pus for healing, while that which comes from finer swellings is different.
And it is difficult to heal when the swelling which is called "gegunu" does not receive treatment for gout that affects it entirely; this is due to the large number of veins in it and its large size, as well as the fineness of its body, and its proximity to the nature of nerves.
And if what you are dealing with from the gout is the skin, and you catch it early, reduce it according to your method until you equalize the swellings.
And if it has passed in him and become red or black, then strengthen that with thread over the area that is degraded in him, so that blood flows from the damage, since there are veins and arteries in the skin.
And then you insert what is another inside that ligament, and place two ends of the thread hanging from the other part left open in his skin, so that it is relieved by your effort to fix the fabric and expulsion of pus from the gout.
Reminder for plagues when they occur in the swelling.
When disruption occurs in the swelling and is small, then it may be cured in some people. As I saw him who was struck in his belly with a lance and had gout on the right side of the stomach, and the gout was old and caused fistula, and there was no strength in his movement and flatulence.
Then I pursued the treatment of him even though it was not satisfied in his healing, but I continued to refine him until the place is healed and the area is consolidated.
And I noticed the place already consolidated, advised about the misfortune that happened to him in his belly; and did not attribute any part of this bad accident and destroyed in his many positions by eating and drinking, then washed himself and exercised at his will.
And now some experienced ones would say that when there's an infection in the intestine, and it's small, then they dig to reach it as follows: you take pieces from large roots; next adjust both sides of the wound and place a piece from those with open mouth above the two sides of the wound. Then, when it presses on these and strengthens its mouth, cut off its head, which adheres and doesn't dissolve.
And place another piece close to the first one, and don't stop doing this with pieces right after each other according to the quantity of the whole wound.
And return that and everything related to the wound; break off those excess roots inside the infected area so that the intestine becomes healthy; and ensure it doesn't harm the patient during this procedure.
And it is possible that the intestine can be likened to a subtle material made from animal intestines, particularly because it swells like thread. And you would take hold of the tip of these threads of intestines, cut them neatly, and place their ends in this material, encasing it. Then insert that thread into needles and substances among that piece of intestine, then reduce it during dissection.
And this method of stitching with pieces is nothing but according to the path of trust and hope.
If the infection is large and broad, especially if it's in one of the finer intestines where direct intervention is impossible, then there is no cure for it entirely.
Regarding the treatment of ulcers and fistulas.
Know that every infection and abscess when it inflames and grows old, and results in a ulcer, which doesn't consolidate and bleeds constantly for a long time and can't be cut off, then anywhere this occurs throughout the body is generally called a fistula and we call that ulcer.
And as for fistula according to truth, it's a fibrous, hard lump, white in color which doesn't cause pain and against which the body reacts similarly like reacting against an injury; therefore that's how some refer to certain cases of inflammation, namely injury.
And in such wet conditions, it bleeds out; and a slight increase in humidity leads to bleeding off within some hours. And sometimes this moisture causes swelling, it's minimal, it's thick, and it's subtle.
Having shown all those causes, their signs and the treatment with medicine is explained in the division.
And thus, I will teach you how to heal a fistula which is treated through surgery by the hand.
And know that fistulas occur in all parts of the body; those are fistulas that result from major veins, arteries, nerves, spinal cord, intestine, bladder, or some of the ribs, or some of the thoracic vertebrae, or where joints are formed similar to hand and chest; and among them, there are fistulas that are close proximity to the main limb parts and resemble each other.
And thus, among these types of fistulas that are treated this way, they result from illnesses with difficult healing and not receiving treatment or care, making it a laborious task due to lack of knowledge.
And if there's some fistulas whose depth doesn't reach the areas mentioned previously, and you hope for its healing and are confident in it, wanting to know more about it, then attempt with iron or a needle. If the fistula is straight, then you inquire about it by touching it.
And if the fistula is twisted, then investigate it with a subtle lead object, where lead in its body sinks and curves according to the twist.
And if there's no movement or horror in the fistula, it is not within your ability to indicate anything about it through touch.
And thus cleanse the opening with your fingers, where the moisture used to cleanse that should flow through other openings and exit them.
And then inquire meticulously, according to what manner it is possible for you to know if there's bone or nerves here, and whether the fistula is distant or close to the surface. If it's a fistula with multiple openings, this is over your whole strength, during your questioning of the patient, by pressing your hand on that area, understanding the meanings and causes associated with abscesses.
And once you have assessed all those causes at the true station, then proceed with treatment according to confidence: it is that you consider this now whether it's a superficial fistula close by or in deeper locations, far from joints, nerves, arteries, veins, or any of the areas I've mentioned to you.
When you dry out the fistula as was described in the narrative about him, and remove whatever is in that filtration and from rotten flesh, and what has grown within the opening of the flesh or in parts and their likenesses, treat it internally until it is healed.
If the fistula is of long-distance depth and is straight, then hollow out what you incised in the preon until it becomes possible for you, and then change that from all its rotten flesh; and prepare hot-wrapped composites and insert those into the cavity of the fistula, which you have understood with iron.
And do this by making some incisions in that way so that the acute medicine corrodes everything that is rotten within the cavity of the fistula.
And then restore it with ointments which generate healthy flesh until it is healed.
If it has not been healed by this method, then you will burn that according to what we have advised.
If the cause of the fistula is bone and you have to certify this, then inquire about it and dry that according to what we have advised, if you do not prohibit any cause of vein or nerve or main member as we have said.
If the bone is revealed to you and there is corruption and blackness in them, then remove that within which the corruption is completely present; and treat that with what nourishes their flesh until it becomes healthy.
And if it is not healthy and bleeds like before, then know that you have not completely eradicated the corruption; hence uncover again on them from the second time onwards and make a detailed examination of this, along with its proper preparation, until your treatment results in stronger fortification, and then treat it accordingly.
And if it is healed, then that's good; and otherwise, know that this corruption is at the deep remoteness of the body, which has not been able to heal, hence for you there is nothing left but to leave this.
And if the bone becomes rotten and is small, or if it's possible for you to pull that out, then you will pull it with delicate forceps suitable for this task.
And if they are spongy bones, then make the extraction of all those carefully, and do not leave any cause against your strength.
If it encounters any contradiction due to dampness and in their incision there is neither fear nor error, then if those ligaments or tissues are present here, cut them out and deliver the bones.
If it is not your preparation to have the bones of your time, then place your hand over that which should heal this wound, and leave it within where this is around those bones and tissues, and guard that wound from being consolidated, and ensure that the section you incised in your operation remains restrained.
If you are afraid, place your hand on the submerged wrist in a heated oil or on an Egyptian ointment, or any of those ointments that give off steam, so when these ligaments relax and the bones become separated from their flesh and the dissection is relieved.
If it is a large bone like the bone of a limb or thigh or anything similar to that, and what is rotten in them is just their surface, then remove this only from behind until you expose that blackness and corruption, and then proceed to treat this wound.
If what is rotten in them is a large part, and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then this becomes necessary to close that and everything you have incised inside the area where the corruption is found, and then treat it until it heals.
And I advise you to do this, in order that you place that example and assistant on your operation when working near someone's thigh.
Consider this situation for someone young around thirty years old, who suffers from pain in their thigh. The underlying cause is found within the body material where the disease has reached the thigh, and it's a matter of abscess, especially a large one, not due to an external cause.
And then extend that time during the error of the doctors until the abscess bursts, and drain off the moving materials, and the treatment is adjusted while a change occurs into a fistula. And do so on the pus-filled openings where all had inflammation and bodily moisture.
And then there was a period of over two years of doctors' treatments, and I didn't rely on those but rather in the art when they called me.
And I saw the change in that and the fluids flowing from those openings through large veins; and already the body of that person was entirely stiff, and the color of it was yellowish.
And then I inserted a stick into one of those openings and reached the stick to the bone.
And then I examined all the openings closely and found that they could reach them from all parts of the body.
And then I felt it and incised over one of those openings where I found part of the bone, and removed that rotten thing, and it was earthy and rotten and decayed; and already had become rotten a part of the body where it penetrated into the marrow.
And then I wrapped what was discovered to me and prepared for the revealed bone.
And I would say that it's not within the bone but rather that corruption which hardens and constricts, and I had already removed it.
And continue with the long-term restoration of the wound using consolidating medicine, and it is not consolidated.
And I would re-examine and uncover again inside the bone after the first discovery, and continuously find corruption within the bone.
And I would harden what appears to be that corruption, and I proceeded to perform the treatment and restoration for him, but it was not restored.
And then I discovered another wound in him and did not stop digging into the bone gradually particularly and completed his restoration, but it was not restored until after he dug around a palm's breadth from it. And I extracted his spinal marrow, and afterwards restored that with medicines, and it was slightly consolidated and healed.
And it is not necessary to iterate in the operation of him and his section but due to his bile disposition and the lack of his endurance and fear of death which happened to him all the time due to excess evacuation syncope,
And thus health is through complete healing, and nothing is in place of hard bodily parts; good disposition is made inside his body and virtue returns to him; and he changes into his dispositions and does not do anything contrary to him during walking or injury in any cause.
If the bone is prominent in the location of the body already drilled, then follow this method: you should take hold firmly that bone at the extremity of that prominent bone, and command someone to extend it downwards. And place a piece of thicker cloth fiber over the flesh where the bone was left exposed. Extend its end so that you pull the flesh towards the left and right parts previously exposed, and uncover the flesh on the location that you want to drill in order for the drill not to cut into the flesh.
And place a stake or table at that part of the body correctly, so when you do this, it is not forbidden to use the drill so that it does not cut into the corrupted flesh.
And you should make the drill to start over that corrupted spot little by little, so if it's inside the cavity of the corrupted bone and does not appear in its manifestation at feeling, force him to open another wound.
And if the bone is corrupted and not prominent, right before one part continues to the other, and the corruption is at its middle or in a part of him, then you uncover the flesh from all parts completely; and you place a stake there, and then drill that part where the corruption is inside where continuity exists of the drilling from the other part.
And make the drill according to the location of the corruption a little, as we have said.
And if the corruption is in the joint, drill that corrupted joint, and drill the bone where continuity exists from the other side.
And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it's not at its reason but in between them.
And if the corruption is in the elbow of the hand or chest, it's quite difficult; however you should inquire how the corruption appears to you, and cut that open, then show that according to every disposition which is possible to you, and for each side correct it as needed, so that it doesn't contradict you arteries or nerves.
And know which are the drills and the drills to drill these bones depend on the position of the bones, and the preparation of those, and the size of those, and their subtlety and largeness and smallness, and their hardness and their rarity; so you should prepare for every species of operation tool suitable for that operation.
And know that this operation means to you about the type of tool which you need; when among you is great study and long knowledge of the methods of this art, and experience from methods of diseases, as then already you have for yourself taken this that's convenient for him of tools to every disease.
And I shall be to you forming at the end of this chapter the number of tools which you will have placed among them, as simply as in which you proceed with your prohibition which you will experiment on the others. Shape of drill:
Shape of another drill:
Shape of large another drill:
Shape of ream (drill): The head of this drill should be according to the shape of the star key's head, and its points should be as per the shape of the points on the astelfege.
And it's not necessary that for those, when they are corrupted, there should be friction at the heads of the joints, or else it has a large and wide mouth.
Shape of the smaller scissors:
Shape of the diagonal scissors:
Shape of another drill properly made: it should have an arch above the fluid, and the sharpness of the iron blade, and the member of the boy's stabbing point is to be made downward. Shape of its (referring to something or someone previously unspecified):
Shape of scissors in which has been hollowed out:
Shape of another subtle pair of scissors:
Shape of another curved-end scissors:
Shape of a small shave somewhat resembles a tooth:
Shape of another smaller cutters:
Shape of another cutting instrument; this resembles a blade, and the end of it is like a saw, exhibiting in muscle locations along the course of bones:
The shape of a needle which corresponds to that which penetrates through bones:
And the end of it is triangular and has a sharp tip.
It is made of Indian iron, similar to the hammers that we have mentioned for razors, cutters, and saws.
For cutting at the extremities and for unlocking bones.
The extremities are pressed either due to an intrinsic or extrinsic cause, or when you have treated that corruption with curative medicine and the cure does not occur, or sometimes the corruption must be removed from that body part due to no cause affecting it, then strike a tool into that body part until it reaches the diseased area, so that the patient can die of sickness or harm caused by this much greater misfortune of the body.
And the sign of that to which you apply it, is that the limb becomes black inside where it has been burned or if you place the darkness inside until that heat goes into that limb and spreads throughout its body; then take your tool to cut into that.
Similarly, if there is a cause for the corruption due to the impact of certain poisonous causes such as from a sea scorpion or from a viper or from a snakebite and similar cases.
And if the corruption or impact is at the extremity of the finger, then you cut the finger and do not give space for the corruption to spread into the hand.
And similarly if you reach the hand, then you cut that from the base of the thumb, and do not allow the corruption to spread inside where it can affect the forearm.
And if you extend that, then cut the arm into the elbow joint.
And if the corruption passes elsewhere around the elbow and there is another cause in that area, then death comes to the patient; administering another cause for that is a lot of virtue in treatment.
And similarly do it for the chest when corruption extends throughout the chest, then you cut that into one of the ribs.
And if it spreads in the bottom of the chest, then you cut the whole chest. If it extends into the diaphragm, then you cut the cavity into the joint of the diaphragm.
And if corruption has already penetrated through the diaphragm, then it is not an operation but rather release, and leave the patient to death.
The method of cutting the limb or tightening it is that you strengthen the ligament at the part where you want to cut, and place another ligament over the area. Extend your assistant's hand with one ligament on each side of the parts left. Extend your assistant's other hand across its sides. You separate the flesh which is between two ligaments so that it opens all the way; then proceed to cut or tighten it.
And strike a tool so that all sides are covered by the ligament for itself making sure it doesn't touch the area, and that the patient receives the injury adjusted and without an abscess.
And if during your work you encounter blood from the wound, then you cauterize the area moderately or place some strengthening powders on it; and afterwards return to your treatment until it is completed.
And tie the injured limb with ligaments at a suitable length, and treat that until it heals.
And I advise you that when something happens to a man in his hand, this incident is placed on it which I and you have advised, which happens to him turning black in his hand as though it had been assembled for burning with fire.
And that corruption first occurs in his finger spreading throughout the whole hand.
And then that man prepares himself to apply pus because when the treatment progresses towards the body with its intensity causing pain and distress, he cuts that hand into the joint, and the hand heals.
A long time this incident of corruption occurs in the finger of his hand as described.
And then it comes to me, and so I am supposed to correct this excess on what is left over in his hand with the medicines, near the body's transformation; and the excess does not recur but begins to spread into another finger starting from the hand.
And he asks me to cut the hand of his, and I do not want to do that fearing the recurrence of this excess, rather I fear your judgment on cutting the hand which is already dead, where the life's virtue was in restraint.
And when he left me, he returned to his homeland and came back to me that man prepared himself and cut his whole hand, and it healed.
And I have not told this story merely for amusement about such illness, but rather so that it may serve as a guide in dealing with cases like this, and so that its significance may be understood according to which it is to be performed.
Regarding the care of sinuses and the quality of enemas along with medications.
When an abscess occurs in some muscular limbs and the space of the abscess extends inside collecting pus, then it is broken and perforated, and the pus escapes from him, leaving the place void as if it was a vessel. The membrane that was covering it remains like a fine cloth underneath, without reaching deep corruption, not penetrating into bones or nerves or joints; it is called a sinus, and is not named a fistula.
However, if the space extends inside causing corruption in some part of the body, then it is called a fistula and it is not located elsewhere.
And the treatment for it is to incise that membrane all around as it has moved, especially if it's fine and formed like a cloth, making sure not to stick to the area due to its corruption.
If you hope that the membrane will stick and the corruption hasn't resulted from posterior consequences, then when pus has appeared in the membrane, then your treatment is with a suppository.
And you consider it as a sinus; if the opening is large and emits an odor when pressed, then suppository that with Egyptian medicine containing oil, wine, and vinegar in equal parts, mixed together and placed in a container, which are then heated over the fire until the medicine boils and spreads like honey.
And then you take what is necessary from it and dissolve it in water and honey; suppository that into the sinus; strengthen its opening; let the medicine remain in it for a quantity of two hours.
And then you extract that at the expense; and do this for several days until the sinus is cleansed and the pus has subsided.
And for some cases, it is suppository with ash water when this medicine isn't at your disposal; you must take the ash of juniper and mix it in water; then heat that mixture and suppository it into the area until you are convinced that the sinus has been treated.
And if the patient does not tolerate Egyptian medicine or ash water, then suppository it with water and honey which is mixed with vinegar, then suppository it with wine and honey that has been mixed. The properties of honey make it cleanse and soothe, while wine makes it stick to the sinus, especially when there is excess viscosity and dryness in the wine.
And as you do this for some cases and convince yourself that the sinus has subsided, then suppository it with a substance that causes growth in the area.
And you take defibrinators and dissolve that in clarified oil and wine with astringent properties; or suppository it with certain medicines and other ointments which have the characteristics I have already written about in the treatise on ointments.
And if the opening of the sinus is narrowed in such a way that the catheter of the suppository does not fit, then you gradually widen it with iron, and pause during this process covered in Egyptian ointment or basilicon ointment until it is widened.
And similarly if the opening is large, then you stitch up the lips of it with suture and allow from the quantity that fits inside with a suppository to be added.
And if the opening of the area from which the bone protrudes is elevated to the upper parts, then dry it in that place where pus is located so that the bone can go inside without you. When the bone is constrained within the depth of the sinus, the tissue will grow there.
And if it's not possible to dry the sinus within the vicinity of the bone due to pus, then you perforate where you prepare the limb for surgery, so that the bone protrudes slightly as per your capability and without leaving any obstruction for the bone.
And that which is over the opening of the sinus, you strengthen continuously to ensure it fits properly with the bone. And so that you know if what is coming out from your body in relation to the bone is much or little, whether it is digestible or not.
And in this way, you should also consider the location of that sinus, if the patient feels pain or not, and whether it is inside an abscess.
And as your treatment continues in this manner, you observe that the substance exuding over the sinus opening sticks or begins to adhere. If it adheres, then you gently remove it or loosen it daily, and when removing the wound, replace the bandage with a new one and change the ointment.
And if the sinus is far away and there's fine pus under it, don't worry about the adherence of the skin, as that indicates healing. Some people take longer for tissue regeneration in their wounds, while others see the opposite happening.
And if bile rises up over several days causing indigestion, then you understand that the bile does not adhere; and if the adherence of the bile is delayed and becomes a prolonged issue, then adjust in drying out the medicines. And if the medicines are damp in their substance and in their effectiveness, they become dry as well, just like dyaphinicon grease when it has been adjusted to excess accumulation of fat.
And behind the matter which is being cured, it is that you take dyaphinicon grease and dissolve it in roasted oil, and apply it to your body, using it as needed.
And already pretending in that action, when there is no bile, take dyaphinicon grease and honey when it is rubbed inside the body causing it to thicken, use it; or take myrrh and aloes and grind them together with honey as they are under the fire, then apply this mixture on a cloth and strengthen this over the stomach; and apply this on the honey that you have rubbed inside making it thick, and grind this further on the cloth and strengthen this.
And some healing occurs through the administration of simple herbal remedies in my long and detailed language (and this is heavenly lily) and flour from poppy seeds and centaurian, use these simples or adjust them, grind those together and sift over the honey that I have recommended; and use this.
And if the bile is prolonged, and this treatment does not cure it, then you understand that corruption is in your body, and begins to investigate within the bones or other hard parts or joints; then you treat it with tuberculous disease, as was said above.
From the treatment of ingrown nails and cuticles, and cutting of a finger, addition of an incision.
Ingrown nails are an abscess which makes the nail cuticle of the finger or foot depart from it, and forcefully pushes the nail into other fingers. If this is prolonged and its cure is expensive, or if it becomes infected with another abscess, or if it gets corrupted, you must dig in through the nail's root, force out the corruption of the nail completely, and force out its corruption to reach the bone within which it stinks, then cut off that extremity of the finger, and the color of it is made dark.
And so when you have that which we have said in the division and it does not confirm your cure, then consider that you should incise with iron all the excess that has gathered under the nail, and apply cautery to the wound near this area, where heat from the cautery is beneficial in this respect.
And if the bone is safe and the nail is healthy, and the additions to the nail have already encompassed tissues from inside, they begin to prick them, leading this, then consider that you should place your finger gently at the angle of the nail which pricks the flesh, push it further in, and incise that flesh with ease, place on top of this what remains of the flesh from the tissues burned by corrosive medicines until everything is thoroughly excised; then treat this with greases until it heals.
And if corruption has already spread into the bone, then consider that you should incise the bone there and remove it, because nothing heals while there is corrupted bone in the body.
And if the corrosion and the corruption are spreading in that finger, then consider that you should incise it at one of the joints according to its memory point, and treat this within until it heals.
And if there is percussion or scratching on the nail, and there is intense pain in that area, then consider that you should at the beginning bleed out the patient, and treat this by removing the nail with a sharp blade across its dry surface upwards, and make sure that the drying does not reach the flesh that lies beneath the nail, which will cause intense pain to occur on the body, and is the reason for the development of excess adjusted tissue in that place; then heal that area with whatever relieves the pain.
And this adjusted thing, which is natural in many people, forcefully makes flesh everywhere, or it forcefully resides within the bones, or it forcefully resides in the nail.
And such things are natural in the tissue of joints, or they are the nature of this body in some joints of the fingers. And that which is natural in some joints of the finger does not cause harm, whereas this which is natural at the joints forcefully causes trouble.
And of those that are naturally fleshy, the drying is mild; thus, you should incise this near its root with a blunt blade.
And of that which is natural in the tissue of joints, the cure is difficult; thus, be careful about removing it.
And in that which is natural in this finger, consider that you should incise at the beginning of the flesh towards the bone, and proceed to cut with one of those saws appropriate for this, and then treat it within until it heals.
And consolidation is what occurs between the joints of fingers due to their inherent nature or as the body ages, or through healing from wounds, or due to burns, then consider that you should dry out this consolidation within so that the fingers return to their normal shape.
And between their cloths of ligaments in the oil that has been roasted, so they do not consolidate lightly, or place a layer of soft lead sheet between them where consolidation occurs as needed.
When it happens that consolidation occurs in some of them on the palm, then you dry that consolidation according to its preparation and fit it to the figure of the body.
Regarding the description of diseases, these are varicose veins.
Diseases are varicose veins, which are thick, full of melancholic superfluities, veins that appear in knots of the body's limbs. Their main manifestation is on the chest, and especially on the chests of travelers, workers, and carriers.
Therefore, when you administer the heart's purge for black cholera, some strong discharges occur during its expulsion, and you make the patient bleed from the basilic vein.
The treatment of their blood according to two methods is as follows: one way is to incise it and pull out that black pus, and the other method is to raise the vein and remove it entirely.
The section of him is according to this method: drain from the beginning until water runs in for a while that the large pus is resolved, it becomes liquid on the chest, then strengthen the chest under his buttocks so that it is raised about half an inch above the knees, and drain the vein at one point near the bend in his legs at the same level as when he leaves them, and drain the black blood at a location or two, or three in wide sections, then lift the black pus with your right hand from the bend under their buttocks upwards into it, and above, where you drain the quantity of pus that you want and is enough for him, which will draw out the power of the chest.
And then lie there, and command him to refrain from eating any food that might generate black cholera.
And continue the treatment with bloodletting when the veins are full and you notice this in the chest.
The elevation of them is according to this method: you who rub the chest under the chest, if in their knots in the belly, then place him in water and rub the chest with hot water until it turns red and the veins are swollen; or if he exercises vigorously by physical exertion, if a bath is not available for you, until the member is scraped.
And then dry the cord along the vein for sections in length or at the back of him, you need to pull his legs, or at the lowest part of him you need his buttocks.
And then cut the cord with scissors and scrape the vein from all sides until you feel it, and you should see his appearance that times that complaint decreases to blackness.
And when you have raised and removed the cord, let that white thing be the cord that you have removed.
And then place his hands under this line so that they are raised and lie flat beneath the cord, hang that one on a nail or on iron.
And then dry another section close to that section for three inches, and scrape the cord from the part above the vein until you can see it.
And then raise that and incise it at the last section you should do his buttocks, and then extract that and lift it until it is visible through the second section, and then extract that from the section which is above that.
And do this until you extract it from the section that is most above or another of all sections, until it is completely visible; and then incise that.
And if you do not follow to extract and raise it, then insert a needle into the thick double cord and tie that one, and extract it, or insert your hand under him and move your hand in all directions until you lie flat. And watch that it is not incised too deeply; for if it breaks, you will find it hard to raise that knot and it has spread over the chest through that injury.
And when you have completely extracted that and it is lying flat, then place your hand on the spot of the wound with wool submerged in oil and rubbed oil, and ointment not rubbed, and cure it until it heals.
And if the blood flow is constricted without having much winding and is not according to rectitude as we have said, then you should cut above that at all parts of its winding, and at the sites of constriction around it, and then hang it up with scissors so that you can raise it completely.
And watch that you preserve your section so that you do not incise the vein and do not trouble that one, for it will be hard for you to raise that; use your judgement in that.
Shape of the cut where the blood has been dried:
It is not as cooked for him as for ordinary needles nor is it of sharp extremity so that it does not trouble the vein; and it has great elasticity iron, if it were subtle, it would cut into the vein by its subtlety; having said this it is in his excessive thickness as we have said.
Regarding the extraction of the femoral vein.
This vein is generated in the chest on lower lands as Al-Ategi in the territory of Arabs and in the lowlands of India, which are dry and have little fertility, where neither grass nor trees grow.
And the thick one is generated in other places of the body, elsewhere in the chest.
And the condition of him is from putrefaction that you see in his cord as with venom inside the body like snakes, worms, insects and parasites generating between the cord and the flesh.
And a sign of the anticipation of this disease is that it occurs in the area with intense inflammation; then the area becomes swollen; and immediately afterwards, the vein begins to emerge from the site where that inflammation seems to originate, resembling a plant root.
And when you see it at the extremity, then weigh what you cover over that with a weight of lead whose weight is equal to one dragon. Within two dragons' worth, and place it there and let the lead hang suspended from its chest.
And for as many times as any cause makes inroads into parts outside, enclose this with lead and place it there. And if the condition is prolonged, then you must enter a portion of him and wrap it in red; do not enter that from which it is rooted, for if you enter that it will be contracted and penetrate into the flesh, causing inflammation, pus formation, and a bad ulcer at the site.
So that it is treated gently and extracted gradually, without any cause remaining in the body.
And this vein emerges in some people that extends the length of several palms and has already reached me, where I have experienced one up to twenty palms.
And if it is entered during its treatment, then introduce the needle into the patient's wound and pierce that along its entire length in the body, so as to evacuate all that is within the material. Then administer putrefaction to the area for several days with medicines; afterwards treat it for the healing of pus discharges.
And this vein has opened several times and mainly when it appears at the junction of the chest or in the chest, and brings about the opening of various openings, and emerges from every opening.
And therefore treat it in this way as we have said in the division, and according to what was said above.
From the section about worms generated under the skin and it is called cow sickness.
This disease is named in some countries as cow sickness because it occurs in many occasions among cows, and there is a worm present that is native between the backbone and the flesh, and it moves throughout the body up and down, and its movement can be felt from limb to limb causing the backbone to break and protrude.
And the generation of it is through the putrefaction of some fluids thus causing worms, snakes, and other parasites to occur in the belly.
And it is found through the malice of him, when it moves in the body and rises to the head, then reaches the throat, at which point it twists his bile within him, enters and destroys the throat, and this occurs repeatedly.
And when you want to treat and remove it, do not do so if not with regard to the development and manifestation of him as felt by the body, then proceed where you strengthen what is over him and what remains inside him intensely and forcefully constriction, and afterwards dry up on it and extract it.
And if it is buried in the flesh and does not escape, then you place a cautery with fire on the site where it lives, and the main fear that is feared is corruption of him as we have said, which corrupts the area thus.
And if it is found to have reached the head near the throat, then press firmly over the forehead with intense constriction, and afterwards dry up on it, and extract it; and know that the patient uses bodily changes through medicines expelling bad putrid fluids, and avoid foods causing body corruption.
From the section about cow sickness.
This disease is called nafir in our country, and it is pain that appears in some limbs, and afterwards spreads from limb to limb.
And I have already seen that second one which I will report on. I was called to treat a sick woman in a village, and I saw her arm and found a small swelling on the funis vein of the arm. After it burst for an hour, I saw that swelling move like this as it ascended towards this one, but less forcefully than water flowing from a spring, so as if it were living silver when it moves from place to place.
And then you feel the pain in that area and settle into the muscle, and remain like this for an hour.
And afterwards flows internally to reach the other arm.
And afterwards, he informed me that it was moving around in his entire body as I saw; and I was too amazed by the transformation of him and the speed from limb to limb. And I had already seen this before in my own throat according to that manner, however, I have seen several which cause pain to be transformed from limb to limb. But I did not see it like this in the throat as with the woman.
And I do not think it is like this only because the woman was of old age, with her dry body and visible veins, and in this case there appears that wind movement transformed by sensation.
And it is necessary that it does not appear according to this reverse flow in those who are lively and have wet bodies with many veins.
And when you want to treat him, and the patient feels this pain, then it is not like what we said in relation to the throat, so proceed by pressing on that place gently and dry up slightly over that area where that constrained wind emerges, then cauterize the site.
If you do not notice it among your scents, then you treat that as an internal discharge and whatever expels wind, cure those with herbal remedies and pills made from serapi and similar.
Extraction of arrows.
Arrows are diversified according to the species and according to their locations in the body where they find use, what makes them diverse is that some of them have large points, small ones, concave ones, and dull ones, they can be solid; and there are also those which have three angles, and among those are the ones with tongues; and among those which are like needles.
And concerning the symptoms of poisoning: when it finds inside the arrow, and penetrates through the skull which is above the brain, if it happens due to excessive heat, blindness, dizziness, nausea, swelling, tongue pain, spasms, confusion of understanding, vomiting from anger, and if there's a loss of speech caused by a word being torn away, and if there's a presence in the wound location of a white dampness resembling dust, and saliva appearing as if it were too much liquid for the meat.
And so, if you observe these symptoms, then refrain from the treatment and extraction of the arrow, unless it's already out.
The symptoms of the arrow when it's near the left breast, are that it's close to the innermost part, and feels as if it's stuck in hard tissue, not causing vision loss. The movement of the arrow is similar to the motion of dust, and the condition of the wound has a black spot, and it becomes cold at the extremities, there's excessive sweating, and fainting; thus you know that death descends from all directions.
The symptoms when the arrow has pierced the lung are shortness of breath with frothy blood in the wound, and the veins close to the neck are hardened, and there's a change in the color of the body, and they start to breathe heavily and require the intake of fresh air.
And if the arrow is found in the muscle layer which is located under the foot, then the pain occurs near the small ribs and it causes a great intense pain along with sighing, and there's not too much fatigue of all the body muscles.
And if the arrow is found in the stomach, then there's a strong sensation of nausea with some undigested food in the wound.
And if the arrow is found in the abdomen, and it's stuck there, you'll find a hole in the wound or the skin, or the intestine which has been ruptured, and there's little hope for the treatment of its extraction from the arrow.
And if the arrow hits the bladder and causes urine to leak out, it can lead to processes escaping from you in certain ways. And there's a pain over the body, so you know that this is fatal.
Treat the other limbs in this way too like the face, neck, back, shoulders and supporting parts, and the lumbar area of the spine, the ribs, waist, chest and similar body parts are treated according to major protocols when the arrow doesn't hit a vein or artery and it's not a poisonous arrow.
And I recommend this to you that I've observed about these arrows, so you can understand the significance of your treatment.
This is because when an arrow hits someone near the tear duct of their eye in the angle of their nose, and I extract it from there towards another part, you let their ear wax go, they will heal, and no harm occurs to their nose.
And when it comes to extracting another arrow from a Jew which hits them in the ear wax of their nose, let their eyelid remain as is and let it alone. The arrow was already hidden and could not be obtained except for a small tip that stuck to his stick, it was a large arrow among the sharp arrows of the Turks, made of iron without any ear wax.
And when dealing with a Jew, there should be no mishap in their nose.
And when it comes to extracting another arrow from a Christian which hits in the back, it is an Arab arrow, and that's the one with ear wax; then I pierced through it between two guides, it was already submerged in your back. Then I carefully removed that and the Christian healed.
And when it comes to extracting another arrow from someone which hit their abdomen, I thought they would die due to that; then, considering that there were XXX days since this happened and there was no change in his condition, I pierced through the arrow and operated on him, he healed, and there was no harm caused to him.
And I saw a man in which an arrow hit him near his back, the wound had consolidated over him, and since then it was approximately seven days ago, he moved the arrow to the angle of his thigh.
And I see a woman who has an arrow in her abdomen, and the wound is hardened inside her, and it does not change in its position during pregnancy, and the woman does not experience discomfort in any of her natural operations.
And I see another man to whom an arrow has penetrated his face and the wound is hardened and the arrow is left inside, without causing any pain here, and it resembles this in appearance.
And I extracted the arrow from the king's prince's face, which was embedded in the middle of his nose and had already deflected to the right side of his mouth, being completely hidden.
And I was called upon to assist in his treatment around three days after the insertion of the arrow.
And then I examined the wound of the arrow's insertion carefully; and then I inquired about that under the delicate test, and did not feel it; but he felt it sharply under his right ear, and then I suspected that that point was at the tip of the arrow.
And then I filled the place with an emollient and restorative substance, confirming to myself that this is where the attractive and digestive power resides, as it shows me the location of the arrow, so that it can be removed from there.
And it does not happen in the significant location where you have hit with the arrow, this is due to its proper place; and I continued applying the emollient on him for several days without causing an accident; the wound consolidates meanwhile, and the patient feels the pain inside his nose after a few days, and he recounts this to me.
And then I placed acute corrosive medicine on the wound for several days until it opened up, and under the test I examined that area, and then I carefully examined the tip of the subtle arrow, which adheres to the shaft.
And then I adjusted the wound opening with that acute medicine until it became visibly clear to me the tip of the arrow, and I passed that time with this process for about four months.
And when the wound had become enlarged, it became possible for me to insert scissors in him, and refine that area, without causing any pain. Then I did not cease trying various mechanical methods of handling this object, after which one day I began applying forceps extraction on him, according to the shape of those at the tip of the arrow, until I could finally extract it; and then I restored that wound.
And some doctors thought that the nasal cartilage was not restored, and I did restore it and the wound consolidated. The patient is now fully healed, and there is no damage in him for any cause.
And I advise you about the quality of extracting some arrows, that you should follow this rule and significance about what I have not said. For the parts of this art and the definitions of that are not understood in the narrative nor do they comprehend them freely.
And the craftsmen are wise in comparing many on a matter; and about what is present compared to what is absent; and you find new operations and new instruments when accidents occur regarding foreign causes of this art.
And so I say that arrows are not extraneous to the members where they are embedded, but according to two methods: either by piercing the location in which they enter; or by the opposite of the other side.
And that which is embedded through the location gives entry, or the arrow proceeds in a meaty place, and it is thrown and extraneous.
And if you do not experience any discomfort during the time it was hit, then it is advisable that you leave him for several days until the flesh around it subsides, and that the entry of it and its exit are eased.
Similarly, if it is embedded in bones and you do not experience any discomfort, leave him for several days and then repeat this with the entry and movement every day, until it is extraneous.
And if you do not experience any discomfort for several days, then it is advisable that you pierce in the circuit of the arrow at the bone of every part moving through a subtle travel where the location becomes enlarged by the arrow, and then extract that.
And if the arrow is already hidden in the body's location, and it is hidden from feeling, then you inquire about that under the test, and if you feel it, then pull it with such instruments as are suitable for its entry.
And if you cannot handle him due to the constriction of the wound and its length in the preon, and here is neither bone nor nerve nor vein, then you cut into the wound so that it becomes enlarged and that it is possible to extract the arrow.
And if it is the earlobes that are pierced by which they hang, then you liberate the flesh in which all parts are embedded from every organ; and use your skill here, if you cannot about the expulsion of the flesh in the breakage of the earlobes and their twisting within where you must abide.
And when you manage the removal of the needle in any location where it is, then use your twisting with forceps at all parts within which that needs to follow; and finesse from behind subtlety so that the needle is not broken and that it makes your difficult extraction of it and of that removal.
And if you cannot about that of your time, then let for some days within which the parts are in the circuit of you, and soon iterate that which is later relieved. May it if your feel contradictory blood flow, then you administer what we have said of treatment in its chapter.
And guard your skill in the incision of vein or nerve, or cord, and apply your best means to remove the needle; and do this with ease, calmness, speed, and firmness as I have advised you.
And therefore when you make the needle contract by itself so that the patient follows the figure according to which you must place the insertion of the needle in them, which is more convenient. May it if this is not within your possibility, then you administer that which is within your possibility through the figures.
May the needles that are pierced outwards against another part, or which already proceed some parts from inside to outside, or make the extremity of the needle flexible by feeling above the connecting part and sometimes over it; therefore touch that one; and cut there; and do this according to the quantity in which they take the forceps; then pull that one, as it is done lightly against the feeling.
May it if it is held in the earlobe, then you twist the needle according to the opposite direction within which the needle penetrates into the earlobe, and enlarge your insertion, and then extract that one.
And if not, let that be for some days, and soon iterate that within you ignite.
And if the body of the needle is in that place, then push that one towards you.
May it if the stem is broken and you wish to administer an impulse, then insert that one, if it is deaf, shake the bottom for such that enters the cavity of you into the tip of the needle, and then push that one towards you.
May it if the needle is concave, then push that one with strong shaking entering there, for the needle is relieved by that.
And if the needle is elongated, then cover that all flesh in which is there, if this is within your possibility, and soon treat that with what seems appropriate.
And if the needle is in the foot, or in the belly, or in the bladder, or in the side, and it is close to you that you touch that with the handle, and if this is within your possibility to cut over that, then cut over that and keep yourself from incision of vein or nerve, and extract that, and soon consider the wound if needed, and treat that until it is healed.
Shape of forceps with which needles are pulled:
Let the ends of them be like a duck's bill that are made as pliers when they take hold of the needle so that they do not let it go.
And of those are made special points, large, few and intermediate, according to the quantity of the size of the needle and its slightness, and the width of the wound, and the constriction there.
Thus like a spear for it to relieve the inner part in the concave needle and is pushed towards that one.
Regarding phlebotomy of veins.
The veins for phlebotomy from which blood is usually drawn are .xxx,. of which there are sixteen in the head. These are the two pulsating veins which are near the earlobes, called alhasisain; two herbs that are in both temples noticeable; and two veins that are in two lacrimals of each nostril, called aspicientz; and the vein prepared in the middle location of the forehead, and the vein that is at the end of the nose; and two guidegi that are at the neck; and two veins that are above the upper lip; and two veins that are below the lower lip; and — these are the veins called algelic; and are two veins that leave the tongue. May it is known that the veins which are subjected to phlebotomy in the arms are .v., or five. Among those are one cephalic, which is of the wild heart; and the people call it "the vein of the head," and deafly, it is a medium-sized vein, composed of a branch of basilica and another branch of cephalic; and name that the people "the whole body's vein", and basilica is the vein placed in the domestic heart, and named "citillar", and they call it by the vulgar "the vein of the belly"; and arm muscle veins, which are placed on the artery, and this is where phlebotomy takes place, and it is the one that appears above the elbow through a manifest appearance; and salve shea, which is the vein between the mentioned auricular and the small one called pus, and there are two branches of it.
And in the arm and chest are three veins; one of those is responsible for conveying the curvature of the wild lizard's lung; and the second is sophena, with its location corresponding to the lung cavity of the domestic animal; and the sciatic vein, whose location corresponds to the cavity of the wild lizard's lung; and in the chest are other veins similar to those.
The young veins near the ears are in ancient channels and cause drainage, bleeding, and ulcers on the old bad parts of the head.
And the quality of this is according to what I advise you: it should be applied at the forehead of the head illness, and rubbed on the top of the head in the area between the two veins with a thick cloth for good friction; then strengthen the patient's body with a bend under which the two appear, their locations being near the ears in two pre-ear areas of the head; apply this to you as instructed, and if you feel the pulse of this as instructed, it works like a test.
Close you take the surgical knife, and that is the one that strikes, close you insert those fingers into the vein into the canal where the blood flows to the bone. And close you lift your hand to the vein and canal to the upper parts, then cut the vein starting from where it strikes. And make the length of the cut equivalent to two fingers or a bit more than that; allow the blood to flow out as much as you want.
And close strengthen with powders and leave it where it is until it heals.
And already, in the beginning of this treatise, we discussed the cut of these and their cautery treatment.
The two arteries that are in the blood vessels of the templars during the juvenile period of bloodletting cause ancient and evil bleeding, frequent conjunctivitis, and sudden, excessive body aches in humans.
And the quality of performing bloodletting on these is according to what I advise you: strengthen the patient's body with movement under which the two veins appear through manifest appearance, and demonstrate your pulse as instructed by me; then you will test it.
And close you raise the canal above the vein to the upper parts as instructed, then insert the bloodletting tool in an incision position under your guidance, and lift the vein up there; then cut that too just like you did with the other veins. Then let the blood flow according to the amount of your need.
And close loosen the constriction of the patient's body, place your instruction on the vein for an hour, then pause over that part and apply powders to strengthen it with firm pressure, and leave it where it heals.
And already the recall of them, and their incisions, and the extraction have been introduced at the beginning of this book.
And thus the juvenile period of bloodletting for the vein at the forehead is similar to bloodletting in the occiput for ancient head illnesses on the face and gout, rash, and stinking ulcers.
And the quality of this bloodletting is according to what I advise you; that means that the patient strengthens their body with a bend where the vein appears; and close take the tool which is named the fossor, whose form is as follows:
Place the tip of the fossor on the part of it that is at the head, above that vein, and hit it against it either straight or in another way as yours, let the blood flow according to the amount you want; then close release the hole in the body and strengthen it until it heals.
Some veins are opened during bloodletting at the site, but note that this type of bloodletting tool does not have a pointed tip like others, instead it has a rounded tip. This particular bloodletting method runs perpendicular, where the bone is close and quite light; if it's too thin, the bloodletting tool would break through when being used.
The time for the juvenile period of bloodletting from the two veins that are in the tear ducts of each eye due to inflammation of the eyes and rash on the face, as well as head illnesses.
And the quality of bloodletting is that the patient should strengthen their body with a bend, and perform this bloodletting, while you stand over their head.
And the bloodletting should be done perpendicular with a length of just a few, where in the place there is no flesh; and if the bloodletting tool is thin, its end will break because it's quite light.
And close let the blood flow as much as necessary to you, then pause over that area and strengthen it for a night, then close release those areas.
The bloodletting for the vein in the nose is related to acute fever and intense heat, as well as head illnesses and gout that occur on the face, especially if they are old.
And the quality of this bloodletting is that the patient should strengthen their body and place their nose under your left hand, take the fine, long tool and put it in the middle of the nose's head according to the straight line; where the vein doesn't appear here, and where the blood starts flowing immediately.
Be sure to finish your hand with the bloodletting tool gradually and let the blood flow as needed; then close that place for a night, as that is quickly restored.
The youth of the bloodletting procedure for the two guides to constriction, to the onset of leprosy, and to skin diseases as well as dyspepsia and bad corrosive ulcers, such as erysipelas.
And the quality of this bloodletting procedure is that the patient supports each one on their back with their arms; and the doctors are above the head of the patient, and the patient lies on a mattress.
And then perform bloodletting on the vein along its length; and gradually make bloodletting on ample little cuts; and then extract blood according to the season, quantity or according to what is necessary that you do; and pretend it's like another vein.
And then untie the ligament and strengthen both veins by means of a tie in the middle, so that the patient does not get infected, let them rest until after night when the illness is cured.
The youth of the bloodletting procedure for veins in the alergetic condition, confirms to small pustules and pimples on the mouth and gum rot and bad ulcers and cracks, as well as bad ulcers that are within the nose and in the circulation of the body.
And the quality of this bloodletting procedure is that you cut in front of the patient, and strengthen their neck with a bend, then move around the lips and watch over which two veins there are; one of which is on the right side of the lip, and the second on the left; and demonstrate each by the color of each of both, and what is more is that within the circulation of those veins there are small dark ones; and then you penetrate each with an incision.
If there is doubt, then leave it to you, and if you do not know which one of those is, then understand the incision of the larger of those, and the obvious pus from those.
And make as if there are two veins in the lips above.
The two veins that are in the tongue, when treated with youth, are similar to bloodletting of the cephalic type at pre-illnesses found in the gullet, throat diseases, and mouth sores.
And the quality of bloodletting these is that you follow the tongue between your hands in front of the sun, elevate the tongue for them, observe their tongue, from one side of their vein and the other side of the vein, and the color of each declines to black.
And then bloodlet each one; and watch that you do not finish your hand in bloodletting these, for these are arteries.
And your veins that are bloodlet in the armpit are in those where it is customary for all men, and the bloodletting of them is done according to two ways, or place on the bloodletting with the mirtilate or olive subtlety; or stop at bloodletting with a surgical knife, and call it appling, and this is the form of that:
And the parts of that are like this when needed, and you fit to open the veins that are concave and full, proceeding with apparent large vessels, and those which contain hard fat.
And this bloodletting is of less width and of finer subtle extremity, it's suitable for bloodletting of finer subtle veins that contain fine subtle pus.
The youth of the bloodletting procedure for the basilic vein which is one of three veins: you extract the pus from the throat and neck diseases, as well as from the feet and belly.
And it is for the bloodletter, when performing this bloodletting, to guard against that and be above fear in that, where your patient has an artery, and if he misses or adjusts during the bloodletting puncture, he will penetrate that artery and cause flows of pus, so beware not to use a sharp bloodletting tool before stopping it with appling.
And if the basilic vein does not appear by obvious manifestation, then beware that you leave it and change to another, or try one of its branches; or bloodlet at the end of your arm where this is manifest; and stop that with a surgical knife in the same way as we have said.
If you want bloodletting of the median plane, then go in front of the constriction on the arm where you touch the place inside that you know the location of the pulse, and watch over it with your hand; and adjust the arm and stop the vein at the concave section with surgical knife as we have said; and beware that there is no percussion for some space in the location of the artery.
And when you touch it, with strengthening the ligament, inflation occurs in the place that you have placed under your hand, then that inflation is an inflammation of the artery, and therefore avoid that.
And if the pus flows in bloodletting like a child's urine, and this pus is subtle redness, then you know that it is of artery pus; and then you cover your hand for as long as spaces were said about that; and then hold your hand until you notice that the redness disappears, once the redness has disappeared, then strengthen your arm and let that be.
And protect the patient from cold sweat, and the excess fear of them, and do not let him suffer for a few days until he is healed.
If the disease is not eradicated, and when you must not provide medicine to him, then you enter the artery if it appears to you; where the extremity of the patient is contracted, and the disease is removed; or that you take a small piece from the pulse, perform that operation, and take one larger part and apply pressure on the place of the vein during the strictness until the other day.
And if the disease is eradicated, it's good; and otherwise, then treat that with the medicine from which he was preceded to recall the place of the elimination of dust in the flow of the disease.
And removing the cause of the disease from him is difficult in various conditions due to the small area of the wound and the possibility of the spread of infection in the arm.
When dealing with the black vein's phlebotomy is juvenile that extracts the disease from the part above the head and to the part below the body; thus, since it consists of branches of the basilica and cephalic veins as we have mentioned.
And direct the phlebotomist who has excess fear in the phlebotomy of you, because that one leaves behind is a nerve; and therefore adjust in the puncture of the phlebotomy and find the nerves, it will happen to him dizziness, making his recovery difficult, and he may not be fully cured. And this nerve appears with feelings sometimes; if it is hidden from some people and is subtle and is not shown, then when you make your phlebotomy on the section of the arm where you are phlebotomizing on, avoid touching the nerves with your strength, and when you make the phlebotomy, do not choose a section that might contain veins, and avoid hitting the nerves in your stronghold.
And if the vein is between two nerves, then you make the incision of the vein along its length.
The juvenile phlebotomy of the cephalic vein is that you extract the disease from the head and connect it to the patient's arms.
And take care in this manner, if you want the phlebotomists to puncture on an olive or on a myrtle phlebotomy; which is the preserved blood of all veins, without leaving your artery or nerves.
However, strength is lost in some people when phlebotomy is not performed on the first percussion, but does not notice under that abscess.
The first is that you know that phlebotomy should only be administered for the preservation of health and with hope and caution for recovery, and when performed on one of the veins located near the heart; namely cephalic, black, and basilica; and it is done during spring, before meals in spring and autumn, and in winter just before eating, when signs of repletion appear.
And it is done phlebotomy and leave the first three hours that have passed since dawn.
Phlebotomy that is administered, whether when it provides convenience and necessity or at night or during the day, at any hour and in every season.
And be aware that an infant should not have phlebotomy until they are fourteen years old, and a pregnant woman should only undergo it during the first trimester before the seventh month, and elderly persons should not undergo phlebotomy if they have already passed sixty years.
And when someone wants to be phlebotomized for any reason, know that before the phlebotomy with leon's powder, they should modify their intestines. If in those ones have a hidden wound, so that the veins do not pull excess from the intestines during the phlebotomy of the intestines, which are cleansed and do not flow into the main members.
And do not undergo phlebotomy for patients with night sweats and debility, nor from illness or intoxication until they are cured of them, nor from liver disease, and more that phlebotomy be feared during colic pain and during vomiting, and during belly ache, and during multiple sexual activities and labor pains, and during all causes that dissipate their virtue, either physically or mentally.
And consider delicately in eliminating body fluids before that if the disease is large, with foods and drinks, and with medicines if it's possible for him.
And consider taking baths if any cause doesn't prohibit it, or by engaging in some exercise so that the disease is eliminated.
And schedule your phlebotomy during the day, around the time of three o'clock in the afternoon, as we have mentioned.
And be mindful that the day of all animal accidents should be kept in check on this particular day of all illnesses and accidents, such as distress, anger, fear, and all bodily accidents, such as labor pains and unnecessary grief or sexual activity.
And to their satisfaction, let there be presented the causes in the use of which men customarily delight in aromas and scent, and like balsam and perfumes according to the amount of possibility.
And let the bloodletter follow on a cushion that is placed under the one where it should be bloodlet, as to the one who was supposed to be bled.
And then extend his arm, and rub it with the doctor's hand using the bloodletting tool for two or three times; and adjust it on the belt and encircle it in two places.
And if the constriction is mild, or if the constriction isn't equal, or if the constriction is due to excess, then prohibit the flow of the wind. Or if it's due to soothing, then prohibit the movement of the wind in the body.
And for the constriction, have the one who was to be bled rub their hands in between them until the veins are swollen, and make them feel this through touch.
And for the bloodletting tool, smear it with a little ancient medicinal oil; then place your right hand's index finger on that vein, leaving the location where you want the bloodletting. So that the vein escapes a little, and the percussion is stopped when you find the vein like heart escaping, this is where you should perform bloodletting, and from these it is full of windiness, and when you place the bloodletting tool on that spot it contracts; then uncover the bloodletting tool; and the bloodletting tool does not pierce the vein, but if it does, that one is tightened.
And therefore, have the bloodletting tool set and fully informed about all these causes.
And then pause the bloodletting tool, but if the vein is punctured in one place, then this happens; and otherwise, repeat this on another spot by placing it a little further, or over them with haste, if that spot has not hardened.
And if the spot has hardened, or the patient feels hot, then you let it rest for one or two days, and do not adjust the bandage, so that a hard boil does not push out pus with heat, nor enter into dampness.
And if she wants more, repeat the bloodletting.
And if the incision is small and the wind is subtle underneath, and you fear that it won't expel enough wind, then repeat the bloodletting according to rectitude and adjust in the incision a little, and do this with haste before the spot hardens. For men of soft flesh, you should wait a little incision.
And if you have already hardened that area, then do not repeat over it, for there is no excuse for any cause; pause over it some part of the oil channel, which delights the body of wind. And it is better in this area that it be oil and that other oils not be used.
And similarly administer oil channels in all bloodlettings where blood vessels should be prohibited from wind of the body, and do this with turpentine oil and lavender when it is paused on one of those spots, for windiness and agitation occur when it is applied to a thick layer.
And if in the location of bloodletting large boils are generated, which occur with many points, especially when someone has not been bled except at that point, or on a small part of the vein incision, then you cover and pause over that area with an infused sponge in water, a little scraped, and heat it for one hour until it dissolves.
And have them do this at the movement of the wind from that vein in harmony with its own or another vein.
And if there remains any darkness or greenness in that spot for some days, do not notice this; and if you want to, pause over that with a cause of aloes or myrrh dissolved, or some cause of mint juice or calamus or similar.
And if many points arise, boils and protrusions require bloodletting from the basilic vein.
And place your hand over it, and if you later find softness, then your compression over it is correct, so that this protrusion is bad; then take care to pause over it with any of the causes we have mentioned, for strongly it will flow from the wind artery.
And let it be plastered with water in which it is steeped, so that the area lasts, and then take care of it with any other treatment until it heals.
And have them extract the wind from all humans according to their virtue's quantity and according to the prevailing color over the wind as it appears.
And if the wind is black, then you let it out until it reddens; similarly, if you find it thick, you let it out until it becomes fine; and likewise, if it's sharp, within it should be cooled down its sharpness.
And for the one who is full and strong and needs to extract wind in one place, extend the bloodletting on the vein and make the bloodletting tool large.
And for the one who is weak, do the opposite of this, and have them extract it in many points, and that the incision be straight.
And the best way to perform bloodletting on veins is for it to be a cross section, not a puncture.
This method of phlebotomy saves from the flow of pain and from the dissection of nerves, and is useful and safe when performing bloodletting according to latitude and longitude.
In this case, it is customary for fainting due to lack of blood supply, you should perform phlebotomy, and before you treat that with phlebotomy, give them a small amount of infusion of milk thistle or simple diluted oxymel; and remove some of the pain from their body in three stages or four.
And if it is due to a complex condition, then take an infusion before phlebotomy with myrrha water or flavored honey water with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger and similar things, or with an aromatic and pleasant-smelling syrup.
And if fainting occurs you should perform phlebotomy, and it is due to the loss of bodily fluids, then give them to drink water from their body and a pleasantly subtle-smelling syrup; use aromatics in this way, and limit their movement with that.
And use the other causes we have discussed in the division for treatment of fainting through evacuation.
And whoever wants to improve their arm and dissolve their pain after the second occurrence, for this purpose phlebotomy is by means of bodily evacuation, and the virtue of which is coolness, that gradually eliminates the pain little by little, so it depends on the amount of the virtue in continuous days.
And whoever wants to improve their arm and get rid of their pain in the second occurrence, and their body is strong, then do this seven hours or nine after the first phlebotomy.
And whoever wants to bring the blood of their body in the opposite direction from where it declines, then let them improve on the second day or the third.
And for that body in which there is already blood disturbance and it becomes severe causing fever, then let them release their blood once and make a large amount of bleeding so as to intensify the sensation before fainting occurs; and you should conserve all conditions of phlebotomy; and place your hand on their wrist to prevent death instead of fainting. When the phlebotomist is ignorant and negligent, then these stages should be performed this way.
And when you want to relieve the arm and evacuate the blood after the second time, as long as the openings of the veins are closed and it becomes difficult to discharge the blood, you should press under that forcefully and slightly bend his leg, which is too bad.
Let him rest for this after performing phlebotomy again; or keep doing this until the coagulation of blood in the opening of the vein stops due to phlebotomy; or place your hand on a piece of Turkish red clay, or aloe vera, and press slightly under it so that the blood is expelled.
And if the vein is swollen, then let him rest and do not touch it until the hematoma subsides.
And if it is necessary to cause him to evacuate the blood again, and it is not an excuse, then you should prick him over that spot or on another arm at another vein.
And the vein referred to as "arm's cord" is phlebotomized in the place of the gall or the basilic vein, when they are not twisted or hidden, which is composed of those.
And the quality of phlebotomy for him is that he immerses his hand in hot water until it easily turns red and the vein appears clearly.
And apply it firmly over that with ligature and a narrow bandage; and perform phlebotomy according to the transverse direction, not longitudinally nor according to length.
And let the sensation be wide and your phlebotomy with which you perform phlebotomy on that point of the hand a little.
And if the flow of blood is prohibited, then immerse your hand in hot water and let the blood run in the water until you achieve your need.
And if you were in the days of summer, then you are excused from immersing your hand in hot water, and similarly you should let the blood flow in hot water during winter.
And phlebotomy for this vein is particularly safe compared to all others, since it leaves you without a pulsating vein or nerve.
And phlebotomy of the wrist of the right hand is relevant to stomach diseases.
And the quality of phlebotomy for him is that you strengthen your hand with ligature or with your own hand, since you place it in hot water, until the vein is swollen and can be demonstrated by pressing; and perform phlebotomy transversely on that; and if you pierce all over it does not bleed back.
And make sure not to end your hand in phlebotomy, because that leaves the nerves of the fingers exposed.
And apply your hand in hot water and let the blood flow through it, because if you do not immerse that in hot water, the blood will coagulate in the opening of the vein, and this is prohibited from flowing.
And as the blood is extracted according to the amount of necessity, then you should pause on the vein oil and salt so that it does not become consolidated thickly; similarly, let this be done in all branches straight.
The youth of the phlebotomy of that on my left hand, it is referring to the maladies of the liver.
And do likewise in the phlebotomy for him as you did for the other one.
The youth of the venous phlebotomy is for liver diseases located in your body's left side, just as with liver diseases and retention of menses, and for those of the gallbladder and ulcerous conditions of thighs and old sores, and they resemble other diseases.
The quality of the phlebotomy for him is that he introduces his palm into a caudal water and does rubbing in the area where veins become visible; place your hand on the chest joint; locate the apparent vein path near the said position, and from there its branches flow into the wet surface of the chest.
And therefore perform a phlebotomy for the full gallbladder or release the organ from your hand according to its location, follow the addition towards this position, it is better and yields more blood.
And if you perform phlebotomy on the chest surface, then protect yourself from the nerves that are around there on the chest surface, and place your phlebotomy tool at the point where you're performing the phlebotomy across, as if you wanted to penetrate it.
And do the bloodletting as necessary.
And if bleeding is forbidden through the mouth; then you immerse his foot in the caudal water and lets the blood flow within where it's drained.
And if the bloodletting tool misses in the first attempt, then try again with bloodletting on its own a little bit more where it's bleeding; and don't worry about harming him, but be careful of the nerves as we've said.
And similarly do for the gallbladder on the other side equally.
And for the sciatic vein, as we've said, you should place your hand on the exit point of the wild body part.
The youth of phlebotomy for him is when it comes to hip pain due to bleeding.
The quality of phlebotomy for him is that the liver enters into bathwater, rushes and strengthens his thigh in the middle of the hip under his hand above four fingers on a long thin bend which only appears like this.
And when it appears, then you perform phlebotomy for that according to each organ that is within your capability and according to the cross-section, which is better; or you make an incision in it by cut-off or you remove it by searing, where its location is clear.
And she's in a thick male condition; and if you find that, but it doesn't manifest entirely, then perform phlebotomy on some branch of it, and that is the one that appears behind the heart and the ring finger.
And watch out for nerves, let the blood flow in the amount you want.
Then untie the constriction and place your hand on the phlebotomy site, then strengthen that area which will quickly heal.
Regarding ventillation and the qualities to use those [tools or methods].
Ventilation can be done with horns, reeds, or pipes.
Ventilation is performed in two ways: one of them involves incision and blood extraction, and the other involves ventilation without making an incision.
This form of ventilation that involves no incision is done in two ways, either with fire or without using fire.
And of the ventilation that is given with incision and blood extraction, there are fourteen locations in the body. The first one is where bloodletting is done, which is the alnocrati part at the end of the head; the middle location is on both sides of the collarbone area inside; the next one involves ventilation close to the mandible left side of the mouth and right side of the mouth; then there are ventilation for two spatulas; ventilation in the alhoster place, which is near the anus; ventilation from two lamps, and they're about two fists apart; ventilation on both sides of cavils; and finally, ventilation at both thighs.
Ventilation does not extract blood but from small superficial veins in the flesh, and thus it does not have the power through those means; similarly to how bloodletting works. Nor is it necessary for ventilation to be done with fire or without using fire in any liver ailment where the body as a whole has been filled up so that the body gets completely drained out.
And if necessity compels for ventilation due to liver issues or continuous discomfort, administer that in every phase of the month and at its end, as well as in the middle of it and at any other time.
When it comes to any cases of those conditions, and particularly if it's in the liver or spleen of the stomach, then it is commanded that suction should be performed because after a few hours from day two or three.
A young person for neck suction is when that is affected by gravity in the head and to what settles in the lungs; may this be a nearby evacuation of the entire body.
This suction is at the site of the cephalic phlebotomy location.
And it's not written that you should use what causes friction or in which there is catarrh, which gives rise to a great harm.
And for that reason do not use those old methods, and in the heads where there are maladies of fever.
And for him who continues above that, it is made to forget; and so you should command the suction operator that he should place a small amount of the suction device near your parts, fearing the generation of forgetting.
Alcohol suction is at the site of phlebotomy for the dark vein and the basilica: so it causes asthma, and constriction, and splitting of the alcohol stomach, and coughing, and fullness.
And it's known that the alcohol suction should be small; if left for too long, it generates weakness in the body and stomach.
Alkaghdan suction causes headaches in the head and ophthalmia, and migraines, and hyperemia, and toothaches; this is at the site of phlebotomy for the basilic vein.
And it's to command the suction operator not to press their hand with a scalpel so as not to pierce an artery and cause the flow of pus.
And mouth suction causes alcohol in the mouth, and decay of the gum, and symptoms similar to those diseases that occur in the mouth, and are at the site of phlebotomy for the alveolar veins which are in the two lips.
The suction that is performed on the two spoons causes heat, which is caused by fullness of quality.
And the suction of the two areas inside the lungs causes youthfulness from phlebotomy of three veins, which is that of the basilic vein, dark and cephalic, as this draws the pus from all those large veins found in the flesh, and those small veins of other veins that lie between the larger ones so that the suction reaches to the three veins.
And command the suction operator not to proceed with incision, where the place is stripped of flesh, and leave your nerves and arteries.
And it's a suction on which hemorrhoids are sucked, causing rectal bleeding and leaving pus ulcers.
And it's known that you should command the suction operator to use a large suction method, and one made of silver, where the place requires strong drying; and for them apply subtle suction tubes and then perform incisions.
The suction of the small abdominal areas through obvious reduction removes pus from the entire body and relieves old chest pains and menstrual pains, and bladder; they also cause menstruation and relieve indigestion. They are at the site of phlebotomy for two small intestines, and aortic arches, and two cavities.
However, they weaken the entire body and cause fainting in older men.
And for the suction of the aortic arch, it is youthful to the youthfulness of the abdominal suction.
And the quality of the position of the suction is that you place the suction at the beginning view and continue for a while with warm preparation, do not prolong the position of the suction, more pause those lightly, and let them cool down, and make the fluids reach the place evenly. And do not stop repeating this until you see the place already reddening and swelling, and that the color of pus appears.
And then you perform incision gradually, and in small quantities, and mainly take into account the disposition of the body.
For that person who has rare flesh and veins, it's known that you should perform incision once and not more, so as to prevent the area from becoming ulcerated.
And command the suction operator to expand the incision and make it a little large, always facilitating the flow of suction.
And if the pus is thickened, it's known that you should perform two incisions, in which during the first one, open the pathway for subtle extraction to the pus and his liquidity. And during the second one, inspecting the acquired extraction of thick pus removal.
And if the pus is moist and fecal, it's to be performed incision for the third time in order to obtain the remainder.
And gradually, when we want to extract small amounts or a little of pus, until for us one incision is enough.
And if we want extraction of thick pus, we make a large incision; and if we know that the pus is thick, it's known that you should perform extraction through wave-like incisions.
And the term of incision in which the depth of the cut is only so much.
And if the channel of that person is thick, hard, dark, and their veins are strained, it's known that the locations of the suction devices should be gently smeared, more open, decisively resolved; when in summer time, such as with aloes oil or violet oil, or melon seed oil, or cinnamon resin oil; and if it is in winter time, then with narcissus oil, or lemon balm oil, or chamomile oil, or with pus oil, and among those.
And if the excess is large, cool it, then use oil of turmeric, or camphor oil, or aloes oil, or nutmeg oil, and apply them.
And if the collector is of wide pores and has flesh, then it should be prohibited from oil, and it should allow this to the places of the openings of their collectors close to the suction, to be washed with water or with sunflower oil, or with water from aloe, or with water from rosemary, or similar things applied to those.
And for the one whose suction is of moisture, wash his collectors with vinegar or with water from mint and sumac, or similar things applied to those.
And for the one whose excesses are large, wash his collectors with old vinegar or with water of sage, which is basil, or from decoction of nutmeg, or from chamomile, and similar to those.
And it should be noted that the suction is kept facing the bath; you should administer it close to the bathing water for an hour or two, and also let her sleep near the suction.
What is it that needs to be done before performing a bloodletting procedure with respect to the collector?
And when considering the meal: if the collector or one who is to undergo phlebotomy has a choleric and hot disposition with inflammation in his veins, then it should be taken cold substances, as for example vinegar salads, lettuce in vinegar and milk, secalin, and julep, and similar things.
And let her have food like chicken or pork from fattened rabbits, and seasoned foods with herbs, and similar to those.
And for the one whose body is cool, it should be taken to drink asarapalm oil or asarapalm of alsecanabin from seeds and sumac; vinegar mixed with aromatic wine halfway between old and new; and it should be recommended to her that she uses moderation in drinking and eating, and pauses her meals of chicken, rabbit, pigeons, and small rabbits and doves.
And it should be noted that on the day of suction and bloodletting, her intake of fluids should exceed her food consumption.
And it should be given to drink in some hours before giving some men thyme alephrac, or muscle medicines such as muscatel or garlic, before suction or before bloodletting or nearby, so that the main parts are comforted and the disposition becomes subtle; but it should not be taken that cold broth.
The collectors that are subjected to scarification should be collectors placed on the belly, over gout and over the umbilicus, in the areas of the knecks, and the plexus of the abdomen, as these members do not suffer from scarification on themselves.
And it is not done with those but with the pain of the body's disposition, such as suction on nipples in mastitis from the flow of body's disposition of the nose; and we use that to dissolve the congestion and relieve wind, such as placement over the belly and umbilicus; which that hardens the member and stirs it up and resolves the pain caused by wind.
And it should be placed over the livers when they occur in their development or before ejaculation, for the force of attraction causes the body to develop and eradicates the seminal emission from its place.
Similarly, when it is placed on the belly and the back, it causes wind in those confined areas.
And these collectors are administered with broth alone; some administrations are made with fire.
And some administrations are completely filled with hot water in the mastitis of the belly.
And that is why the suction should be filled and there should be large pus, either hot water alone or hot water in which herbs are cooked as appropriate.
Procedure for suction administered with fire: make the size of the opening two fingers wide, according to how we have made it; the quantity of blood is almost up to a hand's width; and it should be on the back, in the place that is in the circulation, half of it, let the tube be small according to the amount that enters it with one needle.
It should be made of elderberry or citrus, with thick margins, lion's balm, equal and clean so that it does not move the member to its rightful position on you.
And at the middle of your elderberry or iron rod, where the candle is placed when it's in the fire.
And this suction should be larger than the one we have recommended; and use less grease according to the mastitis and the condition of the one who uses that.
And the suckers of children and exhausted ones are different from those of young people and with large circulations.
And the quality of placing this suction on a member is to spread the charcoal in fire from good wood before a small wax candle flame, and place that over the middle of the crossbeam in the middle part of the suction so that the fire be lit close to your side for it not to burn the body of the patient.
And it should be placed on the body of the patient, and let us say over the tube that we have said, within which when we have the collectors and they do not seem to bear the tube and smoke over that tube, then the suction will dissolve immediately.
And properly apply the fire according to their manner, and continue this process until you have finished with it.
In a wet blanket used in the illness of pleurisy, there is no cross or twisting water inside it, and it is not administered unless it is full of water, and it is placed only on the member.
And this is the form of it: And this wet blanket, the larger it is, the better it is, so that it can receive a large amount of water.
Chapter 97.
Sanguissuguations (blood-sucking treatments) are not administered on moist members but on those parts of the body where it is impossible to place a suction cup due to their small size, such as the gums and similar areas; or on uncovered flesh parts, like the nose and those that resemble it.
And the quality to use those you have found, which are in the water of the old world's fluids.
And let them lie throughout the day and night in water that is old, so they don't cause any harm inside their stomachs; and let the body be emptied of blood and by suction; and let you rub the parts of the affected area until they turn red; and let them be placed on the patient.
And when they are filled up, and in case.
And if you can find a place with suction from the area by using a suction cup, it's better to do so early in adulthood.
And if not, then wash the area with warm water and apply hot water; and rub it and press out its contents.
And if the body of the disease has extended to the site where the sanguissuguations are applied, and it is like this residue, then you immerse a linen cloth in cold water and place that above them until the discharge subsides.
And if the disease is multiplied, then apply powdered vitriol or the like substances that are used in stiptics over it, until the disease is absorbed; or place the ashes of burnt fava beans over the area and let them remain until the fava beans adhere to the area, until the disease is absorbed.
And if necessary, repeat blood-sucking treatments, as it's possible to change those.
And if blood-sucking treatments are prohibited from suspension, then rub the area with recent disease or leave a needle in those areas where it causes the disease to start spreading; and let them be placed, so that when there is any disease it spreads immediately.
And when you want them to heal, apply a little of powdered aloen or salt or ashes over those, and let it cure immediately.
And thus begins the treatment for the remaining part: restoration. This chapter deals with necessary treatments in the art of medicine; it involves restoring fractures and accidental displacements in bones.
Oh child, know that people who study this chapter are doctors and laypeople, as well as those who have forgotten the teachings of the ancients and do not even read a single word from them.
And for this reason, this method of the scholars in our land is kept private; I have not forgotten everything over time; and I did not include anything that I learned directly from them, but only after reading their works extensively and studying their understanding to extract knowledge from them.
And let him direct towards experimentation and study throughout his lifetime.
And I have already described in this chapter everything that is part of my science and about which extensive experiments have been conducted. Thus, I abbreviate this for you others and relieve myself from the task of long explanations; then abbreviate it at the end of abbreviation; and illustrate this at the end of description; and formulate this into various forms that are administered in that, just as I did in two previous chapters regarding addition of description, similarly to what I have done in those.
First chapter.
Summary and collections from existing fractures of bones, from which it is necessary to have a preview before we begin recalling the fractured members and various aspects. And thus, when you speak about the introduction of this chapter, mention summaries of the discourse; and those chapters that are understood by artisans at the beginning will be built upon their knowledge or understanding of these. These include both you and those who readily understand such noble arts from you.
And when you encounter a fracture or dislocation or twist or dislocation occurs, then you should take care at the beginning with bloodletting or treat that area, or any time, if no cause is forbidden, such as increased vitality, or it's the place where this happens unexpectedly, or old age, or it's the time of strong heat, or strong rubbing.
And take care to eat food made of herbs and fowl meats and crab meat; and forbid large meats and fill yourself with all foods that fill the veins of disease, so you're safe from developing pus under the skin. And if you don't fear the leakage of material into the body part.
And then return your body to its initial state that is customary for it.
And when the broken bone begins to be restored, then you should feed your body with nutritious foods that are motley and dense in which it has viscosity, such as wheat cooked in water, rice, nuts, fish, bellies of cows, eggs, fresh meat, thick foods similar to these, and under this regimen there is a slight coagulation of pus from the fracture and honey.
And know that bones harden when they are in men who are in the first half of life and in the elderly, it is not possible for them to remain constant and be consolidated according to their nature due to the drying out of their body parts.
However, nature adjusts and heals over the broken bone from every part for a similar cause to scorching in which thickness adheres and strengthens that inside it. They glue together and bind it inside as they coagulate together and solidify at intervals, inside where the end of strength and firmness comes, like fire at the beginning, within which no prohibition stops that from his works.
And for this reason it is necessary to stop the foods of the belly, foods in which gravity and viscosity and thickness exist as we have said.
And know that the types of fracture are diverse according to the diversity of the body parts, a fracture of the bone in the pelvis is different from a fracture of the skull bone; and a fracture of the foot bone is different from a fracture of the leg bone; and similarly all other bones are different among themselves.
And I recall all kinds of fracture, described in its chapter distinctly from the other.
A variety of fractures within oneself. And the species of bone fracture within them are diverse; some occur in their vertebral column; and sometimes fractures happen according to the length of the bone: these include fractures from the scapula and stars and those not originating from them, like when writing is prepared. They are gouty fractures and disruptions in the head, and they are small crack fractures.
And for every kind there is its own or turmoil in the restoration according to how each will be distinctly remembered in their places.
A sign of bone fracture. And thus, this is how bone fracture is known: it is the curvature of it, and that prominence and connection to sensation from it, and the feeling when you press on it with your hand.
And therefore, when there is no visible curvature and it is not felt by your touch when you press the bone with force on the body and the patient does not feel great pain, then it is not here a fracture.
It is possible that there could be curvature or a small crack, just know how you feel it when you touch your hand to it and the compression of all. It rests over it from the medicines which will make you remember at that moment what suits the location; and it stretches through subtle constriction.
And know that when it is curved and does not split into two or any other that do not occur in the scapula, if it is widened throughout its whole part by comparison, then know that starting from your time you will correct it whenever it has given rise to a cauterization.
And if it has given rise to cauterization, then smooth that for a few days until the cauterization ceases; and then equalize that according to any manner you can of levitation and skill.
And know that the restoration and adjustment of it are much less than in the bone where you have suffered scapula.
And then strengthen it according to how you will remember it.
And if in the bone there are scapulas, then it is necessary to extend this broken member from two parts, if it's the hand or foot; or with your hand if the member is small; or with two cords or with one and a hand.
And if your position is with which you place the member to its natural location equal while the parts are extending from the broken member, then you must force that you return those additions in their own and according to any manner you can put them in their locations.
And guard yourself so that it does not occur on the body due to your operation or injury, and force yourself according to your ability to apply one bone onto another of its best forms.
And know that in that moment profitably you touch with your hand there, and if you find any different cause here, correct it and equalize it according to the quantity of your virtue.
And avoid excessive extension and compression, as some old doctors do when their operations cause cauterization or lead to contraction in the body, like we have seen that through the operation of their swollen parts.
And the quality of the restriction of the broken member is as I have described; and know that limbs fractured are diverse in their size, in their grandeur, and in the shape of those.
And of those who are small like the arm and said it is easy to resemble them, then the covering should be of very fine cloth.
And of those who are large like the thigh or the chest, ensure that in those cases there is a covering that is both soft and durable, such that the bandage securely connects the large and strong member from all sides with tightness, so as not to allow any stain in them.
And then begin your evacuation of equilibrium, place a sufficiently soft material at that, over the site of that fracture with three or four coverings according to which member it is; and strengthen your hand a little on this material.
And then lead him towards the more superior part of the site of the fracture, and strengthen moderately so that your tightness does not exceed the one where you have strengthened the site of the fracture. And then extend the covering of the fracture site slightly, and gradually soften the tightness, until you take over a large portion of the site.
And then take another branch and wrap that other gauze around the tightened site with covering, and gradually lead those coverings towards the more superior part of the fracture; and let your operation in the tightness of this covering and the softening of that happen as we have described for the first covering above.
And then place between the layers of stopping cloth or cloth that matches the curvature of the fracture, if there is a curvature in it; and if not, do not pause on any cause.
And then place on the other branch, and properly match over these gauzes that have been neatly made just now, if there is no inflammation or abscess in this area; and then place what is the abscess here and that which causes the inflammation; and leave it for a few days; and then strengthen your hand on these stars.
And let the stars of the length of cane be rectangular, and formed wisely; or they could be made of wood; or of palm leaves; and make each star according to this shape and this figure:
However, ensure that the star placed over that fracture is larger and a little more rectangular than the other stars. The length of each star according to its reading on the member in size and smallness; then strengthen your hand on these stars using another branch as your first tightness; and then lie properly according to what we said about tightness, such that it is your tightness at the location of the fracture more, and the longer you extend from the fracture, the better repair the tightness.
And ensure that the threads are mixed in pregnancy and fineness, and use many of them; if the threads are large, as I have seen some doctors placing those thick string cords for a number of times during an operation, this is a great mistake when it comes to maintaining equality in tightness.
And it is inconvenient to use thin threads because you will not be able to achieve the tightness you desire with those. Also, ensure that there are no more than a finger's width between each thread.
And if the patient is made to lie with the ends of the stars near the tightness in the specific areas, then place these stopping cloths or mohair lace between them so that they do not cause injury.
Some fracture gauzes are placed on the skin, and there is a disruption in the chain, and I will recall that specifically in the Senate according to uniqueness.
And know that not every broken limb is bound with stars on the first day; this is because when a limb is large, it may not be able to rest upon the stars without causing injury until about three or seven days later, or longer, depending on your confidence in avoiding an abscess.
And this is the method of plastering that the ancients used when restoring them, which are placed upon fractures, dislocations, and twists.
The method of plastering as briefly described for the restoration of fractures, suitable for complex issues and predominantly for women and children, which is done on materials that do not conduct heat or are smooth: and you take the powder from the miller's flour, this being the essence of the flour that comes out when grain moves through the mill walls.
And apply it in this manner, rather than sift it with egg white, and let the preparation not be too thin or delicate; then proceed to use that.
Another method for setting broken bones and dislocations: take a recipe of assafetida, lapdanum, acacia, almond, and myrrh, each measured in one dragon's weight; add half a dragon worth of frankincense and five dragons worth of aloe; add twenty dragons' worth of clove oil or the albumen of an egg if the patient has been burned. And then use this ointment which is made from good composition and restores slightly broken bones, granting strength to old men.
Another method of setting the plaster which helps with fractures and twists: take a recipe of myrrh and white honey in one dragon's weight; add frankincense and aloes worth five dragons each; include six dragons' worth of acacia; and use twenty dragons' worth of Armenian butter.
The text translates as:
The text translates as:
The text translates as:
The text translates as:
The text translates as: The text translates as:
The text translates as:
The text translates as:
The text translates as:
The text translates as:
The text translates as:
The text translates as: The text translates as:
The text translates as:
The text translates as:
The text translates as:
The text translates as: The text translates as:
And then adjust more in the constriction than in your first constriction entirely, and adjust to the swelling of the food of the patient, according to when the memory is recalled for them.
If you have already dried and weakened the area of the fracture more than its depth, then know that nutrition is prohibited from reaching there; therefore, soak that with water intensity for your entire duration, which you apply to it; and do this for all three days; and relax the constriction a bit, and thanks to this operation supply nutrients to the limb, and it gets healed slightly.
Adjust this to what the bone restorers do when restoring a limb fracture for another duration than its restoration up to fullness, according to depth and then restoration according to curvature, which is their error in operation, and with great fear. If it were a draftsman, they would expand these ancient ones in their free areas and harden this opened area.
And I haven't seen any of them do such a thing, so it is more reasonable that they don't do it.
According to the second one: When a fracture occurs in the head.
The types of fractures are blows, and their figures are various, and the causes are distinct, for some fractures occur due to impact by space force, and the impact stops inside all the bones until they penetrate through the skin, which leaves them intact, just like when wood is split, and thus this type is named "crush". Or the force impacts a part of the bone, impacting the flesh but not passing through to the back of it; and this kind of fracture is called "absolute uplift."
And the wound of these two fractures is large or small, and for a frictional or compressive fracture; and its cause affects it when impacting on stone or crushing on rock, and they resemble that.
And this fracture is penetrating, bringing it close to the marrow which leaves them intact within the bones; or it's in the surface of the bone, and for these two types of fractures, the wound can be large or small.
And for this fracture which occurs within the bone in its subtle hairiness and so is named this specific type of fracture "capillary".
And it is the fracture that occurs due to impact or crushing on stone and resembles that, causing some layer of bone to enter its parts inside, and this happens in the concave area as when their impact occurs with the tools used for excavation and their entrance part into the inside areas.
And it is mostly done in wet bones like those of infants.
And for all these types of gaseous fractures, they are like separate stars. And I will recall everything about this in its place.
And I know all these types of fractures through detection from them and by inquiry about their wounds and corruption of the flesh that is over them.
And the capillary type is known for being discovered on the bone surface, it is cleaned off, and there's a test on it, where the fracture appears black.
In the treatment of fractures, consider the patient's condition, and if you encounter any symptoms that indicate manifest significance on the body, such as vomiting from cholera, expansion, loss of understanding, seizure, fever, sneezing, and symptoms in those affected, and similar events to the symptoms occurring in severe conditions, it is not healed.
And if you encounter abnormal symptoms, you expect healing; then you start treating them.
And the cause is that if you have been hit in the condition like being hit, and this happens during the days of winter, then know that you study in the bone's remnants before day 14 according to every disposition.
And if it's during the days of summer, then know that you wait until the 7th day, having understood that what is within the bone has been corrupted by the marrow, and these events occur which we have recounted.
And if the fracture has already penetrated into the marrow and covers the brain, and it's in small parts that are compressive, then know that you must incise the affected part and grind it according to what I will instruct you.
And this is that you assess the head of the injured limb, and uncover on the bone according to custom and your practice as possible given the wound's figure, and it should be minor over the limb.
And if it happens to you, you should detect the bone, pus or abscesses, then you oppose what disturbs you as long as it smells of cloths soaked in vinegar and rubbed oil, and makes the wound rest within so that the abscess is suppressed; and you are sure of blood flows. And then start around the edge of the bone and in its ablation.
And this should be according to one of two ways of operation.
And the first way is that you incise the bone with a straight-bladed scalpel, and this is its form: And then administer another scalpel of this kind, slightly shorter than that one; and this is its form:
And then administer more the scalpel slightly longer than the second one.
And know that you should have a number of different scalpel blades, among which some are slightly longer than others; and some of them are shorter than the others and are at the end of their sharpness, and they are made of iron or steel.
And use their aid in percussion over the incision to ensure that it does not tear the head or harm there.
And if the bone is strong and hard, then carve out through its channel before you make incisions in the arteries which you name as non-deep arteries.
And they are not so in such cases that those do not reach the edge of the bone of the testis to where it is close by, because at the artery there is a round terminal or margin around which their head resembles an acute edge like a margin or a small circle. This prohibition prevents being submerged and passing through the thickness of the bone.
And it is convenient that you take from these arteries a large number of which each conforms to the thickness of every bone, within which being present in all brains at your disposal, the end of which should be sharp, the amount in length and width should correspond to the thickness of this bone.
And this is the form of three types of arteries: The quality of puncturing through the circuit of the broken bone is that you place the artery on the bone and rotate it with your fingers until you know that the bone has been penetrated; then move the artery to another location, and pause where you have removed the quantity corresponding to the thickness of the ray or roughly so.
And then you make incisions with the incision tools where there is any part of the bone, making that subtle pus over it at the end of levitation, as we have said, while you free the bone or with your hand, or by some other means using tools you will have equipped for this, such as forceps and delicate tongs.
And make sure that you take every caution so that the incisioner does not touch any nerve of the spinal cord.
And so when you have drilled through the bone and separated it from the spinal cord if this continues with him/her, and you extract it, then make sure that you examine and compare it with the hardness of what is in the bone at another tool similar to an incisioner, but rather make sure that it is a bit harder than the other incisioners.
And if there is any part of the small bones and soft ones, then take that with ease with what you should have among the tools; and apply this cure to the wound with herbs and ointments as we have said.
And the other way of operation is less invasive and far from pain, which Galien and La Crosse performed through a large incision; this is what it means: in your commencement, you need to start discovering the part of the bone on the spot where the fracture is most intense and most obvious. Once you have discovered that part and placed its extremity on this slow yet steady incision tool (which we will call 'the instrument'), here's how it works:
And it is that the circular part is strong and does not cut any nerve, while the sharp part extends in two directions from him/her at the length before you, as often happens; such that the circular part should be aligned with the spinal cord on his/her sharply inclined surface of the bone.
And then you beat on the incision tool from one side with a small hammer while making an incision through all the bone in ease as it has been rotated, and you are sure of the procedure that does not hit him/her accidentally with any incident, and if the surgeon14 was the most experienced among all humans and the most ignorant of them; certainly, and if he/she was asleep.
And then if any cause is attached to the bone of the surgeon in certain parts of the bone, he will make an incision from him/her using the sharp end of this incision tool that is circular, and he will release it with ease which gets released from his/her nerves and pain.
And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the surgeon, and whatever is separated or remains of the bone is his/her skin, being hard and soft subtleties, then make sure that you examine that hardness and remove those softnesses with fine razors with which you have prepared a number, in various quantities so that it may be possible for you to administer from them wherever necessary, according to the quality of your operation on this broken bone and its shape.
And make sure that you administer according to your reasoning when you start removing the bone with these razors, and then use this fine substance of it as close as possible, and do not stop doing this until you manage to distribute the hard and the fine substance from all those.
And when in any of the other small arterial fractures and subtle fracture, make sure that you provide treatment according to how you lost it for correcting it.
And this is because they are not explained over all those who have studied in that art. And we have shown on what we wrote about large fractures.
And if the skin is torn when you remove the bone, then make sure that you take lint according to the size of the wound, soak it in rubbed oil, and place it on the wound opening; then take another folded or tripled cloth, soak it in vinegar and rubbed oil, and place it on the first lint, gently apply this to the skin without causing any injury to the spinal cord; then apply a thin layer of wax onto it, do not tighten it but only as much as needed by the wound.
And leave it with this treatment for one or two days until you are sure of the pus abscess; then remove it and begin to administer medicines which require unnecessary drying, such as linseed oil and flour of earth, powders of ashes and aristolochia, and other substances similar to those.
And it is that you use this powder medicine to be dusted over the wound, as when they are dry; universally, administer in that all properties of the medicine from which one should cleanse and not bite.
And follow according to your virtue that the wound in your treatment should be clean; and not be in the viscera of ointment or other thing; nor leave adding virulence in it; because when it is applied on the brain's membrane, it corrupts that and sets itself there, and accedes towards the patient near this malign malice.
And it happens in the root of the head, as when your face is altered by its bones and much more so when treatment of you is neglected, and there's a darkening on the surface; therefore consider now if accidents happen to the patient that we have said, know that they are perilous altogether.
And if it does not turn to darkening but only due to the medicine that is placed upon it, and it results from the virtue of that medicine which causes that darkening, then take a part of honey and part of roasted oil in proportion. And anoint those lines with a cloth, and then place that on the head; and cure that with the spices of treatment within which it suits for healing.
Crown in three parts.
For restoration of the nose when it is broken.
Know that it is not broken of the nose but two parts at once, or one of those occasionally fractured, because in you there are two bones, the part left is cartilaginous, and is not broken, it does not come to you but swelling and stiffness and stuffiness.
If one of the two parts is broken in you, then know that you should insert this little bone into your nose hole, and equalize that fracture internally according to your indication, and below it externally, so that the nose returns according to its natural figure. And do this for you with ease, and be careful that it does not fall due to your operation on the patient's face.
And if the fracture is in the upper part of the nose's division, and this bone does not reach there, then know that it should be equalized at the tip of the ray where there is a little thickness.
And if the fracture is in two parts, then you make as though this was done.
And heal him of you in the first day of the fracture, if it is possible; and otherwise, then after seven or eight days wait for the discharge from the abscess.
And insert into the tip of the nose a piece of cloth if the fracture is in one part or put two chips, if the fracture is in two parts, and in the chip thickness as much quantity that fills the nostril.
And as some of the ancient restorers say that the chips should be bound in bandages, and they should be changed throughout the day, though not visible to me; know that the cloth should be bound in egg white paste like a powder of pounded bones; and then let the chip sit until the bone is set and the cartilage becomes hardened.
And sometimes there are fractures in the nose, instead of a chip, risking an abundant pus covered with lion's cloth on you; and it is because already has the broken nose with much pus and that the patient cannot perform inhalation.
And this reason is not necessary for you; if you wish, do this, and if you wish, use chips.
And if there is another abscess on the cautery, plaster your nose with turpentine or with grease that has been heated and roasted oil, or with tallow.
And if there is not an abscess on it, then know that you should plaster that externally with saffron flour and with the powder of coffee beans in egg white; and then place a layer of lion's skin over it, and do not harm your nose for any reason.
And if the bones of the nose are broken in small fractures or are constricted, then know that you should cut on those, and remove those with tools suitable for them; and then dress the incision, and heal it with what promotes growth and consolidation, and apply bandages with what is convenient.
And if there is a wound internally in the nose, then know that you should heal it with chips and administer lead canulas until it is completely healed.
Crown IV.
For restoration of the jaw when it is broken.
When the jaw left is broken and the fracture of it is not in the wound, consider now if the fracture is only outwardly, and is not broken into two parts but bent internally between the parts, then its knowledge is light.
And consider therefore, if the fracture is in the right part, that you should insert your left indication into the mouth of the patient; and similarly if the fracture is on the right jawbone, then insert your right hand's indication; and drive the tension of the fracture internally with ease to the parts outwardly, with your other hand from the outside of the bone; do this decentrally equalizing that.
And if the fracture of the jaw is already separated into two, then know that you should administer extension to both parts according to rightness until it is possible for its equalization.
And if there is commotion of teeth to disintegration, then strengthen those you expect will break in the course of gold or silver or copper; and then place a bandage on the broken jaw with turpentine, and place it on the cloth doubled, and cover it with a decently made large star-shaped patch, or one piece as long as the length of the jaw; and then lay that upon it according to how you have noticed the adhesion of it and what suits its application, so that it is not destroyed.
And command the patient to rest and be calm, and pause their diet for a few days.
And if you estimate that the figure has been altered in some way, then take it out on the third day; and fix what was already altered with you, apply the powder of myrrh, the albumen of an egg, or the flour of wheat. Just make sure to have the final bandage ready for him, and place woolen cloth over the bandage.
And when this is done and the bandage has been properly applied on him, and if the position of the bone is not altered, leave it alone, do not move it until he recovers and strengthens the fracture; for this kind of broken bone heals in three weeks.
And if another wound occurs with a carbuncle or scab, then administer what we have said about treating wounds while he is recovering, and ensure that the carbuncle is properly treated.
And if the fracture is due to a bruise, then consider whether it's separated from or stuck with bone fragments. In that case, you carefully remove those fragments using whatever tool suits for their removal during the treatment of such injuries.
And if the wounds are healed, then you should enlarge them according to your need using the scalpel.
And when you have removed all the bone fragments and if they are no longer present in the wound, then you should clean out the wound cavity if it is wide; otherwise, cover that area with one of the bandages suitable for it, until it heals.
End of chapter V.
On restoring the hyoid bone when it is fractured.
Broken hyoid refers to the fracture occurring behind the front part of the muscle, and this kind of break can happen in three ways.
If it breaks, separates, or splits into two parts other than by bone fragments; this makes the restoration of him easier. If there are bone fragments involved, then his restoration becomes more difficult. Or if the break is due to a bruise, that also complicates its restoration.
And during the operation in such cases where the break is due to a bruise, you should have two ministers present for support. One will hold the broken hyoid and follow it along its path, while the other will extend the neck around that part.
And then bind the fracture with your usual methods until its shape is restored according to its original form, without leaving any unevenness or depression.
And if you need more extension, then guide the patient's neck support pad or wool, according to its size as per your requirement; extend and elevate the hyoid bone while holding it with your hand until you can equalize the fracture as needed.
And if you cannot pull the end of the hyoid bone to the outside parts, since it's pushed inside towards the front, then guide that the patient should be lying on their back with their neck raised, and place a cushion about half the size over the muscle.
And the minister presses against the muscle on both sides until the bone of the hyoid is elevated as it would be when lying down in front; then you correct and equalize the fracture using your usual methods.
If you feel bone fragments and it's stuck in the wound, then guide that cut over there and remove those bone fragments for easier removal.
And if it's held in the bone, then you devise incision on him using one of the scalpels that you've prepared for this task, because you have placed the hyoid where the surgical instrument serves to cut through the muscles; and that instrument is made of wood or iron as follows:
It resembles a spoon whose shape is like that; and its width depends on how much you need for him according to the size of the bone or the softness.
And the length of it should be according to what is feasible in your operation; that there are two ends as usual, and one end is wide while the other is narrow.
And if the wound disruption you've cut when removing the bone fragment from the bone is large and you are sure of a carbuncle or scab formation, then adjust both edges of the wound for suturing.
And if the disruption is small or you fear a carbuncle formation, then cover the wound with cloths and powders according to the size of the cut on the wound.
And if a carbuncle or scab occurs, then soak cloth in water and oil mixed together, and place it over that area.
And always, to avoid disturbing the wound, do not open it; and by your care you see how the patient is every day, because when the inflammation has subsided or the wound begins to heal, then you correct this and strengthen the bandage.
And place the patient's back over their neck, and by placing your hand under the patient while they sleep at night with a small cushion; so that at that time lift the aid of the patient from their waist, and thus raise the fracture of the sternum to an elevation in muscle movement; or let the patient's arm be tied to their chest.
And do not disturb the inflammation unless it occurs suddenly or forms an abscess, within about twelve days.
And replace the dressing if you've noticed the patient's face is as expected, and adjust in the constriction, restore it and smooth until the fracture of the sternum has been restored and coagulated.
And it is strengthened and made comfortable according to the month in twenty-eight days, and some patients need time periods like that for healing.
Capitol day.
Restoration of clavicle fracture.
Spatula tart is broken in the patient's lateral area and not break it from them, but their edges.
And when it is broken - and it breaks in the middle of you - and it is not known except by touch, then according to what it is, the figure of the fracture forces your preparation and reduce that according to the natural figure. In every way of art that is within your ability.
And place over the area powder of ground albumin with oil, stop the lion; and place powdered double cloth; and place over the wound a small tabled edge as per the quantity of the spatula or more slightly.
If the wound is concave in some parts of the spatula area, then you fill that concavity with lion's wool, and then lift the wound according to equality.
And strengthen over with human fat about the constriction, and compress the wound so that it does not swell in its place.
And consider the inflammation every day; and when it has subsided in all cases, apply another one and strengthen it and equalize the wound if it begins to swell at its place.
Lay the patient on their left side here.
The spatula is restored in 20 days or in 30 days.
And when this number is completed, then you dissolve the inflammation, and you should know securely that whatever began from those bones will not be disturbed nor dissolved.
And if you are dealing with the area of the bone pess and put on this chain, then you split over it, and keep it, and do according to what we have said in the fracture of the sternum for pus extraction if it occurs here.
Capitol day VII.
Restoration of the fracture of the arm.
The arm sometimes breaks in the middle of it and thus ends up bent; but its extremities need to be straightened and divided.
And of the accidents when it breaks in the middle they decline into the parts inside and occur to the great pain, difficulty in breathing, coughing, weakness, vomiting; and it is declared in the cavity in the broken bone and is not hidden from feeling.
And the restoration of it is that you reposition the patient on their back, and place a cushion between their shoulders; and press into their muscles, and adjust their ribs to the cushions of two ribs, and refine in your operation and with equalization according to every manner which can be done within your capabilities, so as to return the figure of the bone as you see fit.
And place on the dressing and cover it up with a thin sheet of sause or caligi and match them in levitation, since you envelop that with cloth; then refine that covering over the broken bone so as not to disturb it; strengthen this according to the roundness when you are at the back for some days, and reinforce it with firmness; and consider the bandage always, and when it has subsided, reinforce it.
And if necessity requires you to disturb that, it causes decay or pressure, or pain, or pus that occurs in the area, then you remove and loosen that and remove the dressing, correct what happens with this manner of treatment; and adjust the dressing if you notice its effect; and reduce the dressing if you see its appearance; and adjust your constrictions until it heals.
Capitol day VIII.
Restoration of the ribs when they are broken.
Understand that the break of the ribs does not occur in small places but only in areas that reach both sides; and the extremities of them from their division in front do not undergo this friction but because they are cartilaginous. Awareness of it is not hidden from feeling, you must inquire about it through the words spoken.
And the restoration should be as close to equalizing the break according to the possible manner, within which it is swallowed according to you, and then apply dressing and strengthen the broken bone with a bandage, if you need that.
And if the break of the ribs is declining into the parts inside, then it affects the back with intense pain and puncture, like puncture that occurs in someone who has caught cold, because the bone puts up a membrane; it also causes difficulty in breathing, coughing, vomiting; motion sickness; and this is hard to treat.
And the Ancients were skilled in that manner of treatment.
And they say of them: press the abdomen with your hand that causes food to ferment inside and induces wind, so that the belly becomes swollen and stretched outwards, and the fracture is driven away from the parts.
May we understand this properly so that it is not a trivial cause to generate a pus-filled blister if it doesn't happen; and if it does happen, then at that moment we already assist in this matter.
And they say that it is beneficial to be raised above the wind and near to apply heat strongly; this is akin to reasoning, but nevertheless, there is a fear that the wind will drive away excesses due to weakness.
And they say: cover the area with wool that has been submerged in heat oil, and place powders between the ribs inside where it is full, so that it becomes as soft as when you envelop this according to its roundness; and apply care for the stomach on the treatment of the pains of food and medicine.
And if it causes strong constriction in the stomach which cannot endure, and if you prick the bone gently at the puncture point, fear for the stomach, then let's cut over that area, uncover from the broken rib, and place something underneath that instrument which requires precision beforehand, and pierce the bone with ease, removing it.
And if necessary adjust the two lips of the wound, if it is large with stitches, and treat that with plasters until it heals.
And if pus occurs inside, then you pinch and insert powders in hot oil and place it over the area, so that the stomach is treated with what goes to the pus inside.
And if it is properly raised on the side where he sleeps, until it heals.
Capitol ninth.
Regarding the restoration of fracture in the two lumbar vertebrae and the cervical region.
Some fractures occur in the bones of the neck, and similarly to their tendons, as well as in the lumbar vertebrae. And when this happens with someone else and you want to know if they will heal or not, then consider that if their hands are already softened, become numb and dead and cannot be made stronger, extended, contracted, and when you force them against your own words or prick them with a needle and do not feel pain in those areas, then know that it is not healing, and during these times of symptoms it is fatal.
And if you feel pain and constriction in those areas against your own words or pierce them, then know that the neck of the bone is saved and that the stomach heals with treatment.
And if you see similarities in the cervical vertebrae to this and you want to know if it will heal or not, then consider the feet of him/her.
And when you see that they are already softened, it happens with those things that happen to the hands, and roughly when lying on their back, experiences windiness and loss of appetite according to their will, and some fractures lie on their back and want to urinate but cannot. Then know that it is fatal, and therefore do not bother in treating him/her.
May if no cause comes from those things, the cause is better and less severe.
And the treatment for him is that you perform on cooling down the pus-filled blister that you place over the lumbar vertebra with heated oil, or with the steam of boiling water; apply heat to those wounds each day until the pus-filled blister cools.
And then place a plaster that soothes and remains in place, and press on it with strength; and command the stomach to take rest and peace, not to sleep where pain is found within until it heals.
And if it happens that you rupture the bone or any cause already separated from it, then let's heal over the wound and remove that bone. And adjust the two lips of the wound, with stitches if it is large; and treat that with some kind of ointment until it heals.
May if it is broken in the tail of the bone, which is at the end of the penis, then let's insert your right hand's fingers into his anus and align the broken bone with the other hand according to what is possible for the second equation; and apply plaster and ash on him, if you need those, and press that.
And if you feel broken bones inside him/her, then let's cut over that area, hold that, and treat the wound with the treatment that is followed until it heals.
Capitol tenth.
Regarding the restoration of the elbow.
The bones of the elbows often break, and if they do break, then the fracture is simply communication at the ends of those areas and is inscribed along their length, declining inward; and it happens to the stomach pain in that area and a puncture, and the change becomes numb when there is a fracture.
And the restoration for him/her is that you extend your hand over it while it is above the fracture which is the shape of his/her elbow.
And if the fracture is only at the extremity of it, then let's align that according to what can be done with the equation equal within so that it matches its natural shape.
May if the fracture is in the long or that has declined towards the parts left, then let's make the stomach lie on its belly so that you prepare for the restoration of that fracture. And when you have leveled that, place plaster on them, and also place the stick or bone saw above that spot, and firmly press over it with your hand without fearing the piercing of a fracture or movement of the star.
And level the cavity within which that constriction occurs according to equality, and command the patient to sleep on his elbows or not to turn his side.
If an abscess forms due to the cauterization, then stop extending him and restore him within where the abscess is cauterized, and place on that part which is affected according to its previous condition; and continue restoring him afterwards, strengthen that accordingly as before.
And if it happens in the jaw or teeth are broken, then you should treat them.
Capítulo xi.
关于辅助骨折的恢复。
Adjutori是指位于肩胛骨和头部之间的部分。
如果断裂了，那么对他的恢复方式有以下两种方法中的一个，你会使用中等大小的木棒按照这种方式：
两边有两根线，然后将它们悬挂在高处。
让病人躺在一张小床上；然后将他的断裂的臂部放在木棒上，直到它能够到达木棒中间的位置，那个位置具有与木棒曲线对应的弯曲。
然后在那个上面悬挂一个较重的物体，或者让助手将它移到之前指定的部分；然后医生检查他的手肘，在那里进行治疗，直到骨折能够按照原来的形状恢复。
另一种方法是让病人仰卧在自己的颈部，助手将手肘挂在一个绳索上；然后命令两个助手：其中一个是那个被治疗的人的手部上方的地方；另一个则是他脚下的位置；他们中的每一个都伸展到他们的部分。
如果你想让扩展更加有力，那么在手肘和骨折处加强力量，在另一根绳索上也这样做，并让两个助手的每一个都伸展到他们的部分。
所以，如果骨折靠近肌肉的末端，那么你应该将一半的绳索放在关节点上，并将另一部分放置在手肘处。
类似地，如果骨折靠近手肘，那么你应该将绳索放在那个位置，并且在那个手肘上。
平衡那个，并进行操作，直到它按照原样平衡并正确地应用为止。如果在没有形成烧伤脓肿的情况下发生这种情况，则加强那个位置。
如果形成了烧伤脓肿，那么在第七天时平滑那处的狭窄部位，并在第十五天时用未煮过的小草和油敷在那里，直到脓肿消失。然后加强那个区域。
强化那个部分的方法是在骨折处放置敷料，然后用新的布包裹在敷料上；接着调整手臂的位置以适应辅助装置，并将手张开放在自己的肌肉上。
然后固定布料并加强手肘与辅助装置之间的连接，以确保手臂处于与星星相同的位置。否则，可能会导致断裂的骨头受到任何不利的影响。
那么就使用星星吧。
这意味着在骨折处放置那个星星，使之比其他星星更靠前且更坚固；每个星星之间间隔与星星的宽度相同；所有方向上的星星长度则应根据断裂的位置加上三指的总和。
接着在提及第一章时描述的位置加强那些星星。
这意味着你的压力应该集中在骨折的位置，使其更加稳定。 并且当骨折完全愈合后，那里的压力会减少。
所以，如果你了解了星星和压力的位置，就像我们在恢复肢体到其原位置时所说的那样，在那个时候你就会这样去做。
如果你担心形成烧伤脓肿，那么在第7天时应按照我们所述的那样放松压力和星星的位置。
接着，在所有的方向上考虑绳索达3天，以防在压迫点或肿胀处出现不良反应；或者禁止食物直接接触肢体以避免因过量的压力引起的不适。然后根据我们所说的方式调整所有事物。
如果你确信不会发生任何因这种操作导致的问题，那么不要解开绑带，至少等待三天或者更久。
那么患者的背部应该躺在他的后背上，而他的手则放在他的腹部上。
然后在手肘上放满等量的羊毛垫，考虑到夜间或白天的任何时间，都不应该使断裂的肢体变形或溶解。或者直到该部分变得柔软，然后根据你的技艺调整所有这些。
然后按照我们之前安排的顺序调整食物，以使食物在开始加强时保持细小；然后继续增大对他的食物供给。
关于手肘和患者胸部的常规是，在40天内加强，然后放松并使用浸泡或涂抹药膏进行处理，这些药膏可以调整那些区域。
And if the fracture is healing by friction, then you do not disturb that ligament and let the stars heal within days or within two months.
Chapter XII.
On the restoration of a forearm fracture.
The arm is made up of two bones which are called the radius and the ulna; among them, one is small, and it's called the wrist bone, while the other is large and it's placed after the small one when we say 'after the wrist'.
And in a mild fracture, only the larger bone breaks or even both bones break at the same time.
And when only the smaller bone breaks above, then its restoration is mild and its healing is even milder.
And when either of the bones below breaks, his arm fracture is bad and its healing is difficult.
And even worse than that is when both bones break at the same time.
So if the bone that breaks is the smaller radius above, then for the doctor, it's appropriate to restore him by slightly extending that area where it can be made equal.
And if it is the larger bone that breaks, then apply a more forceful extension pressure.
And if both bones are broken at once, then you should exert stronger traction force.
And when you place your hand's figure, restore him and extend his arm over a cushion, with the wrist of his hand above each other parts above, rather than any other instructions. And let the ankle be below all others, and let the foot be at right angles to a sloping stool laid out.
And place one cushion in front of him according to his height or position, so that the foot does not bear more work.
And then have another minister extend his arm from the side below towards his own hand or ligament, and another minister extends similarly above.
And the doctor should equalize the bones within where it can reduce that according to the best figure that can be.
And if in the fracture of the bone are splints, then you should perfectly reduce all pieces to their place with your strength.
And if there appears in him a splinted separation that breaks the continuity and is not within your hope for his restoration, then you tend to him and hold it as per the manner we have said above.
And if the fracture is from a blow, I have already discussed this in this chapter alone, so take care of that.
And if it happens that you develop an abscess at the beginning of your restoration, then lay out a cloth with a wadded gauze made from burned oil and white wax, and place it in the middle between hardness and subtlety, and apply a firm cloth over that within a subtle constriction where the abscess can be drained; and then replace the gauze and place an adhesive plaster; and let this plaster be placed closer to and more firmly on that fracture.
And know that the number of gauzes for the arm is found in the major dispositions, or whether the fracture is in one bone or both bones at once.
And then place your constriction firmly and vigorously over the site of the fracture, and when more appropriate is the constriction towards each part above the fracture or towards the lower parts of him, place the constriction a little wetter than usual according to his previous memory at the beginning of this chapter.
And the cloths that envelop the fracture should be soft and wet, not hard nor stiff, and the material with which they are strengthened should be midway between subtle and bulky, as we have recommended.
And consider the member and the ligament for several days. And if there arises any cause for which correction is necessary, as when something happens to the member itself, then you should immerse the member in cold water until that inflammation subsides.
And let the member not be strained again until it has rested, and then return to the constriction.
And if the constriction has already been softened and the bone has already been set and looks like those, then correct all this with your strength.
And consider more if nourishment is prohibited from reaching the member due to excess constriction; then you should let that soften slightly and allow it for several days until nutrition can flow towards it, and then strengthen that.
And if to the foot there does not arise any cause of those that we have said, then you should let it be undisturbed for about 20 days or so.
And then let the hand of the foot be suspended by its strength in movements, and make him sleep on his back.
And know that this fracture is restored in 30 days or in 40 days, or somewhat more gently in 28 days, and all of this depends on the qualities of completeness and the dispositions of strength.
Chapter XIII.
On the restoration of a wrist fracture and finger fractures.
Know that there can be a bone fracture in the wrist and knuckles of fingers, but they do not suffer from broken bones alone.
And when it comes to a wrist fracture or strain, you should let the foot remain hanging and in front of him laid out according to equality, and then place his hand on that stretched out.
And then the minister extends the broken bones, the doctor equally matches them inside where they are connected by good bone growth.
And then cover the place with plaster and stopper, if it does not lead to a cauterized boil; and place a piece of felt over the area according to its size, and you have already enveloped that in linen.
If the incision is in the internal parts inside the belly of the palm, then make a semblance of a hole in the linen, and command the patient to hold that on their slashed palm; keep it tightly held by linen.
And let the felt of flesh be on linen where it floats, so that the flesh is applied to the palm; hold that according to how you cover it.
If the fracture is on the external parts, then cover by placing another felt and another piece of cloth from that part under the palm, so that the hand can be open and straight; and place the constriction, as if the hand turns between the fingers to the thumb.
And if it happens that the fracture is in one of the joints of the fingers, then if it's the joint side, it should be matched according to how you cover it and place it tightly on the palm; if you wish, place a small strip vertically so that the fracture is elevated and not painful.
If the fracture is in the other fingers, as in that of the middle part, or on the index, or on the ring, or on the little finger, then it should be matched and placed on the relevant side; or they are all laid out sequentially, which is better; or place a small felt over that, as we have said about the joint.
And consider, in your restoration, and near that, the position of a cauterized boil and counterpose - during your operation - on what covers when any cause of those occurs, according to which is repeated the narrative about it.
Title XIV
On the restoration of a fracture of the hand bone.
The bones of the wrist are broken and assessed according to their conversion into the part in front, and towards the top of the boil.
And the restoration is done so that the flesh is held over the fracture and other muscles around the fracture, and the patient lies on their belly and face.
And then the minister extends all the muscle according to its quality when the fracture is in the middle part of the bone.
If it approaches the radius of the wrist, then let the muscle approach the ulnar side at the part of the thumb, so that the extension covers them, and other muscles around the fracture.
And similarly if the break approaches the ulnar side, then let the muscle be placed near the ulna, and have the extension at the parts left.
And then the doctor matches the bones on both of their hands so that it reduces according to its natural shape and the bone is joined by good union; then cover with plaster or constriction, if there is not any occurrence of a boil in the limb. If it happens that there is a boil in him, then you leave him for several days until the cauterized boil subsides, and then proceed with your treatment.
The constriction for him should be made like this: cover the fracture with a hard bandage, fold it two or three times, and remove any excess from him; then wrap around the joint until it reaches the radius of the wrist.
And insert a long needle between the wrist and the joint near the ulnar side at the parts left, and extend the ends of the needle from the part above the boil to both sides, and then rotate around the joint and wrist until excess from the bandage is removed.
And place felt on the wrist in the location of that fracture, and from those places place one piece of felt over the bone at the joint.
And fill the gaps between the joint and wrist with many layers of bandages, so that the constriction can be凝结.
And start with a strong constriction in the middle over the location of the fracture with three or four layers, and as you move away from the site of the fracture in the flesh, your constriction becomes smaller and more gentle and wetter.
And extend the ends of the needle to both parts where it reaches inside the chest cavity, and hold both ends of the other pieces of felt so that the flesh is not moved from its place.
And let the constriction lie on that, so it is such that there is no corrosion or cauterized boil nor swelling in the limb and resembles those; if any cause of these occurs, then observe his state of illness, and correct whatever happens as closely as possible, according to what we have said about broken bones.
If in the bone there is a piece of bone which fits, then let you match that according to what is possible for you; and if not, treat him with that from which the previous memory was preceded until he recovers.
And some times this fracture of the wrist is treated differently than with his pieces of felt, as we have said in the assistant and for the arm.
However, in the restoration of him using such a method, it should not cause the patient to limp; and if restored alone, like when another joint is applied elsewhere, then it is necessary that he limps from which there is time.
Know that the thigh is strong for forty days or a few months, and all of this varies according to the diversity of the constitutions and other dispositions.
Chapter XV
On the restoration of the knee joint fracture.
Know that although a fracture of the knee joint is rare, it tends to occur in more pronounced twisting injuries.
It may happen that such a fracture occurs; then it is simply a crack or strain in its parts, and this is either a minor injury or a major one, and the whole depends on the nature of the feeling.
And the restoration of it is undertaken so that what is broken in its parts, within those mentioned, may be added and united according to the possibility for equilibrium and ease of manufacture.
And then apply plaster and place over that round pillar, if you need it from that; and strengthen above with a compression as suits.
And then consider all the dispositions which we have recommended in other fractures, thus with a pus evacuation or resembling those ones that oppose every incident according to what is suitable for it within which healing occurs.
Chapter XVI
On the restoration of the hip joint fracture.
Know that in the hip joint there are two bones, of which one is thick and it is named by its name as "the hip"; and the other is thin and it is named easily.
And it happens to those of the species of fracture which occur in both bones of the arm, and thus restoration is made for it just like that of the arm equally, and the operation for it is one.
And if two bones are broken simultaneously, the hip turns in all directions.
And if only the thinner bone is fractured, the hip turns towards the front parts.
And if the thicker bone is broken, look for that knee, and it's among those causes not within your knowledge.
And then administer extension and equilibrium according to that equalization as far as the limbs.
However, if the fracture of the hip is without major symptoms, that extension should be gentle and more mild, and please with your strength.
And in the hip there is some cause for operation about the arm, and that's when you equalize the stars and complete your entire operation. Then you will take weights of sticks of foot which are placed under these causes which are paused in solies, and are made similarly from palm branches; move those to those with slight discomfort, and not the hands, and let their length be according to the length of the hip, and inside the arm, pause them.
And then wrap around each strip in two layers according to the length of it, and place one over the joint of the hip of one side and the other on the other side, and let them be inside the arm near the back part of the chest.
And then tie the two stars in three locations of both extremities and at the middle one, where with this structure the hip is prevented from bending to the right or left side, it stays in good position.
And already a brace of wood has been applied according to the length of the hip; and let the hip be paused in it so that it preserves its movement.
And especially note this for fractures, and when you have properly healed it.
And then consider each day the hip and study it for the end of study, and keep it from pus or inflammation or other similar causes; and when any cause among those happens, then pause yourself on it according to what you learn until it is healed.
Chapter XVII
On the fracture of the heel and bones of the foot and fingers.
A fracture of the entire heel doesn't occur; but some fractures do happen to the bones of the foot; and only few fractures occur in the fingers, and it doesn't happen to them except through violence during the months of disposition.
And if the bones of the foot have a fracture and sometimes those bones are elevated above each other, then the patient lifts their foot onto prepared earth as if in bed.
And then place one foot on that which is elevated from those bones, and apply pressure, press, equalize them within which they turn in the places.
And then apply plaster and stop above it, and place a small table under the belly of the foot which has two cushioned heads.
And then strengthen that on the foot with a descending structure, since you have enveloped it in cloths and other causes from which you need.
And as three or four days pass, then you will release the ligaments, which you will find the bones equalized, or if they are broken or dislocated, and in those operations it's thus how you know.
And if some fingers are broken, then restore those ones and equalize them as I have and recommended to you in the restoration of fingers of the hand. And then place the broken finger with a star according to the length of the finger, and make it slightly closer than this. And then let the foot be on this table which has been recommended to you, and strengthen that with a descending compression.
And if that which is broken of the bones are two or three or more, then place on each finger a star of its quantity enveloped in lion cloth, and strengthen the table at the lowest part of the foot, and standing on one of the table's head let the belly be through it for good retention.
And it is convenient for you not to forget that you do not consider all the causes which we have mentioned to you in other fractures of accidents that we have said; and beware of every event in this way.
Chapter XVIII.
Of fracture of the thigh bone and the shin bone, and of the ribcage in men.
When the thigh bone is broken, then make that part bend at the crease, and somewhat incline it towards the division of two sides, and keep it behind.
And the midwife raises the thigh bone to the hip, and has it positioned in the thigh bone as she wishes; and the woman is tilted forward, and the two sides of her small children are gradually raised, for all this happens as it should be before that part of the thigh bone is aligned as she wishes and the broken bone returns.
And place powders on her back, and when she wants to urinate, ease her hip so that she can relieve herself, and after she has urinated, return it according to the manner in which you have mixed it at the beginning, and then return to her initial powder.
And do this for seven days or about that time, until it is healed.
And if you wish, take an egg shell and strengthen the back of her thigh with a thread; then insert the whole bladder into her thigh, and then blow into the tube so that the bladder inflates inside the thigh, for the fracture returns.
And fill it with her hip and leave it for several days as we have recommended, until she is healed.
And when the shin bone in men or women is broken, then administer to its restoration and adjustment what we have recommended about the thigh bone.
And that which is straight should not be concealed in these nearby fractures where few occur, especially regarding the one who has some study and understands this my free movement; for that fracture means to you in the major directions of mechanical flow during its restoration and constriction, so understand well.
And in the ribcage when it is broken, take guard over her with caution, and place the ribcage there; then cover her with a cloth包裹, and wrap it around her, then leave her for three days or about that time, and she will be healed.
Chapter XIX.
Regarding the restoration of bone fractures when they are under plaugue.
It is convenient for you when it happens to you that you have a fracture under plaugue, especially if the bone is large such as the elbow bone or the adjutant bone, or similar ones, that you take care of and use bleeding tools immediately if the conditions for bleeding are suitable or testify so as we have said.
And if the plaugue is draining pus, then observe that you take care of it well enough so that you powderize over it until it becomes whitish, if no other cause is present.
And then begin to restore the fracture on that day, do not prolong this action if there is no abscess formation.
And if there is an abscess caut, then you leave the restoration of her within the ninth day, until the abscess subsides, and do not approach it on the third day or by all three days, when you will have caused bad events.
And if the broken bone is prominent over the exposed vein, then you must try to reduce it and equalize it with your own muscles as easily and with little extension.
And if extension is not at your disposal and the equality of her with your own muscles, then you reduce it with your own muscles as this tool; and this tool is made of iron, its length being seven or eight digits or eight, and its width according to the amount of the plaugue; thus, it is necessary for the doctor to have three or four of them according to the amount that you need for this in treatment for all types of fracture.
And it should be round, and with little hardness so that you don't bend it, you apply pressure to it during the operation time.
And it should have an acute extremity with a margin on her own extremities; and its strength is uniform throughout, and the most of her inside in the divisions.
And this is her form:
It is named in Greek "labre volenz atelerem", thus it is a small palette.
And you should have her extremity resting on the elevated extremity of the prominent bone.
And push it into a groove until the bone returns and is equalized with some equality.
And thus try to equalize the ends of the fracture between them, and if the broken extremity is delicate, and it does not take that tool for good access, then you must immerse her extremity into that bone where the instrument has power over this.
And if you cannot reduce the bone completely as we have recommended, then cut it with one of the scalpels which we have mentioned; or saw it with one of the saws in any way that is suitable for you.
And then cut only what remains on the bone surface and those thin remnants.
And when the bone is reduced, and upon reduction she feels severe pain in her thigh, then you should know that the bone has not returned to its natural place; and then do this so that you give her great strength to the thigh.
When your restoration of the bone is completed and then you immerse a cloth in a dark astringent remedy, and particularly during summer, do not cover the wound with a bandage or any other source causing oil, for fear that it may cause infection and putrefaction.
And in the time of your completion of the restoration of the bone, apply plasters, and leave the wound uncovered so that you may cut it with a scalpel and use bandages according to the size of the wound.
And take all necessary care not to damage the wound on the fracture, as these are the methods that doctors use, and cause harm to their patients' limbs or lead to decay or corrosion of the bones, for healing is what you seek. And if your constriction is slight, soft, different from the constriction of other fractures.
And if the wound is large or a bad wound, and you fear those harmful accidents that we have mentioned, and you feel pain in that area, then do not cover it with pressure, but instead use hard bandages instead of plasters on that area, and support her there.
And when about one or two days have passed and healing begins in her, then you should remove the cloth that you had placed over that area earlier with oil. Then apply ointments; these are what we commonly use to treat wounds, such as tetrarhomachon and similar ones for that purpose.
And you should know that removing the bandage and consider the healing process every morning and evening until it is consolidated and sealed, then cover so that the limb is prepared in such a way that infection can easily spread from her to the parts left behind.
If the wound takes several days and does not consolidate or detach from her with oil, then know that this is due to the small ones, you should cover as needed for the wound in anticipation. And of those small ones that are separate and fall out, those that do not separate from them and cause the limb to cause pain, perforate and allow you to insinuate those according to what is possible for you.
And if the wound becomes black or white, it is inflammation, or another species of corruption and putrefaction, then cover and allow to rest each one of those according to what you deem fit for her, as per the instructions preceding treatment in that chapter.
And of that in which you should consider the best position and have your presence for her: when the bone is broken, elevate the limb as if it were the bone of the thigh and assistant bones and similar ones to those of large limbs, and do not assume an injury for her, nor removal of the injury that might happen through this cause death; leave it there until it can settle, which will fall by itself after about 20 or 30 days. And then treat the wound if you see her, and if not, leave that area alone.
Chapter 20.
On the treatment of necrosis that occurs in the aftermath of some fractures.
These wounds cause this necrosis in the aftermath of fracture healing, and especially near joints, causing her to distort the shape of the limb; and forcibly prohibit her from her natural operation.
Then consider if the necrosis is recent and administer in that medicine that has astringent properties such as aloes, snails, look at them, squeeze them, crush them, similar ones; so take some or all of those, and apply them with oil to stop the bleeding, or with albumin of flour, or with vinegar, place that over the necrosis on a stopper, and tighten them around her for good constriction.
And leave the constriction so that you do not remove it for several days; then remove that and apply another one, until the necrosis is softened; or strengthen over that sheet of lead, as lead has a property to soften everything that swells in limbs.
Or if the necrosis has already turned black and been removed, and there is a need to cut her gradually, then divide that by the most elevated part of her, and remove the excess or cut it with several razors until it softens; and treat that area until she heals.
Chapter 21.
On restoration of fractures when restored and how to subsequently handle the delicate limb without respecting its natural state.
When a bone fracture is restored, and you are to handle the delicate limb subsequently, this should not be done unless for certain causes: among which one is the abundance of serum in the membrane and the accommodation made by her not according to what she needs; or due to excess of constriction in the membranes where nourishment is prohibited from reaching the limb; or due to an excess of ointment applied; or due to excessive movement beyond its time; or due to weakness throughout the patient's body and debility.
And the treatment of this involves reducing her to thinness and make her body soft where her strength is multiplied in her; give her baths; and use massage and joy for her.
And place honey on the limb, because the honey attracts her body's nutrition, or continue to apply her with strong water, until her nourishment flows and returns to its natural shape.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
Regarding the healing of bones, they are restored in a tortuous manner and prohibit the operation on them for what covers.
When it happens to the already restored member near its healing from tortuosity and eminence in the broken bone and joint, and that is how you preserve the form of the member, however, the member does not prohibit its natural operation. Therefore, do not receive the word of him who considers that part of his body was made of a new broken bone.
May already be attributed to obstinate surgeons and restorers who have done this in our land, and this operation is greatly disapproved leading to great fear of the sign which makes one mortal.
If there is a limpness and joint pain recently, then receive that they be immersed in water of extreme heat where herbs are cooked, such as haws and berries of the same kind; and it should be done to them a plaster in the form of a mollification plaster as well as with garlic well prepared; or that the mucilage from the seeds of the same kind is taken and it is covered with goose grease or with oil of camphor, and then it should be applied with that; or that fatty figs are used and they are stuffed with wax of bees, and similar to those medicines known as consolidating.
And some times it is dissolved by frequent light rubbing on the most moist parts, and it should be administered movement of the limb in all directions at all times.
If tortuosity has already gone ahead and been made strong, turning into pus and requiring treatment with iron for it, then receive that the pus be above the wound and its continuity of bone be dissolved, and let iron be applied to what is superfluous of the joint from that part to the bone using fine incision tools, and its administration should be facilitated in that through diligence and study.
Section Title: XXIII
Regarding speech on dislocation.
Dislocation is the displacement of one of his joints in a location, preventing movement and causing the figure of the limb to be distorted, bringing pain and major injuries upon the patient.
So when dislocation occurs, immediately seek to reduce it, and do not delay in reducing it; for if it is delayed, the joint becomes stuck and stiffens under that, making it difficult to perform the reduction of dislocation.
And do not allow it to be overly restricted or stretched during the process of reduction, as tense and painful contractions are caused by this.
When this happens, do it by the armpit gait of the patient, and let them rest in that place to allow the swelling to settle; and let the limb be soaked in hot water and oil, and let it be reduced with ease.
And each limb should be treated with that which will bring back its memory to its proper place.
And I have already and ordered the chapters on dislocation according to what is preceded in fractures; from the part of the body, up to the part below it.
Section Title: XXIV
Regarding the treatment of dislocation of the jawbone below.
So if the two jawbones are dislocated but not ruptured; and the dislocation of both is done according to one of two ways: they are slightly displaced from their places by a little movement and are made milder. Or they are completely dislocated and completed, wherein they are made milder in the area between where saliva escapes from the patient's mouth and cannot be contained, nor can she close her mouth; and her tongue is enveloped in that word.
When the dislocation of him/her is slight, then it returns to its major positions due to a slight cause.
If the dislocation is complete and thorough, then receive that its reduction be administered gently, and do not delay it in entirety.
And that the minister have the head of the patient, and let the doctor insert his/her one hand in the space of one part's jaw inside the mouth, if the dislocation is in one part; or let him/she insert both hands at once, if the dislocation affects two parts, and the other instructions from this should be outside those with which it agrees; and command the patient to stop moving his/her jaws and let them move off in every direction; and the doctor aligns the jawbone and pushes the jaw back into its proper place.
And if the reduction of him/her is difficult, especially if both jaws are always dislocated, then administer diaphoresis with hot water and oil, during which a gentle reduction of both is performed without delaying the complete reduction of both as we have said.
And once they have returned and been aligned, when the mouth of the patient is closed and not softened, then place those powdered drap polvises on it with cerotic, and let it be done with wax and oil rubbed; and let them rest easily with soft bandages.
And let the patient sleep on his/her back, with their head between two pillows, so that it does not twist to either side; and do not force him/her to eat any particular food; have his/her food be forbidden for lion-like eating, until when the pains are softened and the jaws are numb, then allow him/her what he/she wants.
And this should be given with ease, and you mustn't work over the opening of the mouth during eating and drinking and rest, until the jaw is treated and healed.
And if it is difficult to reduce two dislocated jaws within an hour and they do not transform into their usual positions, then fevers and frequent diarrhea occur, and severely irritate the patient's stomach, causing severe diarrhea that is purely watery.
And when you do this, then you know it's a loss; and if someone experiences this, they will die within three days.
Chapter XXV.
On reducing the dislocation of the furcula and the extremity of the muscle.
The furcula is not dislocated inside the joint due to its continuity with the bone; sometimes it gets dislocated outwardly, and this is reported by the sensation.
And the restoration of him is that the patient lies on his back and extends their arms. And then pinch the spot with your palm with strong pinching, so that it will return.
And then place plaster and powder over that, strengthen that area.
May the extremity of that which is continuous with it not be dislocated in any day; then confirm that it should be reduced and adjusted according to what we have said and according to your equipment.
And then place plaster and powder over that area, apply bandages, and instruct the patient to remain in bed and rest until they recover.
And in this treatment, reduce the extremity of the muscle when it is separated from its place.
Chapter XXVI.
On reducing the dislocation of the muscle.
You will know that the muscle is not dislocated except in three ways, of which one is when it is dislocated at the part of the tendon to the part below.
And the second is when it is dislocated at the top of the muscle, and this occurs forcefully; and it is not dislocated at the back parts by the shoulder; and it is not dislocated at the front parts by the nerves.
And it is mainly dislocated and situated outside in the parts below of the tendon, especially in those where the muscles are few, slightly dislocate; more in those with abundant muscles, it is located outside with difficulty.
And severely to some people, impact or injury occurs, and the patient's muscle becomes inflamed with a boil-like condition, it is moved by this so that it is already dislocated.
So confirm this within you while you are well-prepared for him, and then proceed with his treatment.
And when you know the dislocation of him, it is at the parts below of the tendon; so distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the normal muscle, which you find among those with manifest diversity; you find in the head of the muscle a concavity and below the tendon you touch that part of the muscle like a hound's nose, and the patient cannot move their hand to their ear, nor even that area with all movements.
If it is dislocated from the bone or on it, then you will find distinct touchability, and it is not concealed.
And for this dislocation, a slight reduction is made when the patient is young and the muscle is still fresh.
And the reduction of him is that the minister raises his hand above to the patient's head; then he places your hands below the tendon of his muscle, and lifts the joint with strength towards its place; the minister raises his hand of the patient, extends it downwards; then he pauses it so that it returns slightly.
And if it does not return for what we have said, and is due to the nature of the dislocation, then wait several days, confirm that the patient should be bathed in hot water and given a poultice that soothes and heals as if they were herb baths, fennel, and mint in water, and it should be administered.
And then the patient should lie on their back and be paused with the tendon of him waiting for warm compresses that are equal between lightness and tension, and then the doctor places his hand on the spot, raises the head of the muscle vertically, pulls the hand of the patient so that it does not hurt at the parts below, and another minister holds the head of the patient in such a way that it does not hurt at the parts below, when that returns to its place almost immediately.
And if you wish, reduce it according to this manner: and that you make present a man who is longer than the patient, stands on the side of that joint, inserts his muscle below the tendon of the patient and raises the tendon above him while the patient hangs in the air, and another minister pulls the hand of the patient from the parts below of his abdomen. And if the patient is slighter, then confirm that another cause should be suspended, because heavily making that one, causing the dislocation to return immediately.
And it is reduced smoothly according to another manner: and that you place in the ground a long pole whose tip has a rounded shape like a mortar's handle, not too thick or thin, and then pause him over the tip of the pole; so that the sheets are placed on top of the tip of the pole, the patient standing according to the length of the pole, and then extend his hand at the parts below from the other side; and stretch the body from the other side with strength, so that the joint returns to its place quickly.
And if it is difficult to reduce you by all the causes that we have mentioned, then use this cure: take a rod of such length as is in the span of two arms, and its width shall be four digits, and the thickness thereof should be rough as on the nipple according to this form:
And above the head, cover with lion's skin so that the rod does not harm the patient.
And place your hand or the arm under the rod within the parts, and lay the rod on the support and the arm and the end of the hand.
And place the arm on a ladder according to its width, and the hand is extended within the parts, and the other foot hangs from the other side, where the joint is located.
And when the treatment for you is completed according to any method that is possible, then take and place a piece of lanolin wool equal in quantity on your nipple; and prepare plaster made from moli powder and egg white over all the muscle, so as it is mixed above, and reinforce your nipple with strictness; and the bandage should be rotated over the plaster, and your hand should be connected to your neck, and left like that, and your hand should not be irritated by your hand for seven days.
And it is to be noted that the food for the patient should be little, within which the member is comforted, which is easier to his recovery.
And then the food should be given more around seven or five days and exercise; and therefore if it is closed and not softened, then he/she is already healed.
And if the joint is dislocated due to moist humors that affect it or for another reason, then take note that in that case, three types of cautery should be administered, as stated in the section on cautery in the title.
And if all this is done and after seven days the bandage and the strictness are reduced over some wounds, but not closed and hard, that cannot lift that arm up to his parts anymore, then you have noticed that your nerves which are at the head of the muscle are already cut or extended or softened, and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
And from the dislocation of that which is caused by the foot or the breast or behind parts, the reduction is done with pressure and extension on his hands, so as to return.
And another tightness should be applied in that area, and care for it until it is healed.
And if the recovery is severe in the member and late for his/her movement, then the patient should take hot baths until that heaviness is relieved and returns to its natural state.
Title: XXVII
Concerning the treatment of dislocation of the elbow.
You should know that the elbow joint is dislocated with difficulty and similarly returns with difficulty; it's dislocated in all directions, especially in front of and behind; the dislocation is not hidden from you even if you feel or touch it according to whatever figure it has been dislocated. When adjusting the dislocated elbow, it becomes clearly stated for you, as the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm, nor can it touch its muscle at all.
And take care of your elbows, and reduce the dislocation immediately before it goes to the point where the gout appears; if it reaches the gout point, reducing him becomes difficult, and he is not fully healed. Especially when it's in the behind parts, which is worse than all other types of dislocations and causes more pain; hot baths turn deadly to that situation.
And the restoration of you, when that is possible to reduce, should have your hand extended between two arms, and his arm should be expanded, and the doctor's hands are on the elbow and under him/her, and he/she pushes the joint with the heels of his/her hands or at the base of his/her palm until it returns to its place.
And if the dislocation is in front of parts, then it returns like this: bend your hand towards his/her hand, hitting the elbow at the base of his/her palm.
And if the dislocation does not yield to reduction, then apply vigorous extension and strong force.
And it is that two ministers should extend the arm, and have that tension by themselves without being able to resist against the extension.
And then rotate the arm in all parts, as it is wrapped in a long folded cloth around his/her hand, or bandage.
And when the doctor touches the joint with his/her hand, anoint that with some oil so as to help those causes which aid in the lubrication of the joint making it easier; and then he/she pushes the joint firmly until it returns.
And when the reduction of you becomes that it is placed on that plaster in which there is stability and movement with egg white, and it is tightened with a gentle bind, and the arm is hung from the neck, and left for some days.
And then it should be released; and if the joint has formed in its place, you release his/her bandage and leave him/her alone.
And if you see the joint is not strong, then apply the plaster and bandage, let that rest for several days until it becomes stronger; then release that.
And if there is a tendency towards gravity during the joint reduction, and his position is in movement, then apply moistening in the bath and subtle friction, and compression, until it gets lubricated; or place yourself on top of the joint, like a pad of soft skin; then tie that up, and let that rest over the bone for a day and night. And hold that, then put it in the bath; and when wet, then rub the joint with an early friction, and place yourself over that gently, like a fleshy pad, once, and then again, and the third time. Corruption has already been transmitted within the bowels of the body, inside which it is confined.
And if you want, place yourself over that wet and scraped cow's hole with strength on it; and do this several times, until that becomes moist again and returns to its position.
Chapter XXVIII.
On the treatment of shoulder joint dislocation, it is between the arm and the hand.
The shoulder joint sometimes gets dislocated, and the reduction of the dislocation is easy. However, for other joints, it's better to act quickly in reducing them when they are dislocated before the wound forms or a boil appears.
And the reduction of shoulder dislocation is that you place the hand joint of the patient on a table and extend the arm of the person. The surgeon places his hand or palm over the edge of the joint, then pushes that until it returns to its location.
However, it's important to consider if the palm has already reached into the abdomen of the hand. In that case, the patient should place both hands on a table and have them extended and reduced; and if the dislocation occurred before, then the position of the hand is inherently on the table, so that the surgeon's hand falls onto that edge of the joint.
And if it returns quickly, that's good; and if not, then strengthen that with moistening around the boil and let that be; and don't repeat this procedure, for if you don't, you won't endure nor manage the reduction of it because what passes into it are days.
However, the joint follows its own curvature; and do not ask the patient for any cause, since his arm has been softened and cannot endure any cause; then you should know that the nerves are torn or cut off, and if this is the case within it, then you should strengthen it with a cautery before and fortify whatever reason you give him.
And when the boil has returned, then place yourself over the bandage which we have re-taken, and let it rest and be strengthened for five days; then release that and let it rest, and exercise the arm of the patient.
And if the movement of it remains and causes trouble in it, then moisten that with hot water and apply friction several times, until it gets lubricated.
Chapter XXIX.
On the treatment of finger dislocation.
A few times, you may dislocate the fingers in every direction.
And when any finger is dislocated towards the back of the hand or into it, then fix that finger and push its dislocation with your fingers until it returns.
And hold the head of the finger, then suspend that from the part where it is dislocated, and let that be for two days.
And then suspend that and extend it until its rightness is equal to that of its day.
And when it's morning, let that proceed according to that narrative, and don't cease dislocating that during the day and exercise with movement, and let that be at night; and do this for several days until it is straightened.
And do as if this were the case, if it is dislocated in the hand's belly, then let that be towards that part and perform your first operation on that, until it is healed.
And similarly do this when it is dislocated in other parts.
Chapter XXX.
On the treatment of shoulder joint dislocation.
When it happens to any of the shoulder or neck joints in a complete dislocation, and we reinforce the muscles around that location, then there is no treatment for this, as death occurs to the patient.
And as a sign of this, is that the digestion of the patient goes outside against his will, and he cannot hold it; several times, soften some limbs or both sides of him or his arms, or one of those. Or reinforce a muscle in its place, and several times strengthen that and make removals of these to four parts.
And once it's been strengthened behind those parts, it is named gelsemiotismus.
The treatment of it is that you should then consider if gelsemiotismus occurs in childhood; and there is no cure for this nor complete healing.
And for those that occur due to trauma or impact or similar in those cases, the ancients have said that they discuss treatment with overly long speeches, of which this returns to profitability; but I have abbreviated from that on account of my closeness to your understanding and exposition, to which I have laid out and structured this using various tools from which I will show you this and expand upon that.
And of those, only that which occurs in the feet specifically under this is cured, as I have prescribed.
And let the patient lie on his face on a hard surface about as close to the wall as possible, and let him spread himself out completely wetting it so that he doesn't slip on the feet.
And put a straight staff upright, placed in the ground at the end of the bed near the head of the patient, and another stick at the other end of the bed under the feet of the patient.
And the attendant holds the staff, and does not fix it in a hole; and another attendant holds the other according to that manner.
And wrap around the head of the patient and make the ligaments tight; extend the end of the ligament to the staff which should be under his head, and tie that on him; and strengthen the other band on the buttocks and knees of the patient, and place those at his back; and adjust all the bands and tie those on the second staff which should be under his feet.
And the attendant extends the band to the junction of the staff, and do not have both poles and the bands of their places in which they are placed fixed too tightly, but rather not as tight as we have said.
And the doctor places his palms on the spine with strength in which it returns, or he places one on that table, and make him adjust under the table with his feet in which it returns.
May it be that if it does not return in this way, then take a table whose width or length is about three spans, and dig into the wall as we have said that there is a place for the patient between the end of the table. And place the middle of the table on the spine, and the doctor places his feet at the other end, and he stretches between so that the spine is compressed and returns to its place.
And if you want, open both sides which are twisted under the hand; and what you should do is put the head of the patient on the ground with his back facing the end of two sticks in front of him, the length of which is about one span. And place his head at the end of the bed on two sticks as well, the distance between them being a span each. And ensure that the length between every stick is about one span, and have it done so that you pull out all sides under the ground so they are not disturbed.
And put another stick to support the side, and it should twist in both turns of each stick.
And at the end of it is a turn where the stick forms, whose length is about one span under which it twists; and in the other two sticks it's similar to that.
And adjust the bands you've tightened in the feet of the patient under that turn which should be behind his head, and the bands you've tightened on his thighs under that one which should be under his feet.
And for each side, you should have one attendant to twist that side with his hand, and the doctor adjusts the spine according to what we've said.
And here is how to do it once the spine has returned and the place has been adjusted: take beaten earth mixed with goose fat and stop; then put that on the beaten earth on a table whose width is about three inches or roughly those sizes, and the length should match the size of the jelly-like substance, and over the junction of the spine there.
And next, use the band we have said, let the patient take in subtle nourishment so that they are cured.
And if there remains any danger at the end of recovery in the place, then take care to administer medicines that purify and clean during the long period before the table is removed, as we have recommended; and already an antimony leaf has been administered in that place.
And sometimes there are dangers at the end of the spine on both sides due to dislocation; and that's the place which has already undergone such danger so that you should not take any precautions for him with this medicine, which would cause his death to occur.
Capítulo XXI.
Of the treatment of a hernia that has been dislocated.
Know that the joint of the pubis and the joint of the muscle should not be subject to dislocation alone, but it does not happen in those places as what happens to other joints with small movement and curvature.
And the joint of the pubis is dislocated in four ways, which are: it is dislocated internally or externally, or forwardly or backwardly.
And it is more commonly dislocated internally, with less often occurring externally or behind.
A sign of dislocation internally is this: when you adjust the healthy leg on the patient's body, it becomes longer than normal; the thigh is more prominent than that of a healthy person. The patient cannot bend their knee properly and has to hold their leg in a bent position, so that their buttock protrudes here.
The sign of the one to whom dislocation happens is outside the parts, it's that his accidents are against this incident.
The sign of the one to whom dislocation happens in front is that when his hernia expands with a fullness, but otherwise does not bend that pain which is during his defecation; and if it continues to increase beyond this dislocation in front; and his urine is retained and his swelling is stopped, you should consider his mobility on the sole.
The sign of the one to whom dislocation happens at the rear is that it does not extend his defecation, nor can he bend what bends in front that it bends swelling, and his hernia is much shorter than the other, and his swelling is relieved, and the tip of the thigh is below this location.
The possible reduction of this type of dislocation is that you consider, then, if the dislocation is old and long-lasting, that it has reached this level where you apply the reduction to him according to his position, then not in all; and therefore do not assume any suspicion in that case.
In the case where the dislocation is recent, and it is one of the four types of dislocation, then you must take this to turn the joint back and extend it towards the inside parts and the outside parts, and move it to the right and left, wherever its natural position returns and there is no need for another cure.
If it doesn't return in this manner, then you must prepare to exert force and extend the patient's hernia from its deeper location, or at their chest, or over that which is attached above the hernia; and another assistant should spread his hand upwards towards the buttocks so that he can place their hands under the buttocks. And firmly grip the center of the thigh with your right hand, and have another assistant hold the end of the ligament gently.
And if it is extension of him or from the inside towards swelling at the part of the neck, or from the front to the part behind, or from the rear to the second part.
And if it is the extension of all in a single action that the patient should be elevated from his chest to the ground and dangles freely.
And this type of extension is common for all four.
And so, if the dislocation returns as we have said, it is good; and otherwise, then for each type of its own treatment, it is necessary.
In the reduction of your own, when it is dislocated, and the dislocation is inside, you must have the patient recline on his side; and then place the ligaments over the center of the thigh in that spot which lies between the tip of the thigh and the spot where swelling occurs. And extend the ligament from its lower end towards the farthest part of the neck region to the other part of the neck.
And then another assistant should firmly grasp his arms, tighten the large area of the thigh below and extend towards the outside parts by vigorous extension, until it returns to its place.
And this type requires much less treatment for reducing this member compared to the other types.
And if you are excused and do not follow the treatment for this type of cure completely, then let both feet of the patient be held at once by strong but gentle hands, on both thighs and both buttocks.
And let the length of each foot according to the quantity of four fingers, and let the thigh be extended more than the other by the quantity of two fingers.
And have the patient's thigh hanging on top of the armrest, and upright; and let the length of the ground be the quantity of two arms.
And command a strong youth to minimize the tip of the thigh, and have him hang from the patient with another youth, and let the other youth pull the thing with maximum strength until the joint returns to its place at speed.
And in the self-reduction, when dislocation is outside the part, it's that you should push the thigh forward according to what we have recommended during the preparation; and strengthen the ligament over the thigh properly and over its feet.
And have two armrests placed, one under the patient's foot, and the other on top; and have two armrests adjusted in the middle of the buttocks covered with damp cloth, so that the thigh is not wet by the armrest being between his thighs; for you should extend the arms to the outside parts without it being pulled.
And each assistant should spread out according to his own part, the doctor with his hand manages the reduction according to art.
And when the dislocation is at the parts in front, then let the thigh be extended slightly, and as per this medium account about the body; and the doctor places the palm of his right hand on the patient's lower thigh, and applies force with his other hand, and through that pressure he holds it while extending to the outside parts leaving the part of the rear.
And if the dislocation is behind the parts, then it's necessary that the patient be laid on their back and elevated above the ground; also, they should be placed on a hard surface so that their abdomen protrudes due to dislocation when their width is dislocated outwardly, as we explained about laying them on two widths; and they are on their face and ribs extend, according to what we said, almost without error.
And it's necessary that compression be applied onto the table over the area where the joint is protruding.
Therefore, once the reduction is completed as specified - and you don't see any sign of reduction in them, meaning that you should extend their thighs, then when you equalize those movements and they straighten their leg by extending their thigh and spreading out their foot, if you know how to move according to what has been reduced - then you adjust the two parts and apply poultice, stretching it over the body so that no part is neglected; and secure the patient in bed for three or four days.
And then gently massage the muscle and poultice, and compare one leg against the other.
And when you see that they are equal in appearance, then you know that the dislocation has been corrected, and then let the leg go.
And if you see any sign of relaxation, then return and treat that area with a poultice, stretch it according to your initial position, and let it rest for three days.
And then gently move that area, making the patient walk on both legs for several days until they are comfortable.
Chapter XXXII.
On the treatment of shoulder dislocation.
The shoulder can be dislocated in three ways: it is dislocated outwardly from the parts, inwardly towards the parts, and outwardly more to the parts behind. It is not dislocated forward of the parts.
And the sign of shoulder dislocation is when you command the leg to apply its thigh against the hip; then you know that the shoulder has been dislocated.
And the restoration of all these ways is that you make the leg straighten outwardly, so that it can extend its thigh if possible on this; attach your two hands to their face and place your foot between your hands; then place the shoulder against your palms, hold them together with strength over the dislocated shoulder, and another serves to extend their leg when the shoulder returns to its position.
The sign of successful restoration is when their thigh sticks to the hip and remains comfortably elevated.
And then apply a poultice and make the thigh stick to the hip, and repeatedly adjust those areas for three or four days on one part, and then gently massage them.
And do not use the leg to walk for a few days, until it is healed and comfortable.
And if the reduction of your leg is justified, then apply strong extension to the muscles as described in the preceding narrative about hip treatment.
Chapter XXXIII.
On the treatment of shoulder joint dislocation.
The shoulder joint can sometimes be displaced due to minor trauma, and in other instances it occurs with the full range of motion. The displacement can happen inwardly towards the parts or outwardly away from them.
And the sign of shoulder joint displacement is that you move your arm outwardly towards the part where it has been displaced.
The treatment for correcting minor displacements is relatively easy and involves extending the arm with ease towards the body, making sure that it becomes equal in position until it returns to its correct location.
In treating when it is displaced with the full range of motion, you should make the leg straight and have one assistant hold firmly and strongly from behind the leg at its midsection.
And then place your right hand on the back of the upper leg, and with your left hand at the lower part of the leg near the knee.
And then pull the leg towards you with your right hand, and with your left hand across two points, and also extend it with your left. And push the feet of the leg from the right under the thigh as far as possible.
And do these two points as we have discussed.
And then push the feet towards the thigh along the third point, and you are at the knee.
If you return in one way or two according to this manner, and if the pain is equal on both sides, it's good; and otherwise, then modify the operation, until it works when he returns.
If you are prohibited from returning him as we have advised, then have the patient lie on their back on the ground, and place a thick cloth under them, and put it between their thighs. Then wrap a sheet around the patient to prevent the hernia from slipping down.
And direct the minister to hold his thighs, and another minister to extend his feet either over or under the chest; and extend each minister against the extension of their side, and the cloth should remain between the thighs of the patient while holding him, so that the body does not slip towards the sides beyond its own extension.
And direct the doctor to reposition the joint near their own feet, while another minister holds the healthy thigh in place, so that the dislocation returns with ease.
And when the dislocation returns and you have been informed about his health in the return, then stop with plastering and strengthen that firmly, and place the foot under tension against the chest.
And when you fear or protect from the nerves that are behind over the heel, so that the muscle on it is not vigorous and injures him strongly.
And direct him to rest for two or three days; and if the muscle has softened, extend it.
And on the third day or fourth day, have him loosen up, and prohibit the patient from walking for another ten days. If it is forced to go in front of that space, there's not enough security that the dislocation will not dissolve and decay on him, and what does not receive treatment.
And if it happens that he gets a carbuncle, then remember in the distribution of his treatment what we have explained in our narrative, in another place of healing and application, until it is cured.
Capital: 34
Regarding the treatment of dislocation in the fingers of the foot.
Make sure that the one who is dislocated has slightly extended his treatment area; and what is not difficult, in advance it is easier.
If the dislocation is in one of the joints of the foot, then make sure that you have the patient lie on their foot over a similar location on the ground or on a table, and stay like they were walking.
And direct you to stand on your foot, and place your hand over the area where you are touching the joints, and directly push it against your foot with force so that it returns, and see that it is already aligned and does not appear in the touched area.
And direct you to place the belly of your foot on a table that accommodates your whole foot, which has two ends, and direct you to strengthen it with proper structure and strength for three days; and direct him to loosen up and have rest from walking for a few more days, until it is strengthened and its functionality is assured.
Capital: 35
Regarding the different types of dislocation that can occur on a joint or fracture, or at any time.
When any cause of those happens, and you apply yourself to its treatment and restoring him, many deaths succeed it.
And so do not presume on his treatment, but the one who is skilled in that art, with long use, merciful and compassionate; be late, not impulsive or presumptuous; he should use only medicines that can cure carbuncles alone, and leave the patient to divine judgment, rather than to anyone you hope for salvation from disaster, towards alleviation of illness, and in which you have any hopes. And then strive to immediately make the reduction for him during the onset of treatment, before a carbuncle appears.
And then, if the limb returns as we want, then administer treatment that can cure carbuncles and treat the injury with what suits him from the dry ointments.
And if dislocation occurs with a fracture and it happens in the separated bones, then you perform their setting, and do what we have said about treating simple injuries of that which was followed up on those places.
And follow and avoid according to your skill the interior of the medicine in the ways of fear as you have been guided by my preaching; what is better for you is to trust your Creator, more permanent to your glory, and more health for your true self will be seen those in your own time. And thus conclude the words of Al-Bu'ardi, perfectly from which God may not be praised enough. Amen.
