Oh children, grant me permission to complete this book, which is the last of the science of medicine, for it leads to your health and through its explanations and statements, I see that I must fulfill my task in providing this treatise, which forms part of the medical operation and is akin to surgery.
For the medical operation is confined in our region and time to private practice, which poses great risk to its science, and its legacy remains; it would not have survived without some small descriptions in ancient books, which correct many misunderstandings leading to errors and misinterpretations that extend the effort of learning and practice.
And it seems to me that I should revive this order of this treatise according to the method of exposition and declaration, as well as abbreviation; and to include in the descriptions of the tools like the cautery and other equipment for work, as well as preparation which is necessary.
The reason why skilled craftsmen in their own trade do not exist in our time is that the art of medicine is long and complex. One must be acquainted with anatomy to practice this science properly; understanding the youth of body parts, their forms, their connections and separations; knowing about bones, nerves, lymph nodes, their number, and their location; knowledge about pulsating veins and those that are still, and the places where they are found.
And it is for this reason that Hippocrates said that in his name, work exists, but more so in the craft of hand.
May we have already said in the introduction to this book; whoever does not know what we have explained about anatomy cannot avoid falling into error which could lead to the death of people, as I have seen too many cases of such individuals who are educated in this science but abandon it for another field of study and experimentation.
I have seen a doctor who has treated an erysipelas (a type of skin infection) on the neck of a woman and incised some neck arteries causing much bleeding that led to the woman's death in her later years.
And I have seen another doctor who was about to swallow an omen (a sign indicating future misfortune) on the face of a man whose condition had progressed into its final stages, and the omen was large. It came towards him, and he used a piece of the bladder to remove that omen from his body; it resulted in that man dying on the third day.
And I already had to remove that (the omen), and I saw that due to the size of the omen and the position of the patient beneath it, he would die.
And I have seen another doctor who took a reward from the Duke of our land for surgery. He operated on a black prisoner whose leg had been broken; he showed off his lack of knowledge by removing the fracture, covering it with cotton and bandages made of strong fabric, and did not allow air to escape the wound.
And he then proceeds according to his desires, he heals, and he waits several days to clean the wound as instructed; and this is also true when the bone is treated with erysipelas, it leads to ruin.
And I had him treated, and equipped to remove the bone, achieving peace and alleviation of his pains.
However, the corruption was confirmed in the member, so I could not prevent that, and the corruption continued to wander within the body of the patient, which posed danger.
And I have seen another doctor who drilled an abscess and was infected some days later; during this time, the wickedness in him increased towards his lord.
The reason is that the juvenile cauterization is pure of melancholic humor; therefore, it does not allow it to spread throughout, but rather it is a part that suffers from being affected by everything.
And for this reason, children, it is necessary that medical operation be divided into two aspects: one associated with health during the operation itself, and one where there is great risk in major dispositions.
And I have already established this throughout this book in discussions about operations where mistakes and fear occur. Therefore, it is necessary for you to remember this and avoid deception, so that the pages do not accuse you of speaking ill of others or misbehaving.
And therefore, take your weapons in the service of God and protection, and your patients to happiness and strength.
And use the best way through God's grace to seek salvation and a commendable succession, and leave your terrible patients with difficult recovery. Keep your weapons from what makes you afraid, so that stability is in your faith and your name does not disappoint: for this remains as an honor to you, more in this world and later at your sanctification.
Gualia already mentioned some wise teachings: "Do not treat the sick wrongly, for bad doctors are not named."
And I have completed this book according to three main topics.
The division of the book begins, and this is the start of the first part. The first chapter is ordered within the foot, regarding the forms of tools and cautery equipment, as well as what is necessary in an operation.
The division of the second part. The second chapter, concerning dryness and piercing, as well as suction blisters, plagues, the extraction of arrows, and similarity to those, all detailed and organized with regard to the forms of the instruments.
The third chapter, concerning restoration and dislocation, as well as the treatment of torsion and similarity to those; an ordered chapter about the head in relation to the feet, and the forms of the instruments.
I will tell you about the quality of those cautery elements and their products, and in which condition it is prohibited to use cautery.
So I say that the discourse on the quality of the cautery's product and its aftermath is lengthy and verbose, subtle in knowledge, and concealed; many wise men have spoken about this extensively, and they disagree with each other. However, it suffices for me to consider one aspect of their discussions, as they fear protractedness.
And so I say that cautery agrees with the entire body universally in terms of substance or its constituents, except for two components, which are the tail substance's complexes.
In the complex of tail and dryness, there is matter that will be dried out; some argue that cautery should be used with this kind, while others contend against it, stating that cautery isn't suitable for illness in terms of quality and dryness. As nature is about quality and dryness, it's inconvenient to use cautery on a tail and dry ailment when aiming for healing to occur from being dried out and made dry again.
And it is argued against that which you said, stating that with cautery, youth is applied to all tail and dry illnesses that occur in human bodies. When comparing the body of a person and its humidity to the complexity of fire, you find that the body burns.
I say through the discourse of those who have already discovered this through experience several times.
However, I do not delve into what has already been explored and practiced in the chapter on cautery for subsequent exercises, understanding the diversity of body composition and the disposition of illnesses in their parts, as well as the causes of those ailments, the occurrences related to them, and the duration of time for these.
In other complexes, you have nothing to fear, especially in damp and wet ailments; all doctors are familiar with those issues, there's not much disagreement among them. As for using cautery on youth, this is a topic they do not dispute about.
And know, children, that concerning the secret of healing through cautery with fire and the goodness thereof, there is a burning medicine for cautery; as fire is simple, its action only affects the member being cauterized and does not spread to other parts unless it's adjusted very slightly with minor harm.
The action of the burning medicine reaches that far into the members from which it spread, and gently brings about difficulty in healing and makes them hard to treat.
The fire, due to its subtlety and the goodness of its substance, does not do this except that it overflows. We have known this through experimentation and a long period of service studying the art based on the truth of causes; thus, I justify myself for the length of my discourse. If it were not that this is not contained in my freedom as it's hidden to you concerning fire, and the quality of its operation within bodies and its expulsion through which you expel illnesses, a philosophical demonstration would be necessary to clarify these points, one that would benefit your understanding.
And know, children, that they disagree about the time when it's best to perform cautery and choose the best time of spring.
I say that cautery is convenient at all times; because the harm due to accidental time lapses is submerged in the youth of what was subjected to cautery, and especially if cautery is for pain or necessary pains, strong aches and swellings, which do not tolerate delays as feared by those who might suffer from malice, which is greater than minor harm occurring over time.
And this does not concern your understanding or, children, those who only value the common people and laymen doctors, for it's that when an illness is healed with cautery, it doesn't warrant doing so at all times, thus they refrain from such actions.
And the reason is not just this concern about it, for cautery is merely like medicine that alters composition and dries out humidity which causes pain.
However, unnecessary cautery in addition to medicine due to its effectiveness and the virtue of its operation and greatness of its lord.
And it's possible that its illness may return at some point in time, according to the composition of the illness and the location of the patient's ailment, as well as its virtue, and what is prepared within their body due to the accumulation of excesses, and what they consume or are exposed to from those causes; otherwise, if cautery was applied to an illness, it might have been a subtle illness with few excesses and humidity. Thus, it's possible that such pain doesn't recur in them, but rather, actions like this occur gradually.
A common medical term is that cautery is the last remedy of medicine, and it's a professional term, not something I understand from them, as they believe it's not a cure that improves through medicine or any other cause leading to cautery.
And the reason is contrary to that; and I understand that cautery is the last remedy of medicine but it's only when administering the methods of treatment in some diseases, and those medicines don't work, then at the end of the cause, one administers cautery, improving towards that. And from here, it's clear that cautery is the last remedy of medicine, not according to my understanding which aligns with common beliefs among doctors and many people.
And they would say that cautery with gold is better than cautery with iron, and they wouldn't say this otherwise due to the equality of gold and its inferiority in substance.
And they would say that the location of cautery doesn't cause pain, but this isn't absolutely true, for I have already tested it and found that it doesn't do this in most cases, rather when using a metal rod. Cautery with gold is good and better than iron as they claim; however, yet when you apply cautery over fire with gold, it's not as described, as it melts according to the amount of gold desired for its heat, and one needs to prepare to receive the flame. And if you adjust it on the flame, then the gold melts in the fire, and sometimes a few layers are produced so that the craftsman can work based on the shape of that metal piece.
And because of this, when doing cautery with iron, you should do it more lightly and more precisely according to the nature of the operation.
And I have already organized this chapter on cautery according to chapters, and I have organized those pertaining to the feet under them because they often request this treatment from you.
The first chapter.
This cautery treatment involves applying heat to the head and neck area as a remedy for humidity and coldness causing various inflammatory reactions such as swelling in the joints, head movement disorders, and symptoms like fluid flow from the ears and throat, sleep disturbances, tooth pain, and stomach discomfort. It is universally effective against any illness caused by coldness, whether it manifests as paralysis, edema or stroke, and seems similar to those conditions.
The method of this cautery is as follows: initially instruct the patient to take a restorative medicine on their head, either for three or four nights, according to what suits the patient's condition and age, and their usual practice.
And then you instruct them to wash their head with water and shave it. Next, make the patient sit on a lowered chair and place their backside on their seat.
And then put your palm's edge close to the nose tip between their ears. However, when you have determined the right spot, mark that area with a test, and then heat up an olive cautery as follows:
And then place that over the marked spot on the test area in such a way that it descends slowly, ensuring your hand is slightly constricted gradually, and you rotate it.
And then raise your hand slightly and observe the spot. If you see any part of the bone being revealed, like oil droplets, do so similarly to how sugar crystals are formed, lift your hand if you don't see it return to that iron, or another one, when it is cold. When doing this, ensure what I have told you is visible from the mouth.
And then take a little salt and dissolve it on that spot, leaving it for three days.
And then place your heated finger over the spot and leave it until the burnt skin is destroyed. And then treat the area with tetrathymol ointment until it heals.
And they would say that when a wound is opened like the Romans did, it heals better and faster, which makes it preferable and more beneficial.
And they would say that the jawbone is treated with cautery inside the mouth, and that the cautery should be applied until a part of the bone's texture becomes adhered.
And then remove what has stuck to the bone like this, and then treat it accordingly.
And they would say that when the cautery reaches the back, it should cause strong pressure in the mouth so that the bone falls out, and this is how to treat small ulcers: And they expect from that area the release of vapor from the head.
And if the wound remains open for a long time, then it should be treated until it is consolidated.
And for myself, I have not seen these two types of head cautery at all, but rather in some people according to their fear; leave it alone, my lord, better is with health when possible. When the head heals through the continuity of its own juices as we have testified in other parts, and especially when the head of the patient has a dry nature.
And the first type of cautery is better and safer for me; from that one, I do this work with health.
The second chapter.
Regarding head cautery.
When a chronic and long-lasting pain occurs throughout the entire head and this lasts in the patient's body over time, and if they use head massages, hot baths, cold baths, hair rinses, bandages, pillows, and similar remedies, particularly when it has already been treated with an iron cautery that doesn't exacerbate these causes, then consider whether the head of the patient is robustly formed according to their nature; and if not dry but somewhat sensitive to heat, then this head should be treated differently. Apply another type of cautery, allowing a few days for it to take effect. And then apply the cautery on that spot above his forehead in the middle where the pulse has split. Incise the pulse and reveal the amount which we have recounted, then apply the cautery on that spot behind the head in the place which is called gout - and that is the place where suction takes place. And comfort your hand in ashes, and do not expose the hole, for the patient experiences great diverse pain due to this method compared to all other head cauterizations.
And I direct this cautery in its place, for it appears that among the cauterizations of the horns of the head and the occiput is a more subtle cautery than that which is applied to the middle area of the head; this is how it should be done.
Head high.
Regarding the non-ancient cautery for migraine.
When pain is concentrated in the split of the head, or when pain is confined to the neck, it should be treated with medicines that cool and soothe the head. Then apply other treatments as directed for diseases; if this does not relieve the condition, then cautery on you is done in two ways: either with the application of an acute medicine-cauterizing treatment, or with iron.
Cauterizing with a burning medicine involves taking one dol of aloes, boiling that, and cutting off the ends of it on both sides of the head. And then pierce the pain area on the temple with a scalpel near where it is done in you, within which the pulse is hidden.
And apply strength on you stopped by downward constriction, and let it pass through the spaces of three hours; and spread it out with the aloe, and leave the wound for two or three days, and place your hand under water in which the spot makes white.
And then treat that with ointment where it is healed.
And if you see, do this with some burning medicines which I have written in the detailed treatise on burning medicines.
The cautery with iron according to this method: heat it until this is the form:
And it is called iron key, where the head of which is thus as a form of a thorn, and in its middle part there is a small prominence.
And then place your hand over the pain spot, and hold your arm - so that the heat of the iron which is left does not burn you - and move the small piece of iron little by little at speed.
And if the amount that gets burned by the sensitivity of the pulse thus much is more than half of you, raise your hand in such a way that the artery which is left does not get burned, so that no bleeding comes about.
And then soak your hand in salt water and place it over the area, and leave it for three days; and then dip your hand in water again, and after that treat with ointment when it is healed.
And if you see, cauterize at the end of the surgical blade according to cautery, and watch out for cutting into the artery in this non-ancient migraine.
Head fourth.
Regarding the treatment of ancient migraines with cautery.
When you treat migraines as we have said about the treatment previously, and as we said in the divisions of diseases, if this does not fully heal and due to the disease that is not enough for you what we have said about the first cautery with medicine or the cautery with fire, then it appears that you should ignite the surgical knife until it whitens, since you place your hand over the pain area on a line of length which is the most of what was said, or move there; and pause your hand for once and strengthen that while you pierce into the artery and go inside the skull.
However, it is necessary for you to guard against the continuation of the jawbone, which causes chewing loss, and that the tongue not get burned and the nerves which make that happen, and that no spasms occur.
And if it's concerning the care and caution of blood flow from the cut artery, which causes fear especially for those who don't know what they're doing and aren't studious or careful; leave the operation with you at its beginning.
And I will return to the recall of the procedure for blood flow accidents involving an artery according to its method, in this book.
And if you see that this disease does not satisfy this cautery and sees the tolerable body of the patient, apply this cautery in the middle of the head as we have recounted, and treat the wound until it is healed.
And if you see, administer the cautery that we have said in the chapter on streich of arteries with a cautery having two needles, and this is better cautery and more compatible.
Head V.
Regarding the treatment of earache with cautery.
When there is pain in the ear due to cold and with other treatments which I have mentioned in the division, if this pain does not subside, then heat the cautery, and it is this one called needle-pointed, where this is its form:
And if necessary, make a small incision near the navel, and guide it around the entire ear area like a wheel is turned, or in the circuit of any time periods where pain occurs. Continue with the application of the ear candle cautery gradually, step by step, until you have found the right spot and tried.
And if the cautery is applied at all points of the ear, and you find that way, then treat the areas inside where they heal.
Capital VI.
Regarding the treatment of torture.
Torture which is cured with cautery; it is not a matter of the specific types that come through phlegm, as we have said in our divisions of illnesses.
Avoid the cautery for the type that requires it due to drying or nerve spasm.
When you cure that type of torture with jujubes, purging herbs and tonics, and if you don't confirm your treatment, then understand that when you treat the patient with three cauterizations: one on the navel, another a little below their groin at the lower belly temperature area, and the third at the junction of two lips.
And pause your cautery on the opposite side of the affected part, where only healing occurs in that healthy area.
And the method of cautery is to apply it near the tip of the ear on the lower side a bit above the edge of the head, and at another point in the belly area whose length corresponds to the length of this hand, then place your hand with the cautery where the amount of tissue of the disease burns.
And this is the method for cautery, which is a specialty of surgery, the shape of which is on the front side. However, it's somewhat subtle that one does this with a few touches; and understand that if you apply it in the place of excessive fatness, then just a little.
And adjust your treatment for the area where it is in front of the process until it heals.
Capital VII.
Regarding the treatment of old apoplexy.
When apoplexy is old and you treat it with what we've said, but if the patient does not respond to your treatment and they do not have fever, then apply four cauterizations: over all parts of their head; and at the middle part of the head as we've said; and apply it on the neck. And the method for applying cautery is done according to what was described above.
And once it's cauterized on the mouth of the stomach; and rather behind that; and adjust your treatment according to how you proceed.
Capital VIII.
Regarding the treatment of forgetfulness caused by phlegm.
And if you give them to the patient at the beginning with large jujubes and pellets that help digestion.
And then scrape the entire head of the patient and pause on their neck, covering it with plaster as described in the treatise on plasters.
And pause there for a few touches, that is the method of cautery. And do this according to that order of methods which I have already described.
And so if it results in good health; otherwise, then do this for them three times on the last part of their head, which should descend from the part more above the head to the part more below the neck. And pause between each cautery for as long as this dictates, and adjust your treatment according to how the cautery proceeds.
And if your addition and the patient tolerates it, then apply cautery in the middle part; and if you have a greater addition, then apply cautery over both parts.
And adjust your treatment until it is healed; and let the olive oil be applied according to the method given beforehand.
Capital IX.
Regarding the treatment of gout and the soothing of all the body.
And if you proceed in digestion of the head with jujubes and as we have said; then scrape the patient's head, and apply cautery at the middle part of the head, and apply it over all parts of the head, and apply it on the last part of their neck, and apply three cauterizations on the cervical vertebrae.
And if it is necessary in the illness of soothing throughout the body for many parts and the patient tolerates it, but the illness is strong, then apply cautery at four points on both cervical vertebrae, and pause with your hand where the entire neck burns, and lift up your own hand. And adjust this until it is healed, and let this be olive oil cautery.
Capital X.
Regarding the treatment of epilepsy.
It is not treated with cautery for epilepsy, only this type that comes from phlegm.
And if you are digesting the brain at the beginning of your treatment with jujubes and another treatment which we have described in the division when the patient can tolerate the exclusion of medicines.
And if it is a child who does not tolerate the medicines, then administer tonics and chewables that help digestion, before that for several days, with proper food digestion.
And then shave the patient's head, and then apply a cautery to that spot on the middle of the head according to the previous method, and apply another cautery on the back of the head, and over each corner of their head, they apply a cautery. And if the patient is strong and can tolerate it, then apply those cauteries as I said, while having a paralytic effect on the body over the vertebrae of the neck and the vertebrae of the back.
And apply an olive oil-based cautery as previously described.
If the patient is a child, then use a subtle cautery method according to this way.
Chapter XI.
On the treatment of melancholy with cauterization.
When the causes of melancholy are corrupted and weak with moisture, then apply those cauteries over the areas that we have mentioned in having paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is an excess that leads to melancholy, and the patient's body is moistened, then have them drink what cleanses the brain according to what was previously discussed in the division.
And then shave the head of the patient, and then make a decent tortoise shape from it around the circle, and then place that in the middle of the head.
And if the patient is sixty years old, and has been treated from every part.
And then apply a liniment; it is worthy to be used as an old sheep's remedy. And heat that over the fire for a well-measured warmth, which gives them satisfaction as it increases in them. And then place that in the middle of the head on the circle, and let him stay inside until it has cooled.
And do this for the patient throughout a week once, following his other regimen until he is healed; or if you want, apply this to make small punctures according to his best interest, otherwise place your hand on a cautery as ordered: this is the type of cautery that moistens the brain equally.
And then let that cooked piece of meat rest in a broth or in the grease of blubber.
Chapter XII.
On the application of water-based cauterizations to the nose.
When it is confirmed that the water treatment begins in the nose according to the symptoms I have mentioned in the division, then start and give the patient what cleanses their head, and protect them from all moisture.
And let that sugar dissolve slowly in water for a few days.
And command the patient to wash their head, and apply a cautery over the middle of the head; and then apply two cauterizations on each temple if it is the beginning of water descent in both noses, or one on either side if it is the beginning of water in one nose.
Apply the cautery to all veins and arteries that are left in the chain; and make these cauterizations quite far from the temples.
And watch out for bloody discharges when it is being cauterized; and if you see his bloody discharges from him, give him some medicine, which may be within your reach.
And I will come with knowledge about the extraction of arteries and removal of those, along with caution for bloody discharges.
And some times it is cauterized in the neck between two bones by two cauterizations placed directly behind each other.
Chapter XIII.
On the treatment of ancient tears (i.e., long-standing or chronic eye issues).
When tears from the noses are gently ancient and exist through veins and arteries in the outward location of the head manifesting above the face, and it has been confirmed that this is an excess of phlegm, then apply a cautery with the cautery we have recounted for the beginning of water treatment affecting the noses, and apply a cautery in the middle of the head, two cauterizations on each temple, and two cauterizations on each bone near the neck. And if you feel the need for addition (meaning there is more work to be done), then apply a cautery over the entire length of the nostril on the outer edge of the eyebrow with a small cautery.
Chapter XIV.
On the treatment of nasal odor.
When you are treating it with what we have discussed in the division and do not improve your treatment, then prepare and give to the patient three nights of almond milk; and then shave the head of the person, and apply an olive oil-based cautery over this. And then apply a thorn-based cautery, and two small cauterizations on each eyebrow leaving a little hair.
And watch out not to ignite that artery.
And this is how the thorn cautery should be performed.
Chapter XV.
On the treatment of eyelid softening in the nose area.
When the eyelid of the nose becomes softened due to disease or moisture, then apply that eyelid with this moon-based cautery; and this is how you should do it:
And if you, cauterize that above both eyebrows slightly between two points in all parts, and make them extend up to the temples. And let the length of each cautery be according to the size of the eyebrow.
And do not press too hard on your hand at the cautery, rather according to how much of the inner eyelid is heated.
Chapter XVI.
On the cautery of the eyelid when the skin is converted to parts inside and around the hand.
When the skin of the eyelid is converted to parts inside and around it, when I touch the eyelid, I do the cautery in two ways, which type of cautery or whether with medicine that burns.
If it's a cautery you're performing with fire, instruct the patient in front of this so that they feel their skin as those who are being shaved do, let them be extended and made equal; and if you hold onto that place, then strengthen the eyelids with your hand so that they don't get burned when their hair grows back under their skin.
So when they are grown and made equal, then place the patient's head on your shoulder, and over the eyelid of their eyes apply a tentative touch, mark the one according to the shape of a maple leaf, and make the start of the mark near the hair.
And place about a pinch in beaten egg white or pus from scabies on the eyelid.
And apply heat to the cautery of which this is its form for you.
And apply the cautery to the figure which you marked, little by little in spots seen, while burning the surface of the skin that is like a maple leaf, altogether appearing quite precisely.
And as a sign of your work's health is that you see the eyelid of the eye already contracted and the hairs of it raised above the point of the eyelid.
And then raise your hand and leave that for three days, and place over it a pinch inside so that the scar is raised. And place healing balm on it while it heals.
And if for any reason returns the hair at their origin and the eyelid becomes soft, then do another layer of cautery over that just as you did first.
And if the hairs are on the eyelid remaining, then cauterize that until it rises to its natural place and is made equal so that the hairs do not burn the eyelid.
And the cautery with burning medicine is that you command the patient to feel their skin until it's extended and made equal, and then have done on linen cloth the shape of a maple leaf.
And take some well-known soap and a live ash stick. .1., o does this, and mix those ashes well in water; do it quickly so that it doesn't cool down. Then spread this over the linen cloth made as a maple leaf shape, place this on one eyelid or both; put a pinch of beaten egg white on this, and have the patient's head on your shoulder.
And place the same on the medicine and press that gently but don't burn it while the patient feels the sensation of the medicine's bite, which bite is in them as if from fire.
And when this persistent biting sensation continues, then feel the medicine and remove it from your shoulder; once this biting sensation ceases, then again apply the medicine by washing it off with water; then consider if the eyelid has already risen as if washed of its scabs by fire or incision, which is now done. And if it doesn't return to that place on the spot where you applied the medicine and doesn't disappear until your operation is equalized and the eyelid is contracted.
And then place over it a pinch inside until the scar of the adjustment is eradicated, and afterwards treat that with ointment or another while it heals.
And for this, you must keep watch over your operation with diligence so that no part of the medicine falls into the eyelid. If the eyelid softens after some days and any hair causes burn in the eyelid, then apply your medicine to that place on the eyelid which has softened, precisely like you did at the beginning, and surround it until it is healed.
This is the shape of a maple leaf.
Know that men's eyelids vary according to their size and thickness, thus according to this you will perform your contraction.
And let there be no concealment of the path to rectitude towards that which is studied in this art.
Chapter XVII.
On the cautery for a fistula that is in the tear duct of the eye.
When you treat a fistula with what we've discussed in the divisions of illnesses and don't apply your treatment, then you should perform this method when cauterizing it: command the patient to place their head on your shoulder, and have one of their servants between your hands in such a way that neither their head is burned nor disturbed under their own head.
And place heat in an oil bath or on fat over their stomach.
And apply the hot cautery of which this is the form:
Which should be heated, like when it takes the shape of a cane or a goose quill pen, from one end where the cautery is applied.
And if you see, it should penetrate into the other end. And if you want it to come out like when it is tested.
However, the heated one is better for the country's work.
And if there is an abscess, press it if it has opened, and cleanse him of it and dry that area. And if it hasn't opened, then open it and remove the pus from him.
And apply over him the heated cautery which should be very hot, and hold it to his stomach until your hand or the patient doesn't get agitated, then leave the cautery on the gray area of the stomach and let that one cool down.
And so, if at the beginning of your cautery it enters into the mouth, it's good; otherwise, then reapply the cautery once or twice if needed; and leave that one for three days, then apply a heated point around it and inside him apply an exsiccating oil to heal him.
And if it has passed ten days and he is not healed, then apply the sharp corrosive medicine inside where the bone appears and scrape him according to what seems appropriate in his manual.
And another method for the cautery of an abscess that some initially described: go to the place of the abscess and open it up and apply there a fine line of what is like him, And then put in that place half a unit of melted lead; and hold your hand firmly, so you don't hurt the patient because the melted lead doesn't penetrate into his stomach; and when you hold over the stomach of the patient heat as if immersed in oil bath or water, where the lead adheres to the abscess site and heals it through a miraculous cure.
And if the abscess is healed as we've said about the cautery and the cure, it's good; otherwise, then it's necessary to administer through the nose and reduce the abscess to the body of the nose according to where it naturally fits.
Chapter XVIII.
On the cautery of the fissure in the foot.
Red spots often occur on fissures in the lips, and especially in the lips of children.
Then as you treat those fissures with what we have told you in the divisions and do not deepen your treatment, then heat up the small cautery knife according to this form that is used:
And let the size of his cavity match the subtlety of the knife.
And then hold that initial cautery within those fissures where the cautery reaches the inside of the fissures.
And then cure that with plaster until he is healed.
Chapter XIX.
On the cautery of abscesses in the mouth.
When in the uvula or on the palate or in the back of the throat there's pus and you feel warmth, then it bursts, heals old wounds, you bleed them, and form an abscess; when this happens, you should treat that without deepening the treatment, then take the cautery until its heat reaches inside the abscess cavity, place the heated part in the mouth of the abscess canal, and hold your hand so that the heat of the fire penetrates to its root, do it once or twice; then cure that with what we have told you about healing until he is healed.
And so, if the healing has been removed and he is healed, it's good; otherwise, then it's necessary to find the location and extract the infected bone according to what seems appropriate in its manual.
Chapter XX.
On the cautery of teeth and the alleviation of mucous membranes.
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth are painful, if you treat those with medicines and do not apply hot substances, then hold the patient's head in its usual position, and heat up the cautery according to what will be roughly similar for this task. Make sure that you place the point of the cautery on each tooth while applying it immediately, holding your hand close so that the heat from the flame reaches inside the tooth cavity.
And then lift your hand, and reapply the cautery a few times according to what you desire.
And then let the patient gargle with salt water for an hour and leave it in that state. Once this process is done, if the toothache is reduced and the gum softness is strengthened, and the moisture is dried out.
Chapter XXI.
On the cautery for tooth pain.
When tooth pain is due to coldness or there's pus or worms present, and you don't apply treatment with medicine, then perform the cautery in two ways for that: either by applying heat on cow's sides, or by applying heat using fire.
Applying heat on cow's sides involves taking cow's horns and heating them in iron, then taking a point and wrap it around the end of the horn, immerse that heated point into hot water, and hold that over the painful tooth until it is cooled.
And then iterate that several times until the heat of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
And if you see, immerse wool or cloth in the heat above that, then place that over the painful tooth, and place the heated iron there until the heat reaches inside the cavity of the tooth.
May however be cautious with the use of fire in cauterization, wait for the smell of flesh or iron, and if there's any pus or infection in the patient's body, ensure that the heat of the fire doesn't reach inside the tooth cavity.
And then heat the tip of the cautery to its desired form, place that over the tooth and put your hand inside as long as the cautery heats up; do this several times until the pain is intensified either on that day or the next.
And understand that because of this heated cautery, the patient's mouth fills with a good warmth and keep that for one hour then drink something; this is how the process of using a cautery works.
And apply heat to whatever you see is extreme, according to what is possible for you.
And this is the way of inserting an intravenous line:
Chapter XXII.
On the treatment of protrusions by cautery.
When protrusions are due to phlegm and cold fluids that do not respond well to digestion through medicines, if you notice the digestion of those is slightly improving, then heat up the tip of the cautery to its usual shape, having two outward extensions so that you can release the smoke from one extension when heating it for the other. Place the heated end on the protrusion once, and another time if needed until it reaches the root of the lesion.
And if the abscess is small, then place the cautery according to the size of the abscess, and apply it for three days, then take a rest with a cloth in heat for several hours until what was burnt by the fire returns.
And then treat that area with ointment and wraps, trying to heal it until it's cured.
Chapter XXIII.
On treatment of a sore throat and constriction in the chest through cautery.
When moisture enters the bronchial channel, especially when this is due to cold constitution, understand that the patient needs to be relieved at the beginning with laxative medicines, and then apply cautery to heat up the root of the esophagus in the area where it's being squeezed.
And watch out that you do not apply the cautery to the esophagus or burn at the root of the patient's neck, just a little.
And apply the cautery there using another tip aimed at the junction of the throat with the lower part of the spine. The application of the cautery to the patient's collarbone should be done in accordance with the previous method.
And then treat that area with what was previously applied until it heals.
Chapter XIV.
On treatment of lung disease and coughing through cautery.
When cough and lung trouble are due to moisture, if the patient doesn't have a fever or rash and has old coughing issues, then apply cautery using two tips on the sternum at the lowest parts of the ribs and collarbones; and another tip in the middle of the chest between the breasts; and for the collarbone application follow the previous method.
And if you wish, use point-like cautery which is called puncture, with the form described in the puncturing of ear pain.
And make points inside each; and then treat that area with the medicine that was previously applied until it heals.
And by the time the cautery has three phases of treatment as this: you can do three applications in this manner:
Chapter XXV.
On treatment of a tickling sensation at the tip of the tongue.
When the tip of the tongue is displaced due to slippery moisture and does not return to its usual position within the time it takes for its return, understand that you need to reduce the displacement first, then have the patient lie down on their back or on their left side; and then raise the neck which is located in the inner part of the tongue at the junctions above your left hand's fingers, if the junction is displaced inward.
And then heat up two tips of the cautery; and this is how to perform it:
And then apply the cautery to the neck until it penetrates into the other side; and the figure of the treatment will come this way using four tips of the cautery.
And in some cases, adjustments are made according to this count and why they use cauteries for eight times.
And then place on the cautery salted flesh, and make sure to adhere the patient to being sewn up tightly, and ensure that the member is not swollen for any time until it is comfortable.
And if the dislocation is in parts above and below the knee, then apply cautery to the muscle over a bone or with point cauteries, where the joint is confirmed and moisture is reduced and the patient is healed.
Chapter XXVI.
On performing cautery to the stomach.
When cold and moisture are inside the stomach, causing swelling of its content, and if you continue with your curative methods without rest, then it may happen that the patient will be on their knees, spreading out their arms and other parts. Then apply cautery three times: first, let the feet remain as wide as one finger's width for a point cautery on a bone, and in two cauteries spread over both sides of the stomach area where the triangular shape of the cautery will appear; extend those who are not adjusted to perform preparation.
And if the depth of the cautery is equal to two-thirds of the thickness of the chain's knot.
And if you want, perform with large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form; here is a cautery according to the circular shape as follows:
And the stomach is pricked at the point where it's frightened by this cautery: and you prick over the stomach with salt according to the amount you want in mixture, and then apply the cautery at that point; and treat it with the cure that precedes until it heals.
Chapter XXVII.
On performing cautery to the pelvic region.
When there is pain in the pelvic region due to cold or moisture or excessive wind causing its usual composition to be disturbed by an excess egress, and if the patient is treated as we have said without rest, then it may happen that the patient will be on their knees with their head up, applying three cauterizations according to this form; one and a half times the quantity of mixture over the pelvic region where the hips are, under the position when lying down for men.
And let the space between each cautery be according to the thickness of a finger, and make the cauterizations according to the length of the right body.
And don't touch the salt with your fingers on the cauterization places.
And if the amount of salt absorbed is as much as the thickness of a chain's knot, and it's not properly adjusted; and if the patient is standing on their feet; and if they're not standing, then lie down, which already has spread its limbs, and raise your arms.
And if you have the skill and prudence in this art, it is possible to perform these cauteries with knife-cautery.
And remember not to overdo the cautery process, ensuring that the salt is absorbed by the entire chain for the whole body's absorption and reaching into the intestines, where this chain is delicate. Know this.
Chapter XXVIII.
On performing puncturing of a boil in the pelvic region with a cautery.
When there is irritation or a boil in the pelvic region and you want to know if that boil is within the flesh of the pelvic area or the lining of the patient, then if it's inside the pelvic flesh, the patient shows significant weight loss and pain intensity increases.
And if it's within the lining of the pelvic region, then the pain is intense and frequent, often tiring out the doctors in treating the patient.
And it may happen that the patient will be lying on their head; then mark the location of the boil with salt; and light the cautery which resembles a reed, as its shape was described in the previous page. And apply cautery at that point and in the area where the entire chain becomes warm, reaching up to the kidneys, until it heals.
And treat that with healing for other boils until it is healed.
And do not use this form of cautery but the one that extends over what is studied in the art of medicine, and on which many patients have suffered. But some cases may involve intense burning with this method, however, follow my advice here, it's better.
Chapter XXIX.
On performing cautery on ulcers.
Ancient cauteries for the veins in ulcers were made by rubbing according to this method, and here's what you should do with the veins of aristology. Take a long slender vein that can be found, one as thick as your finger.
And then immerse that in oil and heat it over the fire, then apply cautery at that point which is between the continuation of the sternum and the neck; with two smaller points at that place where it declines towards the part behind the chin, and two cauterizations thereon declining a little behind the fifth rib and thirteenth vertebra, one declining slightly behind; and another cautery in the middle of the chest; and another on the stomach, and three cauterizations from behind; and one cautery at that point which is between the shoulders, and two cauterizations from each side of the chest, let the cautery be between the two shoulders.
And do not let your hand touch the cautery, but be in the sight of the patient during its use.
And it has been said by some ancient men and some of the people who use a metal rod that resembles fire and heat, placing that inside the place which is between the backbones, going from there to there until it reaches that spot, then it heals healthily. As we have mentioned about that in the case of the wound of the leg, so too here.
There is no fear in this kind of incision with the cautery; it's just that it often happens when you burn at that spot which does not heal.
Chapter XXX.
On the application of the cautery to the gum.
When you treat gum disease with what we have said about treatment in the division and without combining your treatment with others', then when applying the cautery to it, do so according to three methods. All of these are surgical techniques; one of them is to make three or four lines along the length of the gum as per the shape of the leg's cautery marks, which I have already described.
And between each cautery mark, allow a thickness of one or two inches, and the technique for applying the cautery is the same method we described in the application of the leg's cautery marks equally.
And do not let your hand touch the cautery; and place the patient's legs on their back.
And there is another way to apply the cautery, that being you ignite the cautery with two streams of fire; this we have described in the chapter about muscle dislocation, and raise the patient so they can extend their left leg without it getting stuck.
And let your elevation be such that you raise the body according to the length of the person's body, so that the cautery applications are done according to the width of the body.
And move both streams inward, ignite the flame, in that place where those penetrate from the other side of the body.
And then remove the cautery; and thus it is done by making four cautery applications.
And if you see fit, apply the cautery with three streams of fire.
And then you treat the application of the cautery because it has been too long without getting rid of heat for too many days; more so than other previous causes in treatment.
Chapter XXI.
On the application of cautery to dropsy.
Apply the cautery not in dropsy but correctly, specifically.
When you treat dropsy with the methods of treatment that we have described in the division and without combining your treatment with others', then it's necessary to apply the cautery in four places: on the circuit of the kidneys, above the stomach, on the leg, between the shoulder blades, one on the right side of the back, and another on the stomach. And the depth of the cautery should be proportionate to the thickness of the skin.
And then smooth out the application of the cautery in such a way that it releases heat for a long time.
And when you don't evacuate the patient of treatment near the cautery as it tends to cause two misunderstandings, and this is done with the help of healing aids.
The shape of the cautery to which it is applied on the belly should be like a hook as it follows that shape before, and this is how it is done when applying the cautery to the back in accordance with its previous form.
Chapter XXXII.
On the application of cautery to feet and thighs.
When the feet are swollen with dropsy and full of watery fluid, it is necessary to apply the cautery to the feet on the back of the leg as far as from the wrist to the finger, while holding your hand over the cautery but not twisting it; then raise your hand without turning that part completely so that the watery fluid drains out.
The application of the cautery is as follows: Apply two cauteries on each thigh, and in every case apply a cautery at the end of the knife-like instrument. And make the cauteries according to the length of the thigh: lay down one on the outer side and the other in the middle of the thigh; and apply two cauteries on each thigh.
And let the opened wound be treated for a long time, so that some water can drain from it.
And then treat those causes that we have mentioned.
Chapter XXXIII.
On the application of cautery to abdominal regions.
When the abdominal region is due to friction and dampness causing dislocation, these are digestive and retentive qualities, which are in the stomach and intestines, and it is treated according to the methods of treatment without combining them, and sometimes the patient suffers from the application of heat as an indication of their condition, so apply a large cautery over their stomach as described previously for abdominal region cauterization, on the circle's cautery, and four cauterizations in the subtle circuit of the kidneys, with a subtle hook-like cautery; and apply a cautery over the liver area on the side with a larger area or two cauterizations.
And if you notice excessive moisture and the patient tolerates it, then apply the cautery over the navel and over the intestines, and strengthen your adjustments of two cauterizations on the stomach and near the groin area, which is a complete cure from childhood with which you will not go wrong.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors. And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out. You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
On the treatment of old hemorrhoids.
When they occur naturally and cause old hemorrhoids or ones from thick humors or corrupted moisture, and these are treated as we have said in the division, but do not yield to your treatment, then you should apply three cauteries to the pus left on each of the two small and triangular spines, and to a point above the umbilical cleft by two digits.
And if you find that the stomach of the patient is cooled and their food has not spoiled, and their face is hot, then apply this with a large cautery as it precedes; and apply one to the chest, and another to the back, and another over the belly. Let the cauteries remain for some time after application, and soon treat them so that they can heal properly.
Chapter XXXV.
On the treatment of abscesses close to the testicles.
When you remove the testicle, then you should ignite the cautery that is assembled like a ray. Place the ignited cautery inside that testicle abscess, and finish your work so that the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which the disease flows.
And do this one or two times, if there are too many abscesses, then you should cauterize each according to what we have described, and soon treat those with the treatment that yields from your ointments until they heal.
And if you cauterize with a large cautery on the testicles, it will last longer in youth.
Chapter XXXVI.
On the treatment of fistulas that occur naturally in the patient's parts.
When nature does not comply with the work we have recommended in its place, and the patient is frightened by this, they should be treated with a cautery.
Therefore, when any has a fistula naturally and it is old, from the patient's health and corrupted moisture, then that pus which deserves to be removed you should introduce with a subtle probe, and then know the depth of that area where the previously mentioned probe was placed.
Place the cautery that resembles a ray and ignite it. And place the ignited cautery in this fistula, according to the depth where the probe entered.
And apply this cautery repeatedly until those corrupted parts are burned out at least once or twice or three times, according to the amount of your need.
And be careful not to burn nerves or veins; if the fistula goes into the bladder or the intestine's cavity, then avoid all those places; do this treatment only when the fistula is in a muscular area and you think it doesn't go deep.
And treat that area until it heals.
And if the area is sealed, and all materials have been removed from it, and it continues like this for a long time, then know that it has healed completely.
And if the materials are not entirely removed from him, then know that it is penetrating or in his stomach, or there comes a remembrance of those causes in its location.
Chapter XXXVII.
On the treatment of sores.
When in sores there is pain due to cold or by excessive heat, and the thigh of the leg becomes reddened, then remove that which requires cauterization from the sores with a cautery on each sore, and apply it with a small point as you remember its location.
And apply the cautery gently at first, as there should come three linear cauterizations, and so they will last longer in youth.
Chapter XXXVIII.
On the treatment of the bladder.
When bladder inflammation and weakening occur due to cold and moisture, such that the leg does not retain urine, then you should apply the cautery in the area left above the bladder, as it begins at the skin of the thigh. Apply one cautery on the right side and another on the left side.
And make the length of each cautery according to the size of your patient's foot; apply this with a cautery on the lower part of both sides; or if necessary, use two cauteries.
And make the cauteries small as they are described to proceed.
Chapter XXXIX.
On the treatment of the arm.
When there is cold and moisture in the arm, thus it is prohibited to engage in coitus, and menstruation becomes disturbed in the patient, and the stimulation of their organs is delayed. Pain in the elbows occurs, then know that this location should be treated with three cauterizations around the navel region; as we have described for bladder cautery; or if necessary, apply two cauterizations on each side above this area; and use small point cauterizations.
Chapter XL.
On the treatment of the dislocation of the ankle.
When moisture infiltrates the ankle region, and causes instability of its location, a sign is that the foot extends over the other when compared between them. The location of the dislocation is found in their knee joint.
So you should cauterize the patient's leg near the water part of his body with a similar-looking cautery. As for your hand, you will hold it in the circuit of that part like when it is being twisted, and so that the part does not fall into the middle of the circle.
And let the shape of the previously mentioned cautery be used in the cauterization of the stomach.
And if this type of cautery is not available to you, then use three different ones: the large olive wood one.
And do the cauteries according to the intensity of the pain throughout the whole chain; and then treat that part once it has been healed.
Chapter XLI.
Regarding the cauterization of the sciatic vein.
When pain occurs in the water part and is caused by friction and humidity, the patient recovers with what we have said earlier, but not simultaneously. If it is old, then you should release the patient from large fluids with pill-shaped items or with artificial pills or similar ones; and then cauterize that area.
And the method of cauterization in this case follows two methods: or with burning medicines, or with fire.
There are two known methods, of which one is to cauterize that area on the width part of the body with three triangular-shaped cauteries according to this form; and make those have good depth. And the spaces between each cautery are equal to the thickness of that mentioned, and whether it's an olive wood or large cautery.
Make some cuts on the middle part over the tip of the anus, so there will be four cauteries.
And if you wish, cauterize on the circle which was described in the cauterization of the dislocation of the water, that is, a circle that burns away all pain throughout the chain.
And this is the method of cauterization for a urinary tract where pain is attached to the water and does not spread into the thigh.
And if it does spread into the thigh, then cauterize that with two cauteries on the thigh over the place where you will hold the leg that is in pain; and with one cautery on the cavity for about four or so you should heat the calf part.
And if it's a knife-type cautery, then the depth of the cautery should be according to the intensity of the pain in the body.
And if the leg bends in such a way that pain is spread out in the vicinity of the ankle, then cauterize it here where you bend with a cautery for three or four points or more if needed.
And if the leg bends such that pain is left with a hole in the thigh, then cauterize it here with a knife-type cautery.
And when doing any cauterization, make sure you don't finish with the cautery to the point of burning nerves or large blood vessels, so that through this there is no injury or constriction on the leg.
And I have seen several others who cauterize on the cavity and finish in the cauterization, and the fire-filled bed that allows the lump to gain possession of the foot, and the fire pierces and destroys completely the foot. And it leads to intense stomach acid production, and thus death occurs.
And if the pain is in two parts at once, cauterize each according to this manner.
And some wise ones say about the cauterization of water: make it resemble a circular iron object, in which the circumference is as wide as a hand; and place its opening according to the thickness of an almond or just slightly more.
And within that circle there should be another piece of iron; and let the spaces between them be equal to the size of a small toe; and those circles should be cut into two parts; and make the length of those nails one nail or two nails, and create grooves for iron appropriately around the circles; and this is how it should look:
And it should be ignited in the fire until it heats up and sparks, and then placed on the water part of the leg, with the patient lying down. And then cauterize that with three round-shaped cauteries in one operation.
And then let that heal for three days; and cover that with bandages and let the open wound heal too, for too many days; and treat that with ointments until it is healed.
Albucasis says: or children, of this type of cauterization we have used it for the sake of protecting him/her, and because we have found those who care about him/her.
For those suffering from large cautery burns on them, find that place for yourself.
And when cauterizing with burning medicines, you should make two circles hollowed out containing the iron dust; and let their circumference in the shape of nails be as wide as two or more of them.
And if the spaces between each are equal to the thickness of that mentioned; let them be cut both above and below, and so that they contain themselves among each other according to this form:
And place the patient on the water part of the leg and hold your hand over the water part; take hot water and place it between two circles, let its quality be in a small fire little by little, keep that for one hour, and let the patient taste the burning - like when it is from fire - until the burning stops.
And then raise your hand to the tool and wipe off all the water, including the heated water.
And let it rest for three days and place it on the edge inside where the redness of the swollen adjustment is, then let him rest for some more days, and he will recover from his soreness. This lasts until old age.
And treat it with ointment inside where it has healed.
And if the pain is widespread within the thigh or leg, have him sit in water according to how it's done for equal water.
And this is the method of heated water, and I have already written about that in the treatise on correcting medicines. Recipe for alkali and non-extinguished oil, each in half parts, mix these and allow them to rest in a new wave. Let the half that is left be pierced by a small probe according to the quantity that enters his eye.
And let the bottom of the wave rest in another heated wave, and pour over this live alkali and oil with gentle water which takes these by a finger, and once you understand these with your hand for proper compression, then observe the scorching that emerges from the hot water in the remaining half to the heated wave.
And adjust all that water, pour it over another live oil and another fresh alkali. Then it will produce intense heat, which is administered in various medical operations and in the cauterization of other limbs. This operation is done with fire.
And there are some remedies in which the area to be cauterized is wide, such as acne, melanosis and oil rash on the skin that should be mixed together.
And Gualia recounts an operation and its treatment from the ancients, which heals water pain and sciatica vein pain, and it is very admirable to be like that. And he says that there is no need for other treatments, and it becomes cured in one go as recommended, and it strengthens his internal organs already from that point.
And it should be close to the gallbladder area, and if there is no gallstone, take a recent fig; then it should be mixed with a little oil and placed in water where there is pain or in the thigh, or on the leg, and it should be done.
And let it rest for a duration of three hours or according to the patient's tolerance until the swelling subsides.
And after that, immerse him in hot water until his body turns red, then expose him to the sun, when the pain stops and he is healed.
And know that one should not apply cauterization to these remedies but rather facilitate the body's evacuation.
Mays Escorides explained that when there is a wound on the neck where the vein becomes narrow, it needs to be cauterized; this will make him more thin. And apply the cauterization as follows: take wool and heat it in ancient oil, then place it between his shoulders and under his armpit.
And after that, take a dry wound and apply it with fire inside where charcoal is made; then place him on the wool and let her rest until it expands. And repeat this process, and do not stop until the sensation of biting goes into the water and rests on the pain.
And this method of cauterization is called cattle cauterization.
Chapter XLII.
On Cauterization of Two Pain.
Some pains in both parts are due to various causes, such as by impact or by percussion or overactive evacuation, and for reasons similar to those, by infusion of wet material substance.
And only the cauterization is not done in this single type which is made through the effusion of abrasive material.
Then know that for evacuation of the patient using pills similar to them, which are made on both sides where there is pain three lines according to the width of his body, because signs appear in every line or more, depending on the quantity that comes from the tolerance of the patient and its virtue.
And perform cauterization using point cauterization.
And if you want, cauterize with three or four cauterizations along the median clavih (arm bone) in this manner:
Chapter XLIII.
On Cauterization Concerning Gallbladder Disorders.
Various symptoms occur concerning this ailment in young children; and a sign of its onset in children is that it affects their structure causing elevation and increase in activity.
And you find it at the end of the spine of the back and on his buttocks where it begins to rise above the other vertebrae.
And once you identify this and wish to prevent it, then cauterize that using point cauterization according to this manner: Let the cauterization cover all parts of the spine equally.
And if you wish, cauterize along the spinal circuit with point cauterization for two or three lines. And let the points be evenly spaced between them.
And then treat the area where it has healed with what we have said about water.
Mays advises that cauterization should not be administered in gallbladder issues caused by muscle spasms of nerves.
Capitol .xliv.
Regarding the treatment of gout and joint pain through cautery.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
And thus how gout caused by cold humors is cured through the method of treatment and not by relieving the pain, then applying a cautery remedy.
And you apply cautery to that nearby evacuation in the foot's circulation around the joint with pointed cauteries.
And this is the form of an olive oil cautery, such as:
And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. And if the pains rise within the joints or to other joints, and if these points are felt, then apply this olive oil cautery over each joint up to three or four times around with this olive oil cautery.
And if you apply these cauteries that are necessary for the treatment, then apply this olive oil cautery and do not press too hard with your hand before it, simply around the size of the vein.
And if the pains rise within the joint and even up to twice its size, then administer the cautery which we have described in our section.
And if the pains are only in the muscles, and it's called small heat, then puncture along the veins as they move, puncture at those two lines.
And if the pains remain in the fingers, then puncture along the veins over each bone and on the back of the hand.
And if the pains rise close to several days in the armpits or muscles, then apply this around all parts of the aids.
And do not evacuate the patient of good order and reception of medicines, for if this is done with a good regimen and fever, the illness will be removed by this cautery and you'll achieve healing, God help.
Chapter XLV.
Regarding the treatment of ruptures with cautery.
When feeling a rupture in the arteries and noticing bulges facing towards the front of the hernia, and if these start near that area, then it's advisable to guide the patient to leave his meals for the day and use mild remedies so that the opening in his abdomen might decrease.
And then guide the patient between your hands on his back and instruct him to have his elbows inside so that either the hole gets smaller or the hernia appears, along with its bulges.
And then guide that back to your fingers and try to locate the rupture over the bones of the heel, marking the end which is similar to half the circumference at the lower parts of the body.
And then apply the olive oil cautery as follows:
So that it burns and produces sparks. And then return the hernia or lump to its original size, and place your hand on that area to prevent the hernia from protruding again.
You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs and placed a cushion under them, had another servant on their legs, and had another one on their chest, holding their hands.
And then place the cautery on that mark with your hand and the point of the cautery straight, enter it so you reach the bones of the heel midway through the middle; try again at another location if in the first attempt you have not reached the bone.
And observe the sensitivity of the lump during your cautery treatment, don't burn that lump to avoid any harm or severe ill coming upon the patient.
And know that when using the cautery, do not touch the bones, for this will not ensure your operation's success.
And consider that the size and measure of the children should determine the subtlety of the cautery used for them.
And then treat the site of the cautery for three days with bandages until the scab of the burn is removed.
And then treat that area with other ointments until healing occurs.
And the patient should remain on their back for 40 days until the site and wound are sealed.
And consider that you should adjust the patient's diet according to the duration of their healing process, which stretches their abdomen, and ensure the lump does not protrude due to the efforts of recovery.
And when it's decided that around 40 days have passed, then administer the treatment correctly and keep that area under observation for another 40 days.
And if it is reduced from labor and fullness of food and drink, and from vigorous uses, then when using this complete regimen for healing, it will result in recovery.
And I shall speak about the treatment of ruptures in other parts of the abdomen, and it's at the beginning, and if they are not contained, then apply this to the rupture of that using round points of the cautery according to the size of its body; so that the vein is drained like its right part. And then treat that with what we said earlier, and it should not be adjusted.
And they would say that for the first treatment, the rupture should be treated with a triangular cautery according to this form, because it is done with trial and error:
and a line is laid out across the width in the middle above the rupture, and another line above it; then place your hand on a triangular cautery, but for the first cautery, it should be gentler and better.
Capitol 46.
On the treatment of twisting (cautery).
When the pain persists in certain limbs due to compression or impact and does not respond to healing with medicines for a long time, then it is advisable to treat with a pointed cautery.
And for the cauteries of all limbs according to their size and thinness, their effectiveness and development, and the location of the twist and pain.
Therefore if the first cautery helps, it is good; and otherwise, proceed with further cauteries; for customarily with those pains they are poked on the surface of the part that is closest to the patient, so that you might achieve those points within which the patient will be healed.
Capitol 47.
On the treatment of leprosy (cautery).
Some lesions on the skin are treated with a cautery for quite a long time, and somewhat if it's due to the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
And when you want to treat that lesion with cautery, consider whether the leprosy is widespread or has been treated elsewhere using what we have said in the division and not with this treatment, nor without it. And be careful about the patient's health that the corruption might comprehend his entire body and all its complexity. Then treat that area on the head with these cauteries: one at the middle of the head, and another a little further down from there; lift the forehead to the end of the hair; and both on two horns; and one behind, over the back or neck or nape.
And with your hand on the cautery for a little while enter into the mouth and make a small pressure, and if the patient has moved in previous treatments, so that the expulsion of thick vapors might be alleviated; then treat on the gums according to what is necessary.
And if the leprosy has already spread on the body and manifests clearly, then it is advisable to treat that area with those cauteries we have mentioned for the head; also with a cautery on the end of the nose, and two cauteries on each of his cheeks, and two cauteries on the two shoulder blades of the neck, and five cauteries on the ribs, and one large one near the heel, and another on the waistband, and two on the buttocks, and one on each buttock, and two on the hips and one on each hip bone, and two on the elbows and two on the muscles; also treat that area over all joints of those mentioned in his arms and legs, and over each of his heels, and over the creases of his body.
And guard yourself from the nerves which are on the heel, do not treat those areas.
And some lesions are treated with a cautery on the bone of the knee and another in the mouth of the stomach, and another on the throat.
And know that the more precisely you adjust the cauteries, the more beneficial and effective they are; and know that the patient does not feel pain in the cautery, as with the ears, because his body is already numbed.
And know that the cauteries should be large or small according to the limbs and joints as per instructions for the tools.
And after that, treat the cautery with a mixture of crushed wheat flour and honey and other treatments until it is healed.
Capitol 48.
On the treatment of stupefaction (cautery).
When any limb is paralyzed or asleep and treated with medicines, bandages, if it's not healed then you treat that paralyzed limb with cauteries according to the size of the limb or its thinness.
And let your cautery penetrate the skin slightly. And after that, treat it with an ointment until it is healed.
And some lesions are treated with a cautery for the stupefaction which affects his arms and legs, as well as his back ribs, you can see the nerves that have that limb, and the stupefaction is increased.
Do not presume about this unless it's someone who is knowledgeable in the anatomy of limbs and the emergence of nerves throughout the body.
Capitol 49.
On the treatment of white marks that are moles.
When white marks are old and do not respond to any of the medicines' ointments, then you should treat that area with a preon cautery according to the amount of skin inside which the whiteness and color might be increased, and the color of the skin changes.
And after that, treat it with wheat flour and lentils mixed with roasting oil and with leaves of arnagrosa, and from each take half parts and all should be mixed together. Then cover with a linen cloth and place on the affected area until it is healed.
Capitol 50.
Regarding the treatment of burns.
When ulcers start and you want them to stop, then cauterize that with a circular point on the patient's body following its natural course, like it's being rolled.
And the wise doctors say that when cauterized, do it with a point on the buttocks in the middle place; however, I don't see this way, fearing it might be an ulcer, and I have seen this several times.
And the liquid pus should be cauterized in the patient's body following a circular path as we have said, or with points of cauterization.
Head wound.
Regarding the treatment of ulcers.
When some ulcer takes longer to heal, and this happens due to the excess causing it, or because of the patient's old age leading to decay, with few symptoms, or due to time, and you wish to expedite the healing process; then cauterize on the ulcer's surface with points of small puncture cauterization; and apply something that will hasten its healing afterwards.
If you want the puncturing of the ulcer with cauterization, then light the cauterizing fire, which is the shape of the ulcer: and place that in the middle of the ulcer so that the needle penetrates.
And if the cauterization is done in that spot where you placed it, because it will alleviate the arm's pain; and then treat that area until it heals.
Arm wound number 52.
Regarding the treatment of corroding (or eating away).
Corrosion is a spreading decay in the body, which destroys that as if fire eats dry wood.
So if you see that corrosion in the affected area requiring cauterization with fire, then light up small and large point-like cauterizations as it suits that location where the corrosion is present.
And proceed with cauterization from all sides until you eliminate all the corrosion without causing any harm to it.
And let that heal for three days, and place on the cauterized areas a mixture of oil beforehand until all scabs are eliminated and all decay is gone.
And then treat it with meat-producing ointments.
If within three days the healthy flesh grows in the area where there was decay, that's good; but if not, then repeat the cauterization over what is rotten in those affected areas.
Corrosion can be treated with some doses of acute medicine, which acts at the site of cauterization. However, cauterizing with fire is quick and somewhat rejuvenating.
And I have already mentioned the treatment of this with acute medicine in the section; therefore, take that when you have need for it from him.
Arm wound number 53.
Regarding the treatment of constrictions and other similar conditions.
Visible symptoms in the areas removed of the arm patient that are called clavus, and this is a major, intrusive cause, which afflicts the arm; and cauterization on those follows two methods, namely cauterization with fire and cauterization with heated water.
Cauterizing with fire is done by lighting the cauterization like a small cone, which is made of iron according to the quantity that contains the clavus from all sides, and it should have thin edges.
And then place that ignition on the clavus, and move your hand around the cauterization in the circuit of the clavus so that the cauterization reaches its depth. And let that heal for three days until you start to see recovery in the arm. And then cover that with bandages soaked in vinegar squeezed through salt, and let the bandage stay on that for a night, until it is removed of its scabs.
And then treat the area with meat-producing ointment until it heals.
And if it is not converted, and visible symptoms occur on the surface of the body, mainly in the breasts and feet, then consider applying cauterization with heated water in those areas. And you should take a small incision tool or a piece of iron or vinegar cone, place that over the clavus; then fill a small container with heated water for a little bit, wet your hand, and move that around with pressure from your hand across, pressing on the edge of the needle in the scab of the clavus, allowing the hot water to flow through the hole in the cauterization; and let the patient endure this hot water soaking for an hour, then remove it, until the clavus and its scabs are eliminated.
And do this with those ones and proceed with the other until you have attended to all of them in the body.
And then treat those pus that are eliminated by these ointments which cause the flesh to regenerate.
Arm wound number 53.
Regarding the treatment of shaking or trembling.
When you experience some shaking due to rubbing in the nerves or due to fever caused by friction, or due to another similar cause, then consider cauterizing that with four cauterizations or on each vertebra of both sides, between every two vertebrae having one cauterization; and on the feet of the patient, apply a cauterization on olive.
The trembling of the patient subsides and quickly restores their health.
Error 403: Forbidden The request was denied by the server.
Regarding the cautery treatment of heart attacks.
When there are abscesses in the body, and pus-filled wounds are formed from corrupted materials; then at the point of appearance, it should be cauterized over the entire opening of the fistula using a fine-tipped cautery with a rod as its handle; or with a long piece of esterology; or using a conical cautery.
And some boilings are cauterized at the beginning of their expulsion according to this method; they are not allowed to grow, and they burst out removing that excess, thus healing them.
But it is important that this be done near the evacuation through phlebotomy.
Error 403: Forbidden The request was denied by the server.
Regarding the cautery treatment of an inflamed disease caused by a chest wound.
Too many boils that cause inflammation of the chest should be treated by opening the infection, or through incision of pus or cautery on the body part, and then proceed similarly, making it difficult to leave that condition.
And when this happens with one such thing, touch the tip of your finger to the opening of the chest, and place your hand on that area, hold there until you remove some of the boils inside where the inflammation remains, so as not to let the disease continue.
And then place in the fire several small and large olive oil cautery tools, by the number of points, and blow over those where there are burning points.
And then take one small or large depending on the location and the wound where the artery has burst, over that vein blow continuously as soon as you have removed your finger, and apply the cautery so that it is cut off and contained that disease.
And if the disease is expelled from the opening of the artery while you keep your finger there and remove the cautery, then take another fine-coated cautery which are prepared in the fire, and therefore do not stop doing this one after another so that the disease may be contained.
And guard yourself that you do not burn the nerves here, and bring about another mischief on the patient.
And know that when the artery flows with disease, it is not possible to restrict the disease in those cases, especially when the artery is large, unless through four ways: or by using a cautery like we have mentioned, or by extraction if it cannot be removed, whereupon upon removal its extremities are burned and the disease is contained; or they may be tied with thread or with ligature due to strong constriction, or placed under the patient with medicines whose virtue is to restrict the disease; and they should be constricted with powder in decent restraint.
And one who administers decent restriction of the patient with ligature and constriction with cloths or due to causes of burning effects and resemblance, do not use only tar.
And if this happens with one such thing and the doctor is not present nor medicine available, then open according to our instruction over the opening of that vein as we have said, and understand within the patient's large constriction where the disease remains from the predominant part of the wound, and above the chest do not remove; and on the chest apply with water rubbed with a large coldness until the disease is cooled and thickened; and consider carefully what needs to be cauterized or which medicine must be used.
Regarding incisions, punctures, wounds, phlebotomy and their appearances.
We have already explained in the first chapter all disease where fire cautery is suitable and with burning medicine, and the occasions and causes of that, and the tools necessary in those cases for the forms of cautery; and I have arranged the chapters concerning the elevation above waist level among the feet.
And I proceed in this chapter in that manner, so that the one who wants it may be relieved, then about what someone has requested.
And before I start this, know that in this chapter it pertains to the fear of what is in the first chapter about cautery.
And because I am aware of the great caution, that in this operation which is in this chapter boils evacuation which is with disease where there is life needs to be applied to the venous sprinkling or incision on the boil or opening for discharge or purification of the wound or extraction of arrow or incision of pus and their appearances. And all of those are accompanied by fear and trembling, and in most of their cases death occurs.
And I warn you that this should not happen to you in which there is an accident, for some boils cause you ways of men and methods of diseases. And there is one that will die from their disease and it's easy for them to death, and also due to the violence of what they find with their disease, and due to the longevity of their illness, and fear which means death.
And those are the ones who give you their advice and say, you hope for that health, and their disease is harmful.
And so it goes that you must consent to whoever comes to see you of this manner; and your caution should be greater than trepidation and your appetite; and do not presume any cause upon this but rather a certain science which verifies what you should, and for which there is a plausible succession of success.
And use in the treatment of all your patients with prediction and indication for which health is converted, that in that there is your aid regarding acquisition of reputation and memory, praise and glory.
O children, God listens to your understanding and does not withhold direction and protection from you, for that is in his hands.
And I have arranged this chapter separately by chapters according to the chapter on cautery, on the treatment of the head in relation to the feet, so that you may be comforted with what you are asking for and which is necessary for you.
First chapter.
On the treatment of water which is contained in the head of children.
Know that this sickness, which appears in children, is due to the onset of puberty and when childhood strength leaves a child's head.
And some bumps due to a hidden cause that is unknown.
May I have not seen this illness except in children; and to all those whom I saw died, for which reason it seems to me that the disease is passed on in them.
And I have seen that a child whose head was filled with water, the size of his head remained always in such a magnificent state that it could not subdue itself due to the size of its head; and more than moisture increased within it causing death.
And this moisture either accumulates between the bone and the skull, or accumulates from outside on the scalp.
And in that operation if the moisture is between the bone and the skull and there's little pus, then you should make an incision at the midpoint of the head with a fissure in the latitude, and let the length of the fissure be twice the thickness so that the moisture flows out. And this is the form of the spathum:
And thus if the moisture is much increased and the pus is larger, then these are two fissures according to this manner:
And if the moisture is outside of the skull, its sign is that you open all the connections of the head from every side and when you squeeze that inside your hand at those internal parts, water is squeezed out which is not hidden to you. And let there be an incision in the middle of the head with three fissures according to this manner:
And during the operation extract all the moisture; and strengthen the fissures with bandages and cushions; and on the fifth day apply wine and oil over it, and cleanse the wound with threads and ointment, strengthening the head with equalities; and feed the patient with dry meat of little moisture until the member is comforted and healed.
And there is another manner of incision that considers the size of the pus and the accumulation of water, for some bumps are more in the back of the head, or at the front, or on the right, or on the left; so attend to where the pus and the water accumulation appear, and do this as best suits you.
And observe that do not cut the artery and let the veins of blood and cause the patient to perish from the flow of blood with evacuation of moisture.
Chapter Second.
When it happens to some cold or coughs in the nose or feet and you abandon the treatment with medicines, then the last treatment here is an incision of those two arteries.
And let there be an incision when you want to cut the part of the patient that rises from his head, and rub the place with a coarse cloth so that the arteries appear, and let the neck of the patient be strengthened with a few cloths; and consider where the pulse beats; and the places below those which are near the ears depress, and they do not always hide in such people.
And press on the artery with a thread, and make an incision in each at the edge of the sharp part near the incision entering into the skull, and let this be according to the size of the head.
And if you want, place the spatula under the artery and twist that which meets them at the parts above.
And let the length of the incision be twice the thickness adjusted, for when any vein is incised blood stops at its exit pulsating which frequently jumps over.
May if the artery does not appear in the center, then let there be measured from the ear the quantity of space three inches, and press with a thread, and make an incision into the skull.
And whatever comes out of the blood is a quantity of wine one ounce. And strengthen the patient with more or less, and all this is according to the quantity which appears from the virtue of the patient and the filling of the artery of him.
And let there be an examination of the wound, and thus if there remains over the skull any cause of the scalp, then cut that to avoid pus formation.
And then strengthen the wound with plasters and with lint from linen, and then treat that with ointment inside so that it is healed.
Chapter III.
On the extraction of the nerves which are in the temples.
When it happens that old migraines or intense headaches occur due to humidity and quality in the nerves of the temples, or ancient headache becomes strong resembling those, and is treated according to the methods of healing medicine, if this does not relieve, then we have developed these illnesses: extraction of the nerves in the temples, or cauterization of those as we have shown.
The method of the operation and extraction is like this: the patient raises their skin which is in the temples; and recognize the nerve that seems to be in the temple area according to its position, it's hidden in few people due to the intensity of rubbing.
And if it is hidden, then you have the patient hold onto their head with some fabric; and then rub the area with a rough cloth or heat up water and pour it on that spot until the nerve becomes clearly visible. And then you take the needle of which this is the shape: And then you ignite the thread while making it easy to pass through until you reach the nerve; and then heat oil and extract that in the upper parts; after extracting that from the thread, uncover those of the tunics which are under that, in all parts.
If the artery is subtle, then you wrap it at the tip of a needle, and then cut off a portion according to the amount by which its ends are extended and are contracted, without creating a flow of blood; for if they are not cut, the blood pressure will not rise.
And then drain the blood from the vein once. Inside three times.
And if the nerve is large, then you divide it into two areas at each of its ends with double strength thread or with strings long, and do not let it decompose in front of the healing of the wound, expecting a flow of blood.
And then cut off the excess that is between two pieces; do this to it immediately or later.
And if you want, cauterize that with a cautery inside the hole made by the cautery knife until its ends are incised; it will stay in the place of that half-done job.
And it is better work if the patient has fever or shows signs of coldness; because cautery comes from those causes that help in finishing off moisture, and thus it is better for young people.
And cut off the extraction of nerves that you place at the ancient site, and have them lie on your clean dust decently, then treat with dry medicines let the flesh come out and heat in order to heal.
And if while you work another wound appears with blood flowing from the nerve, then you must restrict that blood flow, or with a cautery, or fill the site of the old injury, and press your hand until the bleeding is restricted. And if none of those causes are present, then hold your hand on the spot until the bleeding is congealed, and cover the area with cold water to cool down until it calms, strengthening according as you can.
And that which is easier in the extraction of nerves is to cauterize the vein with this cautery having two knives, because you have touched both spots on the test, and then blow fire until they reach the hole and divide the vein into two spots, so that it becomes extended where its ends are, but do not let them become solid with all this cautery.
And this is the shape of the cautery:
And let the heat of the two knives be equal. However, if the heat of the two knives is greater than that of two knives, then it is better, for if they are sharp like two knives close to each other and do not cut the flesh at speed.
Therefore, whenever there is a thickness in those, the heat of the fire in those and the flesh is cut slightly.
And this work is better in all works and much lighter.
And let the space which is between the two knives be the size of the thickness of that instrument.
Chapter IV.
On the treatment of noses with sharp and sour tears.
When there are sour tears, and it is the body of those veins that are on the forehead in front, and no cause is found for the treatment according to medicine, then you have the patient's face already reddened, moving around as if it were a dance of mosquitoes, their noses exhausted, wet like they're already known by their skin texture, and their eyelids are scratched from the sharpness of the tears, the old ones are in favor of this kind of treatment, and they prefer this treatment to passiveness.
And it is that you order the patient to rub their forehead's skin and then cut into the forehead three equal gaps according to the length of the forehead. And if the length of the gap is two fingers: one gap shall be equally distant from the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second according to the length of a little bit of movement of the tear glands which are in the lacrimal, and the third on the other side.
And protect yourself from the beginning of the arteries which are in two sides, and extend your hand along both the continuation of the jaws. And if it's about any initial space make sure to adjust its quantity to three fingers.
And if you have a sponge or damp cloth, place them under where the pain is drying out.
And place two sharp points at each extremity, which is the shape of the incision for them: that begins from dividing the warmth into the second incision. Scour that entire series which is between the two incisions near the joint which is above the bone, and do this for the incision to move into the second incision. And remove this incision and insert another instrument in the first incision, it is called a knife, sharp on one side and not so sharp on the other.
And place the sharp part of this you should cut off the attached flesh and that series, and the other end in his bone inside the bone, and put this one into it so that it reaches the middle opening, and cut all the vessels that descend from the head to the organs.
May the incision continue until it reaches that part of the series, and do this in the middle opening between the other opening.
And once a quantity of sweat from the pain has flowed out, squeeze the places of the accumulated sweat on the wound.
And place near each opening of the old cut, and apply over those powders mixed in vinegar and oil and wine, and make sure not to allow pus to appear.
And on the third day loosen the ligament and administer large doses of hot water or sweat baths, and apply this with basil oil among other things so that the wounds are healed.
Capital .v.
Regarding the treatment of gout and descending organs from the parts inside the head.
When in some vein there is gout and continuing it, and sometimes the organs descending from the thigh are exhausted, and their examination has deteriorated, and the eyelids are ulcerated along with their skin, and at the back of the head is intense pain and subsequent exhaustion, then you should be aware of these incidents where the substances and gout do not come from veins of the parts that proceed internally.
And the best treatment for this is this: order the thigh to scratch its forehead, and then make an incision in that at the middle of the forehead area, a small one according to width (and start from the opening behind the left temple towards the right temple; and the incision goes inside the bone; and extend your hand along the bumps of the temples which are swollen due to chewing), into where the bone is exposed.
Dry all the sweat with a cloth or on linen and then fill between the two edges of the incision with old cloth or on linens. And strengthen it from above with powders mixed in vinegar and oil so that no pus appears.
And when you relieve this and several times as the pus has diminished, then cover the bone starting from your belly flesh, and treat this with regenerative drying that makes flesh boil like if you took two parts of wheat flour and four parts of honeycomb and mixed them together, and make a plaster from it and apply it in these wounds to resemble original flesh.
Capitol .vi.
Regarding the treatment of gout that affects the ears.
All the causes of gout in the ears are one of four types, or it is like gravel due to a mineral cause, such as iron and lead, or plant-based like clove or broad beans, or it is a fluid-like cause like water and wine together and similar to them, or some animal.
And when gravel is in the ear or other similar causes from those that do not settle or swell in the ear, place the ear to the sun's heat, and if you see the gravel, then distill with some oily substance or saffron, and administer the removal of this, and make it sneeze in the condition, and keep your nose away from the occurrence of sneezing. And place some pieces of cloth or wool around the ear, and stretch the ear upwards to the parts above it, which swollen spots are exposed from these causes.
And if it is not affected, then administer removal of this with the instrument called a small ear syringe, which has this form:
And if it is blocked by the syringe, then yes, that's fine; otherwise, then administer the removal of this with a slender tube made of copper.
And if it is not blocked by this, then make a tube of reed and insert the end of the tube into the ear canal and coat the surroundings of the tube with wax and softened oil so that there is only opening to the tube. And then extract forcefully from your nostril with strong suction, which produces swollen areas like what we have described.
And if it is not blocked in this manner, then take some powdered chalk or ground almonds with which you make small balls, and place this at the end of the tube and cover this sufficiently with a cushion. And then intervene in the ear canal for ease, and remove the moisture from the ear.
And so if none of the causes we have recounted is responsible, then you should prepare to treat that which might lead to a boil or spasm.
And the method of treating that is to start by touching the patient's vein of the phlegmatic blood and remove it according to the manner of its nature, then make that incision between your hands and convert the ear towards the parts above, making a small crack in the base of the ear you should press the pus from him into the place pressed by him. And if the crack has the form of the lunar figure reaching to the skin, and once the skin is torn off, you must keep that if possible with appropriate instruments; and, using speed when working on this while it's happening, treat it so that it becomes healed.
And if the cause in the ear is one of those growing lumps that inflate, then administer treatment and remove it; but if you cannot withstand the pain, then take a thin needle according to this form: And perform that extraction of the lump in the ear which is contained.
And don't do that when you think it's already saturated with the steam of the ear, pause in heavy spots, and then carefully remove them or through gentle pressure on the sides, or with an incision as we have said, so that the removal becomes easier.
And in the water which has entered into the ear canal, so that the patient sneezes at the beginning and fills their ear with a bit of old cotton, then place this over the ear where there is water, and if through this it becomes open, it's good; otherwise, take thin wooden and iron tools according to its length, and heat these slightly in the flame, and have the patient insert one of these into the entrance of their ear, press against a part of that with another cotton ball and hit it with another cotton ball over the ball which is inside the ear. Then don't stop this with a cotton ball until all the water has become drained out.
Then don't stop this with a cotton ball until all the water has become drained out. And once the water has fully drained away, take paper or a glove instead,. and place one end of it in the ear and extend the other end into the flame so that its tip is burned.
And place another glove and do this as many times until all the water has drained away, and remove it with a cannula like the one used to extract cotton.
And in the removal of what enters into that ear, if it is a small one, as big as possible and similar to it, treat it as we have said in the division; but if it is of a large size causing pain deep inside, then administer its removal through gentle pressure and using cotton balls, and this cause is the least among all other causes that occur in the ear.
And in the removal of worms produced in the ear, when you treat it as we have said in the division and within the treatment of distillations, do not let your treatment fail, then consider observing the ear under sunlight.
And if any cause of worms appears here, then remove it through gentle pressure or through small cotton balls, but if no cause appears, take a cannula that is stretched out and somewhat wide, which is the shape of this: And insert the small end into the ear according to the quantity that can tolerate it by the patient; and then suck out through strong suction, and do this several times, until all worms have drained away.
And if you cannot withstand the pain, then fill and seal in the cannula circuit with wax as we have said; then administer distilled waters which have already evaporated the old ones in worm treatment, and consult this for further information on distillations.
And make your application using the oil medicines in the ear with this tool which has this shape: Make it of silver or wood, stretched out, and on its surface there should be a small opening.
And make it so that when used for the canal's cavity as required here, it becomes necessary. And if you wish, take the rod and wrap it around the descending part of this cotton, then pour oil into the cavity of the horn, or juice from any herb, or whatever you want from these medicines in the cannula  and that is inside the ear  then insert the rod with a little cotton on top and squeeze it using your hand as soon as the oil is expelled into the cavity of the horn and the patient feels the oil internally.
And whatever is inside the ear should already be softened by heat from a small flame. And remember that when you distil in the ear, it should not be too hot, because ear medicines cannot tolerate this.
Chapter VII.
On the treatment of wax blockages in the ears.
Some cases of infants have caused abdominal swelling in their parents that has not been punctured, and this happens sometimes in adults as well, wax blockage in the ear canal by a small rock or a piece of soft flesh in there; and some of these wax blockages occur before the opening of the ear canal which does not reach the inner part, while others are outside the parts.
And that which happens in the beginning of his condition, which cannot be comprehended by mere observation, is in the most difficult treatments for recovery.
And in that situation where you can see it clearly, take the patient's foot to the sun and observe it. And if you notice swelling that is visible, open it with a thin blade which has the shape of this:
If the end of it where its breadth is small, having one part sharp and the other not; and the blade be of two lion's lengths each side so that it does not pinch the foot.
And if the swelling is in the flesh around the foot or at its ankle, then you have that with very sharp scalpels and penetrate it deeply so that all the flesh is inside.
And if the swelling is in the front of the foot, then take a sharp lion's claw and make a small incision with fire, and then place that near the middle of the foot.
And if you have felt swelling that causes discomfort in the foot due to pressure, relieve the compression of it with ease; and make sure not to injure the nerves of the foot.
And then place a bandage on the foot according to the size of the area that you have enveloped in Egyptian ointment; and do this for several days until you are sure of the healing process; or take something and immerse it in water, crush it over it, and use it; and if you see the swelling has disappeared, then observe that you discard whatever you used and replace it with another one which you envelop in wet cloth made from cotton dipped in rose oil, while waiting for the pus to drain out; and take care of this until it is healed.
And if there is a discharge of pus, then immerse the sponge or cloth in warm water and place it over the foot, and use another treatment that stops the pus discharge, which is mentioned in the distillation treatise.
Title VIII
Title VIII: On the treatment of atresia which affects the eyelids.
Atresia affecting the eyelids; some times they are wet, at other times they are dry.
Then use those with tweezers or forceps, and separate those from their roots, and place them in crushed water over the affected areas.
And if there is pain with pus discharge, then you apply a cautery to those with a subtle limber tip.
And the best application of the cautery is that the incisions and the pus-filled areas return when there remains any cause at their roots; and when they are burned with fire, those roots are destroyed and do not return.
Title IX
Treatment for granulomas that occur on the eyelids of individuals.
Swelling occurs on the eyelids of individuals due to some cause which manifests as a large lump in its firmness and hardness, and because of this lump, it is called granuloma.
And it is an addition of large moisture on the eyelid that leaves and above it.
Therefore, in this situation, you should consider it when the lump is proceeding within it from under the eyelid and is hard to all parts; and the cause of it is minor.
Then make an incision over it for the width, and then carefully probe it from all sides with ease until it drains out, and then lift it with forceps and remove that.
And if the shape is large, then you adjust it with stitches; and take care of that until it heals.
And if it is small, there will not be any harm in that as the warmth of it restores that and causes it to heal.
And if the lump declines towards the inner parts of the eyelid, you should remove it from within the surface; then cut open the eyelid and lift out the lump with forceps, or another one that you use for incisions, press it from all sides, and if the eyelid is stretched by incision, this does not signify any cause.
And near the incision, wash the eye with salty water; and take care of that area until it heals.
Title X
Title X: On the treatment of excoriation on the eyelid above the eye.
Excoriation is a greyish condition that arises in the tissues of the eyelid above, and more so for children, it intensifies their tears leading to blurred vision; thus they cannot see the brightness of sunlight due to the tearing up of their eyes.
And you often use those to rub on their faces continuously, and sleep with them on their faces; and on the eyelids of them, they have wet eyebrows which are already covered by swelling and the apparent tendency for excoriation is in the eyes; and when you press that area with your fingers, you hear scratching sounds coming from those.
And one way of treatment is that the foot rests its head on your finger, then place a cloth under it and apply butter oil, make a circle according to the quantity which contains pus from all parts, then place this over that area and press with your fingers from all sides so that scratching sound accumulates in the middle of the circle. Then at the center of that moisture, make an incision for width, and the incision should not be larger than the one made in a lymph node excision.
When you are in the preparatory phase for cutting open the abdomen, you must completely cut it throughout where you reach the navel. Afterward, in the later positions during surgery, proceed to make a cut through the wound following the shape of white fatty tissue.
So extract those in the sheets which you have enveloped between your fingers towards the parts outside, and rotate with your right and left hand until they are dispersed.
And remember not to tighten in the wound so that blood does not accumulate and cause discomfort there.
When it is not at your will in the beginning of cutting through the wound, then adjust in the wound a little aid so that you can proceed with cutting; and further extract that which we have said; and further submerge cloths for him in water and wine and spread them over the area, pause those on the spot and strengthen those with powders.
And thus that they sprinkle salt and pause that in the cavity of the wound so that what is soaked with that moisture.
And further, treat it until it heals.
So if an abscess occurs in the spot, then treat it with plaster bandages until it heals.
Chapter xi.
On methods of bleeding.
When in the eyelids of the eyes there are natural warts and they have become old, then these cause harm to the eyes leading to conditions like frequent tears and inflammation of the eyelids and inner eye area which is known as bleeding of the eye (tactinir del huel). Treatment for this can be done in four ways: through cautery with fire; or by using acute medicine as mentioned earlier in the section on cautery; or it can be treated with bleeding without cautery through incision and suture; or through needles according to what I am saying.
And when you make the cut to place your finger at the eye level; then turn the eyelid of the eye with your left hand, and if it is turned, then yes; and if not, insert a needle into that part where pus is present under the eyelid, and let the needle penetrate through this point above. And thus, near the margin of the eyelid in which warts appear, near the warts, pull out the thread from the parts above on the eyelid, and turn it back to its original position.
And afterwards, you make the cut in the inner part of the eyelid with the warts aligned towards the major lacrimal ducts at the level of the lacrimal sac; then remove the thread and spread a petal or sheet powder on the eyelid. Apply this to the eyelid tentatively until it looks like a mirethron leaf.
But when you make the cut, according to the amount of deflation of the eyelid, which has already diversified in humans, those who are such that they bleed excessively from the eyelid according to the amount for which the eyelid becomes softened.
And afterwards you apply it over the two lines where you have marked, starting from the major lacrimal to the minor lacrimal. And if your cut is close to the natural skin, as in the thickness of a king's throne.
And then place the needle in one of the two corners of the abdomen, and thoroughly scrape that area. Then adjust it according to the stitches, both lips towards the stomach or on a thin thread under the needle, clean away any pus, and let stick whatever excess is from the threads over two eyebrows with some causes of irritation if you want to do this; otherwise, do not treat it.
And after that, examine the stitches of the threads three days or four, and then treat accordingly.
And if you wish, let the wound and its stitches heal naturally, treat it with things that dry and constrict, so that the eyelid is elevated, you should seal the wound and add to him; yet stitches are better. Thus always do as the ancients taught.
But regarding this matter in him about the eye, it is a good operation, and not out of fear.
And there is another method for confirmation, and it involves marking on the eyelid in such a way that it resembles a mirethron leaf, and then raising the eyelid by three fingers laid out consecutively according to this form:
If it is not possible to do this way, hold the nails, and if this is unequal, then take an awl in which there is a thread and insert that into the middle of the figure, and place the other needle near the major lacrimal duct, and the second needle near the minor lacrimal duct. Adjust between your fingers the needles equally, and next to those raise your hand as high as possible equal to them, lift up the entire string over which the pain is felt just like we have recounted.
And adjust the two edges of the wound for suture, and treat that which is being healed so it becomes healthy.
If an abscess occurs, you should start with your incision or your cut; but treat that abscess with bandages and make it resemble yours, and apply the ointment.
And some cuts under the eyelid where their hairs have to be removed, then take care that you use in that the one we said for incision; but sew with what is more artificial on those that are more so.
Remove the canals like this: And this is how you convert the eyelid and divide the figure inside as I recounted; next perform with skill two canals or two subtle stars of which length will be according to the length of the eyelid, and their width slightly less than the width of the nose. And you have already incised at the extremities of each part, where you have the threads.
And add with subtlety under what is superfluous of the eyelid of the dog, and tighten the threads of each part firmly, and let that area rest for a few days; so that through the tightening the thread will die and be rejected, and it will fall into place when it does so naturally.
If it is delayed, then break the threads at the sutures, and treat that wound so it becomes healthy.
So when it has become solid, the eyelid is lifted and the hairs do not poke.
And this is how you perform two canals which you will do according to this method: and let the quantity of length and width neither exceed nor fall short.
Chapter XII.
For the removal of painful hairs in the dog with an awl when the hair is hard.
When the hairs are unnatural, hard and prickly on the dog's body, then in this operation you should take a subtle awl and place it at that point of this subtle needle and lion. And next, when adjusting the ends of it, press them with dexterity in a delicate manner. And let the length of the needles be as long as your palm.
And then you prepare another subtle needle under it quickly, and if you want, press the ends of that too.
And then place the dog's head in your lap and near the sun so that your work is shown clearly, for it is a subtle and small operation.
And then insert the needle into the root of the hair that needs a tool, and let it pierce the eyelid smoothly while you remove that above the natural hair.
And then pull the hair inwards and insert it until it's tight, and let the hairs be one or two or three but not more.
And then pull your hand into that until the hair is pulled out tightly inside the eyelid through the opening made by the natural hair.
If it has been pulled out tightly and the hair is not gone, pull tightly on those parts with the needle you made for that until beyond the tight pull from the tool.
And then remove that with the dog's view, so hereafter you will pull it tightly and the needle, and shave all and clean its body, and let the skin rest for two or three days, so that the hair adheres to its place and grows back good flesh.
And if the hair is shorter than the natural hairs, then adjust a long hair from the natural ones, and lift it up to that, or leave it so that it grows about some space further on, and then lift it.
Chapter XIII.
For the treatment of excretion which occurs above the eyelid.
When excretion occurs in the dog, it is the contraction of the eyelid when it tightens at its edges or on the right or left side, due to improper healing or scarring or from a cautery burn. It's called porcupine-like, and this excretion can be natural or accidental; it happens due to proper healing or scarring or from burns resembling them.
The method of the operation in this case is that you should cut through that contraction and separate those parts from it, then place a piece of lint fabric between them, and bind those so they heal.
And do not cover where you use the healing treatment from the causes that dry out, it must be tight; so if you do this, excretion will be worse than nothing for any amount of time.
Use from those causes that moisten in such a way as fennel, and soak it in the water with finely chopped it or oil of castor, which should be mixed with some of the oil, then soak the lint fabric in this, and treat it.
And your treasure in your treatment is to pierce through all that is not yet hardened according to the shape I will describe at the beginning.
This operation which we have described is merely a correction of the hernia that does not return to its original form according to how it was before.
Capitol Chapter XIV.
On the treatment of hernias which are performed in the eyelid, let us proceed.
This hernia which occurs in the eyelid, called vertically herniated hernia; it is of two kinds, one natural, the other accidental.
The accidental one is caused by injury, cut, cautery or other similar occurrences.
And the way of performing this operation is: take a needle with a double thread, insert it into the flesh and make it pass from the left lacrimal to the right one, so that the thread reaches both ends of the flesh.
And extend the flesh to the parts above on the side of the needle and where the needle is, make an incision wide open. And then if it returns to its original shape as usual, that is good; and otherwise take hold of the fold and place the needle in the split figure, and with that turn the eyelid, making both cuts on the back of the eyelid.
And let the ends of the two cuts be at two corners of the incision you've made between them, and make an angle from there so that when they meet, a figure is formed by them.
And this figure is the Greek letter: the lambda.
And remove that piece of flesh as much as the length of your needle from there, so that it keeps the eyelid.
And adjust the separated parts, sew those with the thread of wool; and cure those with what we have said about restorative medicines and baths so that they heal.
And if the hernia has occurred due to a cut, stitch or cautery, then proceed to make a flat incision on the skin of the eyelid as previously mentioned. And afterwards, separate with a bath between two lips as we have said.
In the sum of the speech on treating hernias above or below, let the operation flow according to its form in your hands, and that is in the shape of different masses.
And all skilled artisans always prepare tools in every way that is possible for them to return the shape to its natural form, or close enough to it, and according to what suits you from the operation and the instruments among their best arrangements.
Capitol Chapter XV.
On the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
When this kind of solidification happens in many people, it means that the eyelid has thickened above on the albumin layer, and is prohibited from ease of movement and its natural functions. So proceed to insert the tip of your finger under the eyelid, then raise it up or extend it onto your thumb.
And then proceed to make a thin incision for the adhesion, which is not at the sharpness of the cuts, having made it blunt enough so that the patient does not become anxious about the operation, and retain the flap that does not deteriorate the eye on its sharpness.
And let your incision carefully remove that adhesion with ease so that the eyelid returns to its natural shape and all the adhesion is healed.
And then put into the eye salty water that you wash with, or distil from junia dissolved in water.
And afterwards separate between the eyelid and the eye with an ointment bath, place on the eye infused wool in the protein of sweat, and over several days use baths that consolidate until it is healed.
Capitol Chapter XVI.
On cutting the tear duct and elevation of flesh of the lacrimal areas.
Know that the nose can be done in two ways, one is nervous and resembles a hard delicate cypress; or it's non-nervous, resembling white sticky moisture. When you touch it, if it causes the patient to grasp onto your finger, it is removed, and the finger does not stick in them.
And both types only start from the major tear duct, gradually spreading over the vision and prohibiting light and eye movement.
The method of performing the cut is that the patient holds their head in the place they are, opens their eyes, raises the eyelid with your hand, and then gathers the nose onto a small duplicate finger and extends it upwards. And then take a needle and insert a piece of horse, ox, cow or similar skin, or gradually double the end of the needle and place it in the middle of the nose, penetrate that with the needle, tie the nose to the finger; extend that upwards, cut from the skin at the back of the nose which keeps the pupil. And then follow that into the hair where it enters him.
And then proceed to cut the remaining in the root of the tear duct with a thin incision or small V-shaped cuts, removing the natural flesh of the lacrimal area so that by cutting it, no continuous flow of tears occurs.
And sometimes the nose is extended under the sun's finger or under the hand as we've said, and then it is removed with a V-shaped incision, which has this form:
And make sure not to touch the peritoneum with the spatula, avoid rupture in him, and prevent the pupil from being pierced.
Near the incision remains in the mouth for a little salted or raw meat cooked from savory spices, and let that stay inside until another day; and take care to see that what is eaten during this period heals.
And if the nail is not sensitive and you cannot put the needle in there, or it's not pierced at that particular location on the foot, then using this type of nail with medicines heals it, and it is healed just like I have described and recommended in the division.
And if you want to divide that [meaning a tissue or organ], then open the cleft of the leg and take out a fine, sharp spoon according to this form: with subtlety. And if you notice that it has become thin and mixed with dirt or sand, then distill from your mouth into the savory meat cooking pot or into the raw meat broth or into salted water, and leave the cleft open until another day.
And during this operation iterate over it until everything that is yours has been removed, otherwise pus will accumulate in the cleft, and then you leave it, and take care of the pus until it heals.
And continue with your operation on that according to reason until it is healed.
The discharging of the lacrimal flesh, if it causes great harm in the cleft, should be suspended until morning; and cut out a part from that, and do not finish your incision so as not to cut off any discharge of tears.
And continue by distilling over the lacrimal savory broth and cooking it until it is healed.
Chapter XVII.
Regarding the incision of a hernia and what is born from flesh pressed into the cleft.
Some cautery marks on the eyelids have been born from pressed flesh and are over-pressured until they cover the pupil, or come close to it or strengthen near the eyelashes. They compress the eyelashes against the parts forwards and are assembled like the edge of a baluster.
The operation is such that the leg pauses its head in your field of vision; and then open the eyelids of that area and gather all that flesh with needles or scissors; and cut the flesh at the beginning until everything is finished by the scalpel, and make sure not to let that part descend. You should complete your operation.
And if your incision is like the one where you cut those [meaning muscles] or with a spatula which we have recommended in the cutting of the nail, or with small forceps by which you gather scissors according to how it will come to this chapter.
And when your incision is completed and all that flesh has been removed, then fill the cleft with salted water, or distill it with powdered savory spice resembling those of corrosive medicines, and place on the cleft from the corner a piece of duck's albumin until there is assurance of pus formation.
And if there is any reason for hernia and it has been surgically corrected with cautery, and you fear pus formation in the cautery area, then leave the cleft open and take care of that pus formation with water that dissolves that pus. And continue to operate on that according to your operation until it heals, similarly do this for the flesh pressed into this type's cleft.
However, you should know that the cure of the cleft is removed through natural or accidental means via iron, and do not put your hand into any of these operations while you notice that this member is suffering this operation.
Chapter XVIII.
Regarding the collection in the cleft.
Sabel refers to those tough veins that are found in the cleft and prevent you from performing surgery on them; they allow the cleft to heal over a period of days.
So it is necessary at the beginning that you consider if the cleft where there is Sabel is strong and in it there is no other illness but Sabel, then you gather that Sabel.
And you command the leg to pause its head in your field of vision, and suspend those veins on one needle or two according to your judgment; let that needle be made with double subtlety as follows:
or two needles gradually in one body as follows:
And gather those veins with subtle forceps, with subtlety, and remove the cautery as soon as possible, until you see that these veins are being discharged from the cleft and are being expelled.
And make sure not to let the cleft touch the ends of the spatula. And if your operation is in the middle of the day facing the sun, and you are firmly focused on your operation, do not cut any veins other than these ones.
And when you have completed, then distill over the cleft with green or savory broth so that its sharpness corrodes what has been discharged from the Sabel.
If it is not possible for you to gather all in that hour, then cover everything with what soothes the pain of this, and leave it for a few days until the pain of this subsides and there is assurance of pus formation.
And continue to operate on it according to your mother's method until it heals.
And this is the way of the saws:
Head Chapter Nineteen.
On returning hernias to the nose.
When you treat hernias with a cautery or with acute burning medicine according to the described process of the patient and if it is not cured, then there is no need in them but you should make incisions over the abscess. And you must extract all the moisture which is inside the patient and place the cauterizing agent when the wound has been exposed, so that the bone may be uncovered.
And when the bone is exposed and there appears corruption or blackness in your body, then you need to treat it with a powder of which this is the form:
And it is called hard powder, and it is made of iron indigo, and its head is red also like the asir which is made punctured by saw-cut or finely ground through fine grinding (like in the following form).
And place that over the corrupted area of the bone, and then gently rotate it with your fingers, and press your hand little by little until you know that that corruption is flattened.
And make it into some powders, and then restore the area from causes of desiccation and vasoconstriction.
So if the area has consolidated and is in your patient's good flesh and the source of the malady has been completely excised for forty days, and it does not recur or any accident happens to you, then you will know that it is cured.
But if not, then it is not in your patient's body but to reduce the wound to the form of the nose, and according to this method: you must uncover from bone with iron or with acute medicine, when the bone is uncovered, then take hold according to this form:
Let the end of your iron be triangular, and the main part of it be initially expanded inside the extremity as seen here.
And place that over the bone, let it be close to the lacrimal; and extend your hand a little beyond your nose, and then rotate your hand towards the tool so that it penetrates all the bone, and you feel the patient's head when his hand comes in contact with yours.
So then restore the area with vasoconstrictive medicines that dry out like these.
So when the flesh and the area have hardened, then the material that flowed out to the parts goes back to the nose, therefore it is little pus on the head.
Head Chapter Twenty.
On reducing the prominence of the nose.
When the nose is entirely prominent and there is no occurrence of swelling or diminution, then you should cover it with the head, and then proceed as follows: make incisions in the neck's scarification area and bleed well through good bleeding; then place liniment over the nose made from garlic and aloe and ointment and sarsaparilla, and finally strengthen the plaster on the nose with powder.
And the way of powders is that you take cloths made of linen moss, and each cloth should be divided into four squares; then make from those mosses.
And then place those one on top of the other according to the quantity required by the nose. And then strengthen them with a thick bandage over the powders; and repeat the suction with bleeding in the neck's incisions; and leave the suction and smooth the nose strengthened all day and night.
May this way if while the ligament is softened, then cover it so that it is strongly tightened.
And continue to hold the ligament all day and night as we have said.
And if the nose is already reduced, then it's good, but if not, continue to apply the plaster with powders and bandage with suction until it heals.
Head Chapter Twenty-one.
On the operation for reducing the prominence of the conjunctive tissue.
When there is disruption in the conjunctive tissue, and it protrudes outward like a bit of fat, and takes on the shape of oneself through this method, and you want to operate on this, then the operation on them will be as we have prescribed, that you insert the needle into the fold of the uvea at the point left in the part above, and then insert another needle with twice the width of the lacrimal part, and make it penetrate and smooth out the first needle according to its position; and then cut the double filament area and lift the part of the uvea around the needle in the circuit of the needle, and strengthen that with powder.
And then remove the needle and place wool soaked in egg white over the nose, smoothing it so that the filament falls into the eye.
And continue to treat the nose with this method until the wound heals completely.
And add some powders around the entire part in a circle over the nose to adjust the prominence greatly, and then make it pierced with a fine needle that goes to the tip of the nose, allowing the moisture to flow towards the eye white, and lower the nose slightly.
And continue strengthening until it heals completely.
Head Chapter Twenty-two.
On the treatment of conjunctivitis.
This illness called conjunctivitis is simply an eye disease that resembles water dripping from the nose and it's not this one.
The way to act in this situation is that you make the patient lie on the padded bed and straighten their body, then place your hands on both sides of them and push inwards where you saw the disease entering the parts you were treating, ensuring it doesn't descend and stays upright. The patient would see the causes of illness as they perceived them.
And if it does not descend to the knees, know that it is water.
If it is not prepared for the descent of the disease to water, then make the patient lie between your hands and take a subtle spatula which you place under them on the eyelid, looking for a little in front of the continuity of the conjunctiva towards the corneal coat in the crown (into the location you want). Inside where it is expelled by the disease.
Once it is expelled, then you distil in the smell of hot water in which you have mixed honey or water in which you have already boiled fenugreek and honey.
And treat the other causes until he is healed.
Chapter XXII.
On the treatment of water descending through the channel.
We have already discussed the species of water in division and which one is suitable to be used when declaring the illness, then use that according to their health.
Then take care when making the patient lie on them between their hands on a mattress and hold their head straight.
And place your right hand close to the eyelid of their eye, if the eye is where the water is, it's the left eye; or with your right hand, if the eye is on the right.
And place your left hand with your left hand take the almond, if the eye is on the left side; or with your right hand, if the eye is on the right.
And place the tip of the almond close to the crown by the swelling of the eye in the area of the eyelid's album next to the tear duct, and scrape off the almond from its base and rotate your hand towards it.
And penetrate into the area of the eye's album and feel that the almond has already been expelled due to blindness.
And take care that the size of the almond's path to the pupil is comparable to the distance from the edge of the darkness to the end of the blackness, which is the eye area; you will see in that area where the eye perceives light through the clarity of the corneal coat.
And place the almond in the spot where there is water, then gently pull it down once or twice, and if the water descends immediately, then make the patient lie on their side so they can see through their eye as soon as possible, with the almond under their eyelid.
And take a small rest; if the water has descended, then remove that almond before you can remove the almond again.
And when it is settled and does not descend, then remove the almond gently, rotate your hand little by little towards it, and in that water dissolve a small piece of clear gemstone salt and with that wash inside the eye; and take care to wipe out the eye using a cloth or cotton dipped in oil-rubbed fat and albumen, washing your eye with it.
We may take those of our time who, like a thistle in the eyelid's album.
And if your almond does not fit into the eye due to its hardness - which is characteristic of some individuals whose eyes are stiff - then take care that you use the spatula named 'albirid' as described:
And pierce that conjunctiva with it, and do not finish your hand on the tear duct, and do not do so unless you make a path to the almond's subtle location.
And gently insert the almond as we have said.
And you should complete your work by having the patient lie down to allow for a natural descent of the body while they sleep on their back in a dark room, and forbid any movements.
And take care of the nature of this water for it to be purified in its nature, and do not let their head rest on either side of their body.
And place them according to their position within the morning ritual.
And gently open that in this dark room and expose the clouded vision, let them see some causes, then return them to their usual routine on the seventh day.
And take care not to do this during the time of treatments or immediately after bathing. Have it that you remove this water for oneself, so the water can pass gently through great and intense observation.
If it happens that a boil forms, then have it that you open the eye before the seventh day, and correct that with water that allows for pus to drain.
Then take care to remove their sight and place your hand on the mouth area of their face, through which regulate the discharge from their tears for a few days, existing in the dark room.
And gently move this darkness and discuss them about their causes.
And know that even if a student cannot see for some days, then you should be diligent about the operation.
And we have come to understand some of those who are in the Artax, and someone said that they should make fire with a perforated almond where water is expelled.
However, I have not seen anything quite like this in our land, nor is it fully detailed in any of the ancient books; and it's possible that this is new.
And these are the methods for using different types of herbs, so that one can apply them to those situations where one is ignorant about those matters:
And whether it's from an herb or iron specifically, and let the ends of these be this triangular subtlety, the sharp end thus as that is the shape.
Chapter XXIV
Regarding the treatment of flesh wounds, nothing happens in the nose.
When there are diverse cuts in the nose from which one can cause a disease that gathers at the pus of the nose or at a nose polyp; this illness is called a polyp that resembles that part of the nose. And when his flesh is cancerous, mottled, of dark color; and when it is that the flesh is lion's, not of dark color.
So in that which is in these lion's flesh and not deceitful or cancerous, understand that when you make the patient sweat between your hands and place them under the sun, and open their nostrils, pinch yourself with an onion in those areas. And then remove that from the parts forward, and then proceed to dissect what you have understood from those in a sharp, fine substance between one part where you know that all the flesh has been exposed; if there is any cause of concern for which excision is possible, then do this with this tool among the subtle instruments so that it can remove the cause that remains. If you are masterful in discharging or drawing pus from an abscess, then pause for the patient; or if it's of malign abscesses, then you cauterize that within which the discharge occurs and all cavities have been opened.
And proceed to insert water or blood in the nose near the incision site. If you have opened the nose and there is moisture inside the palate from it, then you know that it has been healed.
If the moisture doesn't penetrate as you sweat, then understand that inside him is flesh nothing but in the pus you will not find bones of the nostrils where excision has not been performed.
So when you sweat, introduce a faithful substance from him where there is any lump, and use his own pus as the liquid, pausing between each nut with the quantity of the said or monthly period, and encourage the patient to move one end of the faith in the nostrils at the ray or for some other cause which is possible for him.
And when this has been done, draw his smell so that it penetrates into the canals of the nostrils, and let him rest on his pillow, what makes children vomit from the ears often accompanies this action, and it's a light reason for those who want to do it.
And then pause the two ends of the faith, one end that sticks out over the nose and the other that comes into the nose, and proceed to apply flesh bandage on the pus that is inside the faith, and do this so that you understand that the flesh is already around the pus in the faith.
And then extract the faith, pause in the nose near the discharge of pus with a spoon, and do this for three days or more until all that has hardened from the flesh is removed.
And at the end of the treatment, pause in the nose with a lead catheter for several days until it is healed.
If you are dealing with a curative discharge that dries up, use that one.
And this is the form of the device for nose purger that distills oils and medicines in the nostrils:
And make it of silver or an herb, which resembles a small opened lamp, like a small cup, and the metal similarly.
And if you want, make a closed catheter like a cane, and the catheter of this device for nose purger is flat, open; on which there should be a handle at the rear of it, with which you hold that when you immerse in oil or whatever you want from the essences and susceptible causes.
Chapter XXV
Regarding nosebleeds from the ends of the nose.
Causes that are associated with nosebleeds in the ends of the nose, it is magnified and smeared over several days until a cure is found for him.
And because of this understand that you have inserted it in the beginning of his appearance, and extract all of it. And then pause on the spot or with a cautery or burning medicine where there is pain.
If the discharge takes longer than usual until it is magnified, then consider whether it is hard, dark in color and of little feeling; in that case, do not touch it with iron which causes pus from a bad abscess; for the reasons associated with you discharging this abscess under his great mischief on him.
And if the abscess is yellow in color and not of dark shade, and when it's possible to start cutting throughout that area, then discharge the patient and cut out that suspicious lump, and treat the site where it discharges until it's healed.
Chapter or section title: XXVI
On the suturing of the nose, and of the lips, and of the earlobe when continuity is dissolved by disease or by injury.
Know that when a solution of continuity occurs in one of these cartilages, you should not perform the operation on it rather than some men.
Then, when you need to attend on someone due to one of those reasons, consider if there is a fresh disease affecting him, and then adjust the two lips of the disease with suturing, and afterwards treat that site until it's healed.
And if the lips of solution of continuity are already separated and some is made healthy, then cut that you scrape off every part of his inner flesh until there's no disease. And then adjust the two lips with suturing and strengthen them, and spread dragon's disease powder on those areas after mixing it well, and place a small amount of tallow on top of the powder. Then cover that area with a plaster (of dayfinicon or another consolidating plaster), wrap it for 2 days or 3 days, then remove it and replace the plaster. Treat it with an ointment until it's healed.
The method for suturing is that you add the solution of continuity or with needles as we have recommended in the suturing of the abdomen, or add the solution of continuity with a piece of flesh and let it know.
Chapter 27
On the extraction of those causes that occur within the two lips in their internal parts.
Marks observed in internal parts of men's lips certain hard abscesses resembling fat lumps, and some are softer while others are larger.
Then cut the lips and cavities of each of those hard lumps from every part, and fill the area with fine sawdust until the disease is strengthened, then wash it with warm water and treat the site until it becomes dry.
Chapter 28
On cutting the adjusted flesh in the gums.
Notice that white marks may appear on the adjusted gum which the ancients called "albula", so cut it off with a string or what you have ready, then cut its root and let it bleed until it stops or until the disease ceases.
And place on that with fine sawdust or othering or astringent powders.
And if that flesh returns, then cut it again, and apply the cautery to it, so that the application of the cautery will not return.
Chapter 29
On the reason for teeth with iron.
When in the surface of the teeth both inside and on the front side, as well as between the gums, there are sharp, rough edges, some marks are blackish and occur yellow or green within which they cause corruption to the gum, leading to the formation of iron-like teeth.
And then cut between your servants and place their heads in that spot, and grind the teeth where those rough edges appear along with these other causes within which none of them should cause any damage. Do this for both blackness and yellowishness as well as others until they are changed.
And if that is sufficient as in those of the consumption of the reason, good; otherwise, then continue this process on those another day and the second and the third until it reaches your final conclusion where you want.
Know that teeth have required various forms of resin and different figures according to how your operation is prepared. And by so, for the razor that makes the tooth as the inside part of the tooth is to be shaved, it's another one than the razor that shaves between the teeth according to other forms, and these forms of razors must be prepared by you which you will see shortly:
Chapter 30
On the eradication of teeth.
And cut that you treat the tooth with all remedies and delays in the total extraction of it, for there's no cause to remove its disease when it is extracted, as it's a substance which evaporates during its extraction.
And when the servant's disease is forced on that tooth to be extracted, you must firmly certify which tooth causes pain, as visible marks of pain separate the disease from healthy teeth and fall within diseased but painful tooth. You extract it and then the pain doesn't cease until the diseased and painful tooth is removed, which we have seen in operation of warts.
And how you should certify which tooth causes pain, and as you know it well, then cut off in the circuit of the tooth at the gap where there's any lump, until it dissolves from the gum tooth on every part, and take that out with your knives or thin forks gradually until that is scraped clean.
And then cut through it forcefully with large prongs for good speaking or breaking force, place the servant's head between your thumbs so you can hold them without hurting us, and adjust the tooth according to right manner so that you don't scratch it, nor give more pain to the servant who doesn't feel major pain.
And if it is not yet relieved, then take one of those instruments, and place that cushion under him from all sides with ease, striving for the removal of him in such a way that it starts as soon as possible.
If the tooth is broken or corroded, then fill that space with a cloth and press it at the tip of the delicate area in such a way that it does not get stuck during your compression on that side; hold them.
And make the incisions exquisitely on scarification across the entire part of the gum tissue and preserve your strength so that you do not pierce it and break off a portion of him, then return to the patient due to malice greater than his first pain.
And remember not to do what the ignorant barbers do in their rashness and boldness regarding the eradication of this; they don't apply what we have recommended. Their misguided efforts cause serious illnesses in men, which are more difficult than they can be made to break out again, and all or some of their roots become harder, or some that you remove from certain bones in the jaw as we have testified.
And after the eradication of it, rinse your mouth with vinegar or add salt to it.
And if there are discharges from the gums for this reason, like pus sores might do, then apply a certain quantity of vinegar and sprinkle it over the wound. If that vinegar doesn't work, apply heat treatment with a cautery.
The form of the forceps and delicate tongs with which tooth extraction begins is long at the extremity, short at the handle and thick, in such a way that they do not bend when using those tools.
And may they be such that in the midst of thick handles, when you press them with those ones, they are not bent, and their extremities are short.
And they should be made of iron from India, with straight handles. The extremities of those ones have teeth on which one slides into the other and press by gradual force during use, some of them being like the bill of a pelican, they are called storks, and they are made of strong construction.
Title: Thirty-one
Regarding tooth extraction and the removal of broken bones from the jaws.
When you need to extract the broken tooth, then place yourself above the spot with your hand or for two days while that place is softened; and then intervene with your strength or use the tongs which are assembled like the bill of a stork or crane, in the shape of forceps:
The extremities of these should be made inside like a file or an almond.
And if you do not follow your judgment with these forceps or tongs, then place yourself on the root and remove all the flesh, then insert the tool which is called an awl; this tool has such a form:
And may have a short extremity that is thick and small, and should not be bent because it should not break.
So if the root is already extracted by this method, well done; and otherwise, help yourself with these other tools whose forms are as follows: the first tool has a triangular extremity in which there is some thickness:
The form of the second tool is that it should be triangular and have a more delicate extremity.
And already you can help yourself with this tool having two ramps, of which this is the form approximately like the following: and with other tools which are used in tooth scraping; when youth is performed with this tool that resembles an old man, and here is the form:
of a triangular twisted or short extremity, which should have some thickness, and should not be bent because it should not break.
And you must know that the tools for removing teeth are similar to other tools.
And the craftsmen are wise and subtle in their art, they find out for themselves according to what this operation means and the various illnesses; which are of the illnesses that the ancients would not describe or use a proper tool for, due to the different forms of species.
And if the bone of the jaw or other bones in the mouth is broken, then place your weight on it at its location with that which suits him according to the tools and forceps we have said about in tooth extraction, and help yourself with this gesture where this is the form:
And have some small thickness gradually, and hold it or keep it in your mouth so that it doesn't escape or go inside until the bone is fully extracted; then restore the place with suitable medicines for this.
And if there is a small pus in the bone, then remove that from that pus and its darkness, and cure it within until it heals.
Title: Thirty-two
Regarding the treatment of prominent teeth over others.
When teeth are prominent not according to their natural form and that shape is laga, especially when they protrude in women and more so in older noblewomen; then place yourself to consider: if the tooth is very close to another tooth, and it's impossible for extraction or medication of him, then leave it alone; but if it isn't attached to another tooth, then you should incise that with this tool whose form resembles a piglet, and is made of Indian iron at its extremity with a sharp edge.
And if your initial effort is to cut that repeatedly over several days due to the hardness of the tooth, and not to be an excised part of the teeth.
And if it is a tooth that has been extensively ground down on the drill, then grind that with an Indian steel file of which this is the shape:
It is all of Indian iron and the handle is made of wood; it has metal points such as those used on a file with needles, through which the tooth is gradually ground down in pieces of soft days for ease, so that no other tooth becomes excised and falls out. Then draw it there at the tip, and cut it with some razor blades.
And if it is a tooth where part has been extracted and the tongue touches it, then hollow out that inside where the roughness of that fraction is covered and smoothed, and ensure it's filled in such a way that the tongue doesn't irritate nor the word gets corrupted.
Chapter XXXIII.
On restoring excised teeth with a golden or silver plug.
When it happens that the teeth occur before concussion and removal by impact or impact, and the patient cannot stand on what they chew due to this, and you have treated that with styptic medicines, but your treatment has not worked, then for them not to fall out again, you should try metal plugs in their place instead of silver, which turns black. Leave it for some days near silver, however never change it for gold as long as there is no need to.
And let the plug have such subtlety and coarseness according to the amount that can enter between the teeth; as for the shape of the plug, take the plug and hold twice its length between two healthy teeth. Then make it grow in between the curves of the plug on both sides of an excised tooth or several, so that the thread reaches the healthy tooth from the other part. And then repeat the threading into the part where you started, and strengthen your hand with ease so that there is no excision.
And if your thread is the one to which you tighten the plug, make sure not to move the teeth that are being treated.
And then cut off the excess ends of the plug with forceps or trim it, and place those in every position, and mix them between healthy teeth and excised teeth to prevent harm to the tongue. And then straighten that one like it was done with a Roman tool.
If it has slipped or broken, strengthen that one or those with another plug in such a manner throughout its process.
And this is the form of teeth and the figure for the correction of two healthy teeth and two excised ones, like these bound together:
And when it comes to returning one or two teeth back in their usual places, and they have grown back as we have described, and then grow again.
And do not let that happen; rather, let only skilled artisans and wise people handle it.
And some illnesses are attributed to causes in cattle bones, and it is made from them like the shape of a tooth, placed at the spot where the tooth has failed, strengthened in this manner as we have said, remains and serves for a long time.
Chapter XXXIV.
On the thread that enters the tongue and prevents speech.
This thread which leaves the tongue in some illnesses or is natural since birth, or accidentally happens due to an injury where the one already has become consolidated.
And the operation on you is that you open the mouth of the patient, at its peak existing in your sight; and raise their tongue, then cut that thread nerve according to its width where the tongue's recent position was dissolved.
If there is any hardness or knot in that one, and this has been due to the consolidation of an injury, then you heat it with a small tool and cut it through its width where you have cut the thread nerve, until the knot dissolves.
And make sure not to create a crack in the front of the flesh, cut here and let blood flow.
And then wash the remnants of the cut with vinegar or with a salted water, or with a rubbing water; and let the patient rest their tongue for a while; so when they clean themselves at night by the patient's side, it is hoped that another illness does not become consolidated.
If blood flows out, place pressure on the cut; but if the blood stops, then treat that spot with an iridescent cautery which you apply to this one. And let healing happen through other causes until it is healed.
Chapter XXXV.
On the extraction of a ulcer on the tongue.
Some illnesses happen on the tongue that resemble small ulcers, preventing the tongue from its normal operation; and it becomes larger as it fills up the mouth.
And the operation on you is to open the mouth of the patient facing south towards the sun and observe the ulcer.
And if you see it of a dark color or black, hard, which the patient does not feel any emotion about, then do not touch that which is raw.
And if it has changed to whiteness, in which there is moisture, then you insert the small tool into it, cut that with a fine spade, and cut all around; and if blood begins flowing during your operation, then you stop on this part, so where glass is placed, until the bleeding stops.
And then return to your work where you have previously treated it with respect for him, in a place where he is washed with warm water and salt; and take care of that with another treatment during which he becomes healed.
Chapter xxxvi.
On the extraction of pus from both ears and that which is nothing in the groin, and on other abscesses.
When you encounter in the groin area, those are glands that are gathered like cotton, which tend to be found outside and are named as the two ears. When you treat them as we have said in the division and they do not heal, then you should consider if the abscess is hard, of a dark color, with little sensation, then do not touch that with iron.
And if it is of reddish color and the root is thick, then do not touch that with iron for fear of bleeding; wait until it softens inside as it matures, and then either you will puncture that, or it will burst on its own.
And if it is of white color, round, and the root of him is delicate, then that is likely to be infectious.
And the operation on him is that you consider, before your operation, whether the abscess has rested from being cauterized or if it has diminished with some diminution; then have the patient lie down facing the sun, his head toward you, open his mouth, and a servant takes between their hands the tongue of him placing it on an instrument made noble by this form:
And make it out of silver or gold, and let it be thin like a wire.
So when you press upon that tongue and it shows you the abscess, and you place your own finger thereupon, then take anointing oil and apply it to this area, and pull that outwards from the parts as much as possible. Another thing when you remove some cause of the tunics, then carefully use this tool that has this form:
Another thing when you remove some cause of the tunics, then carefully use this tool that has this form: It is similar to forceps, however the extremities of them are curved, so that each one of these has an opening in front of the other, very sharp, which should be made from iron and well hardened.
May this tool not be available to you, then use this from the spatula that has its shape: And it should be sharp on one side, but not on the other.
And once you have incised one part, then incise the other according to this method of incision, and wash the patient with rubbing water.
If there is bleeding, wash with decoction of elderberry or chestnut leaf water, and do so in the way that restricts the flow of blood for the causes of constriction, until the bleeding stops, then take care of it until it heals.
And sometimes, in the groin area, there are other abscesses besides those two ears, and you should incise those according to what I have said about incisions of two wounds at the same time.
And I have already treated a woman for an abscess located in her groin, which was of dark color, with little sensation, the groin had already swollen and enclosed around her groin, and the woman was breathing in difficulty, she had also been prohibited from eating or drinking water, and she had reached the brink of death if she had not been treated for another day or two.
And the abscess was already so large that it contained two fathoms between which it passed through two thighs.
And I surgically removed it and placed him under one of their fingers, then pulled that out, the large portion was released from him. Then I incised where I understood his other thigh, then I made him open his mouth, and held his tongue, then I positioned the finger in that abscess.
And then I removed a large part of him, and there was only a little bit of blood coming from him instead. And the groin of that woman was completely healed, she began drinking water right away, and soon started eating food again. So I did not stop incising from that abscess for a long time, and instead another abscess formed in place of it, which continued to be incised until that lasted.
And thus I went this way and cauterized her groin, therefore it was healed of the addition; and then I wandered around without knowing what God had done to that from this.
Chapter xxxvii.
On the incision of the heel when it is infected.
When the mucus is secreted in the throat, and it is infected and long, then it is named as a perpendicular one. And if it is located on the side of the thick and round part, then it is called a sore throat lump or bubbling.
And when it has been healed as we have said in the division, and your treatment does not improve, and every time pus is cauterized and then stops for him and is delicate, then you should consider that you need to incise where a lump or cluster has aggregated round; and if it goes along that length, and is bloody, of dark color or black, and there is no sensation from him, then you should take care of the incision on him, where there is fear in the patient.
And when you do that according to the way I have said about its whiteness and length, make him open his mouth and press his tongue with an instrument whose shape processes this, then place your finger in the new area, pull that outwards and incise it with one of the two instruments which are mentioned in the incision of two wounds.
And know that you should not insert it anywhere but where it is adjusted above the natural limit of its addition, for if you insert it further from him, you will harm his speech.
And when inserting, use the one we have recommended in the insertion of two bellows, and cure that inside so that it is healed.
If it was the patient frightened by the insertion, know that you should use the engine in the cautery of him and his fear, and the manner of the cautery on him is nothing but to water, and it is that you place the head of the patient at your side, and then press the tongue of him against the tool we said, and take water from the one we said in the section for cautery, and apply it to this cause live, and pause this not thick nor subtle, and with this fill the cavity of the tool which has this form:
Let the part of him that has been returned in which medicine is placed as in the cavity of a reed, and place the tool with the medicine on it, and the patient lies on his back so that he can swallow or gargle in his mouth due to the internal medicine, so that nothing comes out from this use and that troubles him.
And place your hand on the medicine, and squeeze it over the uvula for half an hour while you see that thing being degraded and dulled by the chewing of the medicine.
And if you want, take hold of and wrap that around the end of the reed, immerse the cloth in the medicine, insert the reed into the cloth inside a tube where the cloth adheres to that tube, do this as many times as it takes until you get what you want from the cautery of the uvula, and then let that be when it dries up and falls off approximately three or four days later.
And if you need to repeat the medicine, do this again, and after the cautery, clean it in the channel of the uvula with a chewed cloth on the tongue, change that which is in the channel of him in the medicine, wash it with water, cleanse outside with grease, wash inside with gargling substances until it is healed.
And this type of treatment is saved that insertion and far from fear.
Some uvula ailments are treated with that which is subtle and cauterizing and inserting, which is healed with submersion in this manner: gather chamomile, hyssop, rue, thyme, Arabic gum, camomile, broth and similar items among the herbs, adjust all these causes or some of them in a single bath, and let them be submerged in wine; they boil. And the bath is stirred with a ladle, on which a clay pipe is placed according to this manner; it is made of silver or gold.
And insert the end into the mouth of the patient until the steam rises to the uvula above the quill, until the uvula is somewhat dizzy.
And repeat over these dizzy spots until it dries up, and remember that you should not perform this treatment at the onset of abscesses, which would overly affect in the abscess, and do not think that you should do this, but rather declare the abscess-causing condition of him by cautery.
If you do not have this instrument at your disposal, then take a cane and create in the extremity of him a hole for honey, so that the mouth of the patient is covered, because the honeycomb prevents the steam from burning the mouth.
And this treatment is good for health.
Capitol .xxxviii
Chapter XXXVIII:
Dizzy spots stick to the throat or thorns from animals or any other cause.
And you should extract what is evident from those, on which you catch the eye, because when you press the tongue against the tool in front of yourself, it will be declared to you what is in the throat.
And what is not evident and is hidden in the throat, you should make the patient vomit before the food has degraded in the stomach, because a strong cause attached to the throat will get out through vomiting; or have the patient swallow a piece of bread or a lettuce leaf or a mouthful of dry bread; or take a piece of desiccated marine sponge, tie it strongly with a thread, and have the patient swallow that thing, as it goes to where the thorns are located and is extracted, then it will get out. And if you take a snake, drink it with bound thread, and let it be inside the mouth gently pull it out; or take a spoon and gently put it in and gently take it out.
And if they do not get out those causes which we have mentioned, then use an iron tool according to this form:
And it should be slightly thicker than a small one, and in the extremity of him there is a cavity which you insert into his throat for ease.
And have his head raised up high, and remember to touch his bone of the throat, so that it does not affect him badly or that which surrounds it with the bone or thorn, or what the doctor puts on his hand.
But let the patient use honey, through his knowledge of the place of the cause and pierce it gently, and pull his hand with the tool in his hands, all according to the quantity that has been prepared inside so that there is an incision.
Chapter xxxix.
On the extraction of gallstones attached to the gallbladder.
When the gallbladder is treated with what we have discussed in the section of recovery with medicines and it does not respond, consider this for the gallbladder of the patient under the sun. As you understand the tongue of the patient with that tool which we recommended to you.
So if you remove the gallstone, extract it from the bile or from delicate parts gently.
And if it's not possible for you to extract it from there, then take a concave catheter and insert that into the gallbladder of the patient, and place in the concavity of the catheter a heated iron, and do this as many times (as long as the gallstone is dead and comes out of the gallbladder) and keep the patient from drinking water for the whole day.
And then take a basin full of water, and make an incision in that for the patient, and wash the mouth with that; and don't drink any cause from that again, let the water sit next to his hand for an hour each other, as soon as the gallstone feels the water it will come out.
If it is not an incision with what we have recommended, then fumigate the patient with garlic or with asafetida through the tool that we recommended in the fumigation of the uvula.
Do this, so that it may cure.
Another method of operation in fumigation is this: take a plate with the firewood burning on it and cover half of the plate with a cloth containing a hole, place the end of the tool in that hole. Place above the fumigation; have the patient hold their mouth at the end of the catheter, close their mouth so that the fumigation does not create an incision until you know that the fumigation has reached the gallstone, as soon as it comes out.
And if it doesn't come out, then you should repeat the fumigation several times, keep the patient from drinking and eating salty foods and such, and don't drink water, and it is necessary that this regimen be carried out without an incision.
And this is the form of the tool by which gallstones in the gallbladder are treated when they are visible; it resembles tongs like these, except that it has some curvature in his. Which is laid out on the gallbladder, and the end of it resembles a stork's beak that is curved, which is filed with a file, for when you grasp any cause, that does not come loose.
Chapter xl.
Which includes the entire discourse on the treatment of abscesses and in the section about them.
Abscesses are specific types, of various methods, according to their memory recall, from each in this treatise.
And they are diverse in the process of piercing and sectioning them by two methods, of which one is for the specific nature of abscesses themselves; and because we acquire moisture from it.
And the second method is for the locations in which they occur in the body, so that when an abscess happens in the head it is different from an abscess happening in the anus; and the abscess in meaty locations is different from an abscess occurring at a joint; and each one has its own method for operation.
And some abscesses are such that they only need to be covered, not pierced until the healing is mature in those or completion of them.
And other abscesses that need to be cut when they are crossed and have not yet matured according to their completion, such as abscesses near joints, so that when an abscess is near a joint, its being extends until you place this which is in the circuit of it, and strengthens your corrosion of the muscles or nerves of that joint, causing a contraction of that limb; or if it's near the main body member, and if you delay piercing it before it matures, it affects the main member; or if it's near the anus, then pierce the non-matured one; and do not cover where you cut through without completion of digestion, but rather where it is near the anus, so that you don't allow its pus to extend into the divided parts inside the anus and form a fistula, or one made at the end which is not healed. And you should cover when you know the time for the abscess to be pierced, and this is when it has matured.
And you should know that it has matured when there is the cessation of pain and the disappearance of fever, as well as the decrease in redness and pulse, and the sharpness of the head of the abscess, and other signs.
And when you know that it has matured, pierce in the location of pus left by the abscess and from pus coming from the healing of the prominence.
And the piercing should be proportionate to the length of the flesh or body parts, if abscesses are in the locations of breasts or feet, and on spots, in the strings of nerves, arteries; and later, in all equal locations where it doesn't reflect. For those that do reflect, use piercing according to that limb.
When the abscess is in a soft location, then it is customary to confirm the digestion of him after the opening within that has been done until the passage of food and the disappearance of the foul smell is observed; as we have said. If you puncture there ahead of that, it extends the illness of poverty and sordidness through the body, and hardens his muscles and increases the depth of the wound.
When it comes to such abscesses, you should puncture according to the size of the flesh or the body's need, or according to which is necessary for the member in question.
And when you administer small punctures, for large abscesses make a large and wide or clean incision according to the variety of the sizes of the abscesses.
And for other abscesses where the channel needs to be constricted and cauterized, do so when it's done in such a way that the process already continues, as happens with many of the lymph glands and lymph nodes.
And for those that are incised at an intersection with three corners; and for those where it's incised in such a way like a snail shell shape, as in the abscesses of the lymph nodes.
And for these, round sections and crescent-shaped sections are administered, resembling them.
When it comes to the one that cannot be done in such a way, like superficial abscesses, you should puncture that through the superficial opening or just flat.
And when the abscess is thick and has already accumulated solid pus, you should puncture it but don't worry about removing all the poverty at once; remove some part from it, then let the abscess settle until the next day, then remove a larger portion, and proceed to make cauterized cuts gradually until there's no pus left.
Especially if the patient is prone to vertigo, or a woman in labor, or a small child, or an old person in decay, where the animal spirit's foulness is resolved with the release of pus, and hardens the body, then you should operate them.
When you look at this chapter with great caution and your puncture in which you are making these abscesses, do so by cleaning the wounds and consider whether the pus of the abscess is little or it's a flat section; then administer either the ones that open to the inside or the traditional remedies. And if the abscess is large, and the openings from the punctures are foul, then you should pause meca in every thread until they reach the time period.
And if in the abscess an opening has been removed from the channel or it's concaved within the circuit, then you should complete it with old cloth or a needle thread as when you pull out pieces of skin or lymph nodes; strengthen that by the third day; and proceed to process that and cure what remains under those ointments until it heals.
If during your operation there is pus discharge in the hours following, then you should administer water baths and vinegar for them, using a piece of cloth under it, and place that over the area where there are foul discharges.
If pus continues to discharge, then you should administer medicine and treatment as well as the powders I have recommended in specific locations of our book and its divisions.
If it is in the winter time, and the location of the abscess is a spot with nerves, then you should mix powders with vinegar and oil, and place those on the spots.
And if it's in summer, and the spots are fatty, then you should apply powdered substances with water and oil, or vinegar and oil on those areas, for as long as three days, just like we said. And afterwards, you should remove the abscess and clean that area, administering whatever remedies suit them until they heal.
And this is what is necessary for the knowledge of the treatment of abscesses in general, but according to the path of distinction that I have already mentioned about all abscesses and how their cure should be handled separately by chapters.
Chapter .xl.
Regarding the channel of abscesses that occur in the body's vein.
In the vein of the head small abscesses, and they are specifically lymph nodes containing tunics that harden their texture; and the specific types of their pus.
And from them you can see, and those that contain moisture resembling lime. And of these are the ones that contain moisture like dust and resemble them; and those that are slippery, hard.
And in the channel of all, and during the extraction of these you should not fear, just as you should not cause any disturbance with the extraction of these.
And the operation in the channel of these is that you expose them with an instrument whose form is somewhat like this, which is called prong, so you know it contains what's inside.
And if what it contains is pus, then you should divide that with the channel according to its length through a superficial channel according to this form:
And start from the line of .B. until you reach the line of .G. When the pus is evacuated, then you should excise that skin that contains that pus, and do not leave any cause there; if after this some new causes return, if there are any leftover causes from it.
And then immerse it in Egyptian ointment if it's present, or otherwise in water and salt; fill that with the pus and leave it immersed for another day, whereupon you'll dissolve everything that is resistant to that skin layer.
And then apply Egyptian balm repeatedly and thoroughly if it seems necessary for you, assuming that there is no cause of that scaly skin; then treat the wound with balm until it heals.
And if the abscess contains fat nodes, then you should incise as follows: Make a section in the form of a cross, and cut open between the two edges of the section, then force your strength into extracting the membrane which contains that.
If your surgery encounters opposition, then do what I instructed you to do initially.
Similarly, proceed with the treatment of the hardened abscess section and its healing according to what we have instructed you; if the abscess is hardened but has few symptoms and a little moisture.
And some of these abscesses are like those found on the head in certain men where there is little moisture; this condition arises when I incise into an abscess on a woman's head and close the abscess as if it were a deaf, hard, white lump that could not be drained, and if anyone hit that area too hard, they would get an ulcer.
And in other abscesses that occur on the head, this is not the head cap, such as those that come from the bumps of children and the ear lobes, but the section of all these are superficial sections.
And pause in the perforation of those from the lower part up to where it provides relief for the body in the lower parts.
And then treat those with what suits you according to that which is suitable for the process of healing.
Capitol Forty-Two
Section on scrophula, which occurs in the neck.
Causes for these abscesses are found in the neck, the axillae, and the groin; some causes occur in other parts of the body.
And those that occur in the neck are caused by internal causes, and all scrophula of these is within its own membrane; just like in fat nodes and abscesses on the head as we have recounted.
And the species of these scrophula are causes, some of which are moistened and some contain moisture; and among them are malignant ones that do not yield to healing.
And in that which you must use with good technique in the palpation, whose color is indicated by what it manifests and is uniform throughout, not attached to the nerves of the neck, nor to the veins, nor to the artery, and not swollen when palpated; then incise it on a slightly superficial section of the part above up to the last line of the body along the .G. line within the line of .B., and burn that throughout. Extend the edges of the skin around its circumference, or with moistened points if you need those, as we have said about abscesses in the head; then extract it gradually bit by bit.
And more caution is needed to avoid incising the vein or nerve.
And if the scalpel is not sharp enough to fit your hand in incision or it troubles the patient, then do not incise what is not necessary. If you were to incise a vein or artery and interfere with your operation, then pause on the inflamed wound until the pus flow stops, strengthen the wound, leave that so that the heat of the abscess subsides and the wound becomes softened, and it begins to heal. When the pus is drained.
And then resume your operation as soon as you have completed it.
And then inquire about the causes of other small scrophula according to what you have been told; hence incise those and cleanse them.
And if it is in the root of the large vein, then do not incise that scrophula from its root. Before this, when you have drawn that with a strong curved forceps and leave it until it falls out by itself.
And then fill the wound with old cloth that you have already soaked in Egyptian balm, and proceed to treat it.
And if you have incised the whole scrophula, then proceed to adjust the two edges of the wound and cut such that there is nothing left but a small amount of excess.
And if you find that there is excess pus due to the size of the scrophula, proceed as to understand how to incise its root and remove it. Then sew it up with what was said.
And for those scrophula that contain moisture, pierce it with a superficial incision at the point where it appears to you in the place of its maturation, and pause at the incision of that which is located below the body's pus area, as we have said.
And after this, perform the incision and apply balm as you would with those, in order that it may soften what has hardened due to congestion. And when you have already cleaned the wound, then treat it with balm of new flesh until it heals.
Capitol Forty-Three
Section on the management of abscesses that occur inside the glandular tissue.
The ancients divided this section in the duct, and no one has been seen using that method in our land.
This is the recording of the speech of those ones.
In men's cases, there are corners, where the removal of the prepuce should be avoided, because it is not done lightly as in others; for all veins and major arteries are here.
In those who have cysts in the mouth or ear canal or two ears, when the disease is not in the hair, you should use the section of prepuce to avoid the loss which is caused by perforation.
So when we want this, you should inscribe the prepuce with three circles of the prepuce's circles, or four at small size by latitude in that which is between two circles for quantity, so that the section be on the side, not on the cartilage. This location is suitable for sections that are without flesh and whose veins are close to his.
And if the doctor is inexperienced, do so when you extend the ear canal up to the notch, and then make an incision in the canal that reaches the canal, but avoid any veins or arteries near those if you see them for any cause.
And then inscribe the line according to what we have prescribed; it signifies on the section of the canal by the fleshy part which is from that eruption at this which is of his rupture and by the excision of the pustule.
And leave the opened wound open for some time.
So when the hour is ripe for that feared perforation, add two flaps of the canal of the wound, and if that alone is cartilage.
And then administer medicines that cause flesh to be born so that it becomes healthy.
And of Albucasis that the summa of the speech which we have prescribed, the exposition is merely that some of those cysts already opened the ear canal in the ear, and the ear went into death, and his hand was between cut, and some were to inscribe the epiglottis so that the patient breathes the ear over the wound site for one breath, and he is saved from death.
And for this we command to leave the wound open until it consumes the malignancy of the ear; and this malignancy is in him for three days; and then we command like this on the wound, and treat it until it heals.
And what I have seen based on my method is that a servant inserted a candle into her ear and inscribed part of the lung canal in it, and I was summoned to treat him, and the woman also sounded like the groan of the dying, and discovered the wound and found the pus that was inside the wound small.
So I confessed that she had not incised a vein or artery, and the wind came from the wound, and treated her until she was healed.
And don't harm the servant unless even in pustules, and after some days return to treating their arrangements.
And I also say that there is no fear in the section of the prepuce.
Chapter XLIV.
Regarding the section on cyst that occurs outside the ear canal, it is called the ear canal hernia.
This cyst named ear canal hernia is a large cyst according to the color of blood, and it moves in females.
And it occurs in two ways, whether it is natural or accidental.
And in the natural case, there is no need for treatment.
And the accidental occurs in two ways, of which one is like fatty lumps, and the other way is like a cyst which is caused by blockage of an artery, and in that case there is fear. And don't assume to apply iron to him except when it's small. And you should test that and investigate it according to the description, and if you find it resembling fatty lumps, and is not suspended by any of the veins, then you should incise it like those, and extract it with what contains him from the skin and remove; and otherwise, then it is thoroughly examined throughout his being, and treat the site with whatever provides treatment until it heals.
Chapter XLV.
Regarding the section on types of lumps.
Of the lumps there are various species, and I have already described all the species in their division.
And you should note this distinction between lump and fissure when it causes doubt.
And I say that with fissure there is a heat quality and fever and violent pains during which the boiling of excess subsides; and it is fulfilled as decay when at this point the fever, pain and heat cease.
In a lump there is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and it has this side which is in the internal sac proper.
And it depends on the color of blood, and its beginning is like a boil and happens like feces, whether larger or smaller, and they are according to two species, whether they are fatty and contain moisture, and the colors of moisture are patches, as I described in my division.
And when you reach the treatment of lump, that you expel it and inquire about it at its origin according to the instrument which is called introducer, as its form comes in the chapter which is similar to this.
And this is the method of investigation for cysts and all lumps, which is that you take this instrument and introduce it into the pus filled area which you find in the lump, and you will test your words little by little inside until you know that the instrument has penetrated the canal.
And then, according to the size of the abscess, finish positioning your hand, and then extract the pus, considering what is left in the footprint of it.
And if there is excess wetness circulating, of any color, then you incise on the superficial section according to what I have said in other abscesses.
And if there is no wetness at the footprint of the pus, then you will know that it's fatty.
Dry on them as I instructed to form into a cross shape like this: Just as you were taught, suspend that with twine, and scrape the wound from all sides easily, and preserve the skin or sac, if possible, over it. Then extract that healthy tissue along the node.
If it breaks during the operation, it is not possible to extract that healthy tissue, and it's advisable to remove this instead. Then you extract it into scales so that nothing comes out from him due to any cause.
If he experiences a reason for some or too much time, the node returns according to his desire.
And if you notice that he suffers from a part small of him, then fill the wound with some corrosive and sharp powders, strengthen the wound, place your hand over what is the pus cavity cautery, and cure it according to another treatment until it's healed.
And if it's a large node, then you cut both of his lips and cure that which is inflamed.
Just as you were taught, if it's pulsating in opposition to him or not, then cauterize and apply over the spot that is inflamed which is vitiated and smooths that stretched area for two days or three until it heals; and then return to cut off what is ruptured from the node.
Chapter XLVI.
Regarding the necessary forms for excision and perforation.
Of those there are the forms of the abscesses, and they have three species, from which there is a large one, and it has somewhat less size, and it has a small one.
The form of the large abscess is like this:
The form of the small abscess is like this:
They are made of iron, alum, descending extremities correctly, so that they stimulate the inside in the abscesses.
And these are the forms of the experienced ones, and they are called small bushes, and one of them is called blood.
They have three species, from which there is a large one, somewhat less size, and even smaller.
The form of the large experienced one, its form:
The form of the moderate-sized experienced one, its form:
The form of the small experienced one, its form:
Make sure they are for those abscesses and ulcers and fistulas and swellings, both of the bones and other causes.
They are round, large, and sharp like big needles with which the ulcers are sewn, made of copper, or of bronze, or of iron, or of silver. The best ones are those made of copper.
And they are the experienced ones made of black lead, which one should remember that for those, the fistulas are opened in the cavity where the reflections are, and their reflections are reflected on its lightness towards those reflections.
They have three species: some of them are long, others are moderate-sized, and the rest are short. This is according to the size of the opening of the fistula and its constriction.
The form of the large experienced one made of lead:
The form of the moderate-sized experienced one made of lead:
The form of the small experienced one made of lead:
The forms of the needles are of special kinds; some of them are simple ones, which have only one curvature, and they come in three types: large, small, and moderate-sized.
And they have iron hooks, and they also come in three species.
And of those needle-hooks have two curves, and they are also of three types.
And they have needles with three curves, and these come in three species.
And all of this is necessary for their place.
The form of a small simple needle, its form:
The form of a large needle with two curves: The form of a moderate-sized needle with two curves: its form: The form of a small needle with two curves: its form:
The form of a large needle with three curves: its form:
The form of a moderate-sized needle with three curves: its form:
And these are the forms of the scalpels with which they cut and abrade the nodes and abscesses, and they come in three species: from them, there is a large one, moderate-sized, and small.
The form of the large scalpel:
Procedure for using a surgical knife:
Procedure for using a small surgical knife:
The endings of those on which a section is made are sharp and the others are not, they are not handled in such a manner, but rather that they are done gently during the lancing of nodes, fearing the introduction of a vein or nerve. And for these the patient finds relief and gets calmness due to this adjustment; you need to find this kind of excoriating on the pustule.
And these are the forms of amalgams, and they come in three species: large, medium, and small, just like pearls.
They are made from iron and resemble a rod on which alcohol is applied.
And in the pointed end of this rod, there is an inner tube concealed; and in that spot, there are conduits both inside and outside. You can adjust it as you wish, just like what you see.
The forms of syringes, which are concealed between the fingers, you perform the puncturing of pustules without feeling the pain, and they come in three species: large, medium, and small. And these are the forms of those:
The forms for suction cups that relieve the flow of illness, they come in three species: large, medium, and small. These are their forms:
They are made from iron like a citrus fruit, round with some length, and they are delicate.
And you should have these species of suction cups in large, mediums, and small sizes, for when you need to quickly relieve the flow of illness, and then when your first remedies do not work.
However, do not use those to relieve illness everywhere in the body, and only use them on fatty areas. Just like this, use them on the sweat glands and thighs, and on the underarms, elbows, breasts, abdomen, and buttocks, and similarly for any other fatty areas.
Some treatments are done using those other small tools that resemble tiny needles according to this form; when performed through phlebotomy or the incision of veins or arteries, illness is relieved.
Some treatments are done in a round manner as per this form:
Chapter XLVII:
On the treatment of male breasts which are formed like women's.
Some treatments cause the breasts of some men to swell when they begin to become fatty like women's skin during sleep. The breasts are then swollen and assembled like women's breasts, with fatty lumps scattered apart.
And for those who experience this issue, remember that you should lance in the area where the lunar section is formed according to this form, between line B and line G. Thoroughly cleanse the skin by scraping it off, apply the medicine as a paste filling up any wound gaps, adjust both ends of the wound with stitches, and cure it wherever it's healed.
If the breast sags towards your sides and becomes softer due to its size like in women's breasts, then it should be cut into two parts filled with pus on either side, forming two sections resembling a lunar shape. Each should contain part of the other; where the larger line contains the smaller according to this form between lines B and G. Then scrape off the crust that is between the two sides of the wound, remove the swelling, administer as we have said about suture and powders necessary for the treatment until it heals.
And if you do not complete the incision for fear of harming the patient and due to illness, then it is advisable to soak the wound with corrosive ointment and leave it as such until this destroys the fat, and then treat it properly when it heals.
Chapter XLVIII:
On the puncturing of pustules that are located under the skin.
These pustules that are found under the skin are of the species of scrophula, thorns, which have a layer that is excised.
And some of them contain moisture; for those that contain moisture, it is to be punctured according to this form: from line G to line B. Once everything inside the pustule has been removed during healing, then you leave it until the next day.
And afterwards, let the area heal with suitable ointment, until it heals.
And if the pustule is of the species of nodes or scrophula, then you divide it over that area just as we have said in the section about scrophulas similarly.
And if the wound is extended to such an extent that it causes pus discharge, then apply a cautery as we have explained previously.
Chapter XLIX:
On the lancing of pustules that occur through arteries or veins.
When an artery is ruptured, and the clot is consolidated over that area, then punctures will occur causing pustules. And there are signs by which you can identify whether inflammation and a pustule are caused by an artery or a vein: when a pustule is due to an artery, it's longly extended in the chest region; and when you press on the pustule with your fingers, you feel a rattling sound inside.
And that which is due to a vein manifests itself in the patient's body.
And if an abscess is formed on this point, especially in the region where the lymph nodes are, and in joints, and around the neck, or in local areas of the body; it's a large one, so avoid iron treatments for its cure, and if it's at the extremities or head, that too should be avoided.
For the one affected by their condition due to swelling of the artery's opening, divide in the main section along its length; and then ligate the section with cords, and close near the artery, and release from the tissues where it is exposed.
And then apply pressure to that needle and make it penetrate into the other side, and strengthen the artery with two folds of silk - which causes you to become skilled in extracting arteries those which are in the temples.
And then stab that spot which is between two ligaments inside the place where it causes all damage until the abscess dissolves.
And then apply treatment in which wax is created that falls between the ligaments; and treat that with suitable ointments so that it may heal.
And if it's an abscess due to vein congestion, then you should hold that which is in your hand like the abscess near the main section of the vein and apply pressure. Then insert the needle at the spot where you held your hand earlier with the needle, and make it penetrate; and there should be a double thread inside where you extract from one side, and then ligate the abscess with a ligament according to what I have told you on the ligament of grapefruit for both parts near the two ends of the thread.
If you fear that we will extract the thread, then insert the needle at that spot with all of the abscess; when you make the first incision in the needle, strengthen your threads in four places.
And then dry the abscess in the middle part of it until what is inside becomes settled; then cut off the excess of the thread, and leave that which remains from it.
And then place over that powder which you have submerged in oil and vinegar; and then administer the treatment made with candles and ointments until it heals.
Remove the top of the abscess which occurs due to twisting of nerves.
So when an abscess occurs in an artery and a vein, similarly, an abscess also occurs in nerves when they are injured during percussion or overworked; and in that way.
And the method to follow for this is at the spots on the limbs or ankle, or in any place where there are painful joints.
And it's a large abscess, and has the same color as the other body, and is in the major parts of its structure with veins beneath; when stretched under tension, felt below feels like the thigh seems to be numb.
And it's not an abscess that has spread throughout the body, and here is the vein, which swells all over but doesn't go forward or backward parts.
So for those that are in the joints, don't treat it with iron, which would provoke a contraction.
And for the one that is on the head or forehead, apply the thread internally at the surface. If it's a small abscess, then you should do that on the edges and cut off that spot afterwards.
And if it's large, then suspend it with a string, scrape that area, and hold that place; adjust the wound with stitches, and treat it until it heals.
End of chapter.
Regarding the section on abscess which occurs due to colic affecting the belly.
Deal with the discomforts that are felt in the bellies of those and in the other parts of their bodies from these things, which are called fungal due to similarities with fungi; for the roots of these are subtle and the head of them is large; already those mouths of them are open, it's from those that are small, and it's from those that become very large.
And I have seen one already, and in their belly there were two parts that resembled fungi, and there was no difference between those white ones, of subtle roots.
And already those mouths of them were inverted and would crack, humidity flowed continuously from that area.
So I inserted and explored each one in the foot measuring eighteen uncia's. And the other measured six uncia's.
And during the operation at the incision site, consider if the thigh is wet and if the color of that part is white and wet from subtle roots. Then you should insert it in a lateral position, and place it near your presence with a cautery in fire; when those observed discomforts are expelled, do so without any harm to health; and if you find illness there, cauterize it.
And if you find the thigh pale and fearful, avoid inserting with iron; instead take lead that has recently been melted, strengthen that part in this manner as we have said; leave it for two days.
And then adjust at the constriction of the lead thread; so don't cease to strengthen that large lead, until it is cut and falls off by itself.
If the disease is of great complexity, then in the examination of him there are some causes of fear and dread, especially in that which is in the belly.
It might be possible that you remove his illness, and then properly cauterize it so that it doesn't return.
And properly treat what's inside where the disease has been healed.
And remember not to proudly claim to remove diseases that are of a dark color, with little sensation, under careful examination, for such are indeed cancerous.
And I will return with memories quite nearby.
Capitol. Fifty-two.
Regarding the cure of the prominence of the umbilicus.
Umbilical prominence is caused by various reasons; or through fissures of the diaphragm which is above the belly, and due to leaks in the cloth or hernia according to what happens in other ruptures; or because of sickness that flows from veins or arteries as previously mentioned, or due to constricted wind within him.
If it's due to a tear in the diaphragm and the leakage of the cloth or hernia, then the color of the pus is similar to the color of the body; and there is a lion-like pain, and it appears from various locations. And if it's due to the protrusion of the hernia, then that place on him resembles what we have recounted from its severity, with a much more intense variety; and as you press that against your fingers it becomes hidden, and then returns. The tension in him is so great, and the vigorous movement of introducing water and strong labor is magnified.
If due to dampness, then it's lion-like and doesn't become hidden when you press with your hand, nor is it constricted, nor does it swell.
And if due to sickness, then these signs appear in the pus turning black and declining.
If it's due to no meat (which could refer to a lack of substance or muscle), then the pus is heavy, large, and hard, and its formation follows in quantity.
If it's due to wind (which could be a medical term referring to air or gas within the body), then the palpation of him is lion-like.
And the operation here is that you consider whether the prominence of the umbilicus is due to sickness in an artery or vein, or wind; then choose not to treat him, for there's fear and dread in this as we've taught you in the chapter about the pus related to arteries and veins.
And if the prominence of the umbilicus is due to hernia or cloth, you should order the sick person to keep their seat extended; and try this out in the system around the umbilicus; and then tell him to stand against your hands on his feet; and surround with a wide space in the umbilical system over the area where you've tried it; and extend the mass of pus up above at least one large span; and hold firmly or gently along the way of holding, decently.
And try to cut open the middle of the pus extended over the flesh and insert your finger into that point to push out the hernia; and if you have found it or guarded it through the flesh, then you will extract it quickly and force the hernia towards the inner parts of the belly.
And if you have found the cloth, then take that with one finger; and cut away any excess of it.
And if it's contrary to your artery or vein, then surround that movement, and proceed with your operation again. Take two needles and place them in those strong points, and insert the needles into the system around the pus where you've done cutting, in a way of crossing, which you will make penetrate; and strengthen the pus on four parts over the needles.
And if you wish, keep the needles and flatten the area where the extended flesh will fall on its own; or cut that when it becomes thinner and is placed, then do so, and properly treat what is covered by the ointment inside which has been healed.
And if the prominence of the navel is due to no flesh in him or dampness, then you should drain the pus as we have said and eliminate the sickness or dampness that you find in him, and properly treat what has been drained and consolidate the area.
Capitol. Fifty-three.
Regarding the treatment of children.
We have already discussed in the division about specific illnesses of children and how they are treated, and that the treatment must be gentle to prevent scarring. We also mentioned illnesses caused during pregnancy and care should be taken in their treatment.
And it was said by the ancients that some childhood diseases can be eradicated from certain locations, such as on the head which is present in the breasts or thighs and resembles parts of the body that are susceptible to removal, especially when they start small.
When it's old and large, don't try to cure him yourself, for I haven't been able to heal anyone of this kind nor have I seen another, nor has this reached here.
And the operation here is that when it's allocated as we have said, you should prepare and leave the sick person and purge them of black bile some diseases, then proceed to drain it, if found, there is a clear manifestation.
And try to prepare the sick person for the preparation in which the operation is located, and ensure there are tools that reach it; and make a concave from all sides on the skin so good incision can be made inside without damaging any cause of your patient's disease. And let the sweat flow, do not abruptly stop it, press the areas, and wipe away the sweat completely with your hand or with an instrument that is at your disposal among the tools.
If you encounter thick sweat on veins or arteries, then cauterize that within where the flow of sweat has ceased, and then treat it alongside another treatment until it is healed.
Head. Chapter.
Concerning the cure of dropsies.
We have already discussed in the division, regarding the types of dropsy from water, and the signs for each type, with their cures we have medicines.
And that which is cured with iron is merely the type of edema caused by salt alone, and it does not resemble treatment with iron for the types of tympanic nor for the type of dysentery, which are fatal.
And when you have treated this type of tympanic dropsy with medicines and your treatment doesn't show improvement, consider that if the patient has already achieved debility or if there's another ailment alongside dropsy, like in their cough or abdomen discomfort and similar, then don't treat them with iron, for caution should be exercised about this.
If your patient is experiencing excessive vigor and it's not another ailment but dropsy alone, not related to age or youth, then the way of performing surgery on them is that you lift the patient between your hands, guide them until they expel their belly with their own hand, push out the water from the left side of the stomach, and take a thorned spade according to this form:
Make it of two sharp parts, with a pointed end like a spade; however, for the patient, make it somewhat shorter and gradually, in order that during surgery you do not enter the intestine, and ensure that it is done.
And consider if the generation of dropsy is from parts of the intestines, then you must consider that when performing surgery you need to be three finger-widths away from the umbilicus for the sections on both sides, in the line of the patient above their stomach.
If the generation of dropsy is due to illness in the stomach, then your surgical incision should be on the left side of the belly button for three finger-widths.
And if the cause of your patient is due to milk, then your surgical incision should be on the right side.
And do not make your incision above the rib where you want the patient to vomit, so that excess fluids do not accumulate in that area.
And with the instrument, puncture completely along the entire line, then intervene in that section and raise your hand above the thorn between the line and the syringe, and scrape there; and if the amount is of one nail or roughly.
And puncture the syringe so that it reaches the place where the water is located, this is the location of the fluid. And after that extract that and insert an instrument of which this is the form: and it is similar to a slender silver catheter; it is made of silver or bronze or brass, at the lowest part of which there is a small hook, and on its sides are three hooks: two from one side and one from the other side; and shaped is the end cut like a feather, as follows:
And at the tip of it is an armature, which when the instrument reaches the fluid, immediately presses against it, thus removes half a moderate amount of water in the middle, if you remove more than that within the hour, weaken the patient through dissolution of their spiritual animal essence, or it might cause them to have a stroke leading to death.
Extract from that according to the vigor of your patient and according to how you interpret the movements of the patient's hand as indicating their spiritual essence's vitality and their goodness.
And after that remove the instrument, collect the water which causes this; it's because immediately the intestines retain the hook above the syringe, which you've been told to puncture in accordance with that manner.
And after that repeat the instrument on another day if you find your patient tolerating this; extract a small amount of water and do this for several days with caution, ensure not to excessively reduce the water.
And if you are concerned about your patient and release a large amount of water, then cure them by burying in sand, using sweat baths in the shade, and waiting under the sun for a long time. And cure them with drying medicines until they recover.
And cauterize on the stomach and the intestine near the water extraction site, as I recounted in what was previously described.
Chapter. 56.
Concerning the treatment of children born with unperforated urinary locations.
Some of the children are born with their head inside their mother's womb and their opening not perforated (or it is stretched straight or not in its proper location).
Then perform surgery on the child immediately after birth using a small silver catheter following this form:
And place on the hook a small lead hook and connect it, leave it for three days or up to four.
And when they want to urinate, they should do so and then return back.
And if you don't hold the lead, it's possible that the urine which goes over the area won't close this (wound or cut).
Let him take what we brought straight for medicine with lead's scales, as we have said, within too many days that it gets expanded.
Let them take those from whom we took the thing not in their place, this is said, which causes it of those, that one who takes it should reach the tip of the penis so that he cannot urinate internally; within lifting the penis with his hand at the parts above; and it's not to his generation, because its sperm can't arrive at the mother according to straightness, and it is a male infertility disorder.
The method of the operation for him is that the patient lies on his back and you extend the tip of his penis with your left hand with a strong pull, then you cut into the tip of the head of the penis at the junction with the shaft, as if it were done with a knife or any part doesn't bleed, so that the middle part of his blood looks like the tip of the penis and that the thing falls in the middle of the area according to how it covers.
And remember that in your operation of blood flow from the wound, what damages occur to this; and pause for you while you cut the wound, and treat the wound until it is healed.
Chapter 56.
Regarding the white matter that occurs on the foreskin at the tip of the penis and pus, discoloration and adhesion of the foreskin at the tip of the penis.
Damages seen in this white matter on the testicles is an indication of chronic inflammation.
And one of them is malignant and the other is not.
Not malignant, you should hang it with a delicate thread and cut the area until that disappears completely; then pause for that part to be submerged in Egyptian oil; then that, treat it with clear oil until it is healed.
And if the white matter is malignant, then you should check its color. Then you should apply a cautery near the cut and the tip of it.
Let's say that if the white matter is on the foreskin at the tip of the uncircumcised penis, and one part of the white matter is inside the foreskin and the other part is outside, then you should take off the white matter which is inside until it hardens; and later you treat the external part, when you treat that period, it's not guaranteed that it won't be torn.
And just as damage occurs in the testicles and on the foreskin discoloration and deterioration, then you should remove everything that has already deteriorated and that is about to spoil or that has already spoiled; and later draw a line over this area with honey, which gets damaged by flour sifted from old saffron and white pepper grains.
And treat it with the other treatment until it is healed.
Let's say that if there is blood flow from the wound, then you should apply a lunar cautery according to this form:
The application of a lunar cautery is in two consecutive stages, which are during blood flow from the wound and when the wound becomes infected.
And if the tip of the penis is corroded and completely destroyed in that moment, then you should insert a lead catheter into the base of the foreskin so that the patient can urinate through it.
In the adhesion of the foreskin at the tip of the penis (this type of adhesion only occurs in those who have their foreskin intact, and on them circumcision is not prescribed; and when adhesion happens due to wound or abscess) you should scratch with a blunt blade until it is dissolved and the tip of the penis is released from all sides.
And if it's hard to remove those completely, then you should scratch with a blunt blade on some area of the tip of the penis and foreskin, and this is because when the foreskin is fine, its thinness easily pierces through its thinness.
And afterwards separate the foreskin from the tip of the penis with a thread of its thinness, which has already been rubbed in water to prevent further bleeding.
And afterwards treat it with astringent until it is hardened.
Chapter 58.
Regarding the circumcision of children and the treatment for what happens to those who are circumcised.
Circumcision is not the solution like other wounds: however, it is of our operation and our will, and more importantly in those cases that belong to children, it is necessary for us to assign better operations and procedures that cause less loss of health.
So it was said by the ancients that they did not practice circumcision on some of the free ones, who do not use them in their laws, but this is only what we have acquired through experience, which is that I have found that most artists and barbers use circumcision and sterilization with needles and at the tip; and they use tendons for the female and cutting at the thumb.
And I have tried all these methods and found that the best sterilization is with blades, tendons for the female, in sterilization like at the thumb, which damages parts above, where the foreskin has two tunics and allows you to avoid further cutting and pain. And concerning circumcision, which is performed by surgeons, and is digital, from which the woodworkers use, it does not ensure the removal of the end of the male member, where it forcefully enters his groin.
In the operation involving a scalpel, forcefully using iron and corroding your operation is advised against. And the umbilical cord of a child is naturally short, and cuts are made in such a way that they do not require circumcision, and I have seen this.
The method of circumcision that uses knives and scissors on the male organ, where I found good results from my own experience; the knives have a proportional incision size, so their sharpness is like the sharpness you apply with your hand; and similarly, when you press your hand down, there are two types of sharpness provided in comparison over time; and it's done by applying pressure to the organ forming a shape containing the foreskin from all sides, at which no mistake will be made.
And the first method of the operation is that you should make the child lie down more if they are among those I understand as smaller children; do not do anything else but hold the organ in its foreskin only, and let that be inside by another day.
And then make the child happy in every way possible to him from what receives his understanding. And then place the child between your servants properly prepared, and it should not exceed ten minutes; hide the knives in your hand or leave them under your elbow, so that the child doesn't see those or any other of the tools.
And then place your hand on the organ of the child and blow into the umbilical cord, pulling that inward so that it separates the head of the organ, and then proceed to correct whatever is added in its skin.
The shape of the knives for circumcision, this is how it should be:
Let the first half be uncut and the other halves be cut, so that it doesn't remove the tip of the penis, and make the length of the sharp edges as long as twice a penknife handle.
The mistake in circumcision is when forcefully it removes the entire intrinsic cord or part of it; you should ensure the incision.
So take care to extend that from your hand towards your knife before the cauterization of the area, and cut it according to equality.
And if you can't hold it at your knife, then take that in a pin and cut it.
And if it has been more than three days, and the foreskin has been cauterized, then let that be inside so that the pus opens, and cleanse that with ease, and cut it according to what you are prepared for.
And watch over the head of the organ, which will not be on him.
And then treat that with what heals the wound from the powders we have recommended in the chapter on powders.
And if it has cut into the cord beyond measure, and adheres to parts there, that won't be noticed by him.
And treat that with what we have said until it heals.
Chapter 58.
Chapter 58. On the treatment of retained urine in the bladder.
Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by blockage due to stone or inflammation, or by obstruction with a foreign body or meat packing, similar to what we have discussed in our treatment methods section.
And if it is not dissolved with what we have discussed and the treatment must be vigorous towards the patient, then take care that you administer extraction to him with an instrument called a syringe, which has this shape: It's made of silver and is slender as a lion's claw, just like a needle from a medical kit of a doctor's, of about twice the length of a palm plus half, where it has a thin tip at its head.
And the method of expulsion of urine through that is that you take the organ folded and tie it with wool or cloth for good adhesion; and insert the ends of the organ into the part left by the syringe, and if there's any cause from the wool, remove it, but introduce it into the needle forcefully. Then press on the syringe to the end and towards his urine bag.
And cut open the patient's flesh, scrape the bladder and the scrotum with an instrument, apply oil, myrrh, and olive oil, then wash them.
And then insert the bistort into the prepared place that reaches the root of the scrotum; and then fold the scrotum above at the point of the pubis; and then push the bistort inside that; and then push that inside until it reaches the bladder, and that makes the scrotum reach the cause of emptiness, and do not follow this order, but in the meat where it is twisted.
And then slowly stretch the string through the wool little by little, because urine wetts the wool.
And then remove that and do treatment with urine, use a bistort, don't stop doing this and use the bistort until the bladder is emptied and the patient feels relief.
Chapter 59.
Regarding the quality of bladder enema and the use of pincers and tools that are suitable for this task.
When there is an ulcer or abscess in the bladder, or congestion within it, or obstruction by pus, if one wants to distill water and medicines through that area, then this should be done with an instrument called pincers, which has this form:
If it is at the extremity of the object where there is a lack, then it is closed. And in that place are three holes: two on one side, like this times.
At the beginning is a concave place where this is inserted, and according to the amount that pushes that one, the addition is made, within which when any cause is thrown out by that from moisture, it is drawn in, and when it is expelled by that, this is also drawn in, and when it is expelled for a long time, as it does with pincers, on which naphtha is heated in naval battles.
So if you want to prevent moisture in the bladder, insert the end of the pincers into the moisture, and draw what is pushed towards the higher parts, as the moisture is drawn into the cavity of the pincers.
And then insert the end of the pincers into the scrotum as we have described in the bistort; and then push the moisture towards that which you push, as soon as that moisture reaches the bladder, and hold the scrotum with it.
The subtle form of the cauterizer for the bladder, which is what the bladder is treated with, and that is its form:
And it should be made of silver or tin, with the head of the cauterizer resembling a small feather, and leave its tube inside firmly.
And then take the bladder of motion and place in it the moisture that you want to cauterize in the bladder, and then join that between two with a strong bandage on the string, and heat that moisture over the fire.
And then insert the end of the cauterizer into the scrotum.
And then place your hand on the bladder with moisture, stretching it down inside so that the scrotum holds that moisture has reached the bladder.
If you do not have a bladder present, then take a piece of parchment and make it into that circle; and punch it all over its roundness; and then insert a strong string in those holes, as they are turned; and then add the circle just like it is alsofatur added, so when you place in that what you want from moisture, and oil and waters.
And then you hold that in the tool and do that as you did with the bladder, and place your hand inside where moisture reaches the bladder.
Chapter 60.
Regarding the extraction of gravel.
We have already discussed in the division the species of gravel and treatment with medicines, and the difference between gravel produced in the kidneys and gravel produced in the bladder, and those signs.
And we have said about gravel for which manual operation and section are necessary.
And the gravel produced in the bladder is precisely that which is formed inside the bladder.
And I will narrate that with obvious exposition and abbreviation.
And it is said that gravel produced in the bladder mostly goes to children; and the signs of this are that urine discharged from the bladder is like water in its subtlety, and appears with sand-like particles; and the scrotum rubs its scrotum, and red spots appear on the penis, and then it rises; and there is a hole made at the anus in pieces of those.
And it is difficult to heal children from that within which they have achieved fourteen years; and the healing of the elderly for this is difficult. In young people, it is easier for this because it is among those.
And of the one from which gravel is greater and healing is easier; if it's small, it goes against that.
And how do we proceed with the treatment of this, go to the beginning of this by reforming the scrotum with a cauterizer which removes all the opening that is within their intestines; for this opening prohibits some red spots from allowing the formation of gravel during its investigation.
And then hold the scrotum against their feet and make it swell up to prevent gravel from descending into the bladder's base or escape at any other place or some spots.
And place that cauterizer between your hands ready, and let his hands hold everything in their places, so that the bladder is made to slope downwards towards all the parts.
And apply it directly to that area and its entire outer part.
So if you feel the pain in the space, then you need to cauterize that section immediately above it.
And if you don't cauterize everything immediately above your touch point, then take an olive oil with your left hand's index finger. If the patient is a child or young adult, insert this into their anus; otherwise, use it to stimulate their belly button. And cauterize directly where the pain is located with your hand. And gradually convert that small part into the bladder's neck.
And place pressure on that with your finger, and expel it towards all the parts outside; locate where you left the section.
And command the minister to press on the bladder with his/her hand; and command another minister with her/his right hand to extend the thighs above all the parts in front, and with the other hand apply pressure on the region where the section is made, as it lies at the place of the operation.
And then insert some foam that has this shape: And divide what is between the anus and the thighs, not in the middle, but towards the left side of the patient's buttock; place the section over that pain and your finger on his/her anus, making a transverse cut so that the outer part is wide and inwardly narrowed according to the amount I removed from the pain, without exceeding it, and if your finger is in the anus, the pain should be pushed out of the section, forming an opening that meets patient's capabilities.
And know that there is some pain that has an angle and borders, making his/her excretion difficult through this.
And that thing, which resembles a small cone and is round, causes slight obstruction due to it.
So if it's the one with an angle and borders, adjust in the opening.
And if it's not an opening, then take care to place it on that spot or firmly press with that, the tip of which is like a file on which you press on the pain without forcing it out; or insert this delicate instrument with curved end.
If you can't place it there, then widen that a little more, and if you see the release of pus, cut firmly in that area with vinegar.
If the pain is more than one, then at the beginning you push your hand into the bladder's mouth and gradually cut towards it; and then push a little close to that area. And similarly do if they are multiple pains.
And if the pain is very large, then you should cut with a large incision; it can happen to the patient in one of two ways: either it remains as it is or changes during urine distillation, because if the place is not completely solid.
If you administer an expulsion from within that is completely open, or uses the saw in the fracture to extract that in pieces.
So when you have completed your operation, fill the wound with essences of aloe and dragon's pus, strengthen that. And place it over that bandage soaked in oil and vinegar or in rubbed oil and water wash, so that the abscess opens up.
And then roll the patient back onto their chest, do not untie the bandage for at least the third day.
And when you have untied that, wash the area with water and add oil, and then care for it with antiseptic ointment and within that until it heals.
If an abscess pus forms and is corrosive in that wound, adjust it with an antiseptic ointment; and if it resembles this when the urine is frozen inside the bladder (and this is known from the release of pus through urine), then insert your finger into the wound and extract that pus, for otherwise it causes the bladder to inflame and decay.
And then wash the wound with vinegar mixed in water and salt, against all species, using that which you consider appropriate for healing until it heals.
And during all the hours of your entire treatment, take care to adjust the medicines that are applied on the body.
And if the pain is small and is located at the root of the penis, it's implanted in him, and urine excretion is prohibited, then treat that with what I recommended before you reach the section; and these symptoms are attributed to this treatment; and I have mentioned this already, which is this tool you should take, which has this shape:
Of triangular end, sharp, implanted in shaft.
And then take the needle, and tie it at that place just below the penis to prevent the pain from returning to the bladder.
And then insert the iron into the penis, piercing with ease until the tool reaches that pain. And with the drill in your hand, you carefully move it into that small opening little by little, and you make a hole inside which allows the other part to penetrate; as soon as the urine is released.
And press your hand on what is hardened in the stone of the entry point away from the foreskin, when that is squeezed, and the hole gets filled with urine, and the patient is healed.
May it be that this cure is not due to your apparatus for any cause which prevents that, then leave a piece of it on the stone, and another piece above the stone. And apply over the stone in that foreskin between two ligatures. And then remove that. And then untie the ligament and change the affected area, which is done in the wound.
And it is not necessary to have a piece of leather on the stone of the foreskin, but in order that it does not return to the bladder, and another ligament above this one only when, once untied, the leather is near the exit of the foreskin, the disease returns to its place and heals.
And for this it is necessary when you have the leather above, that you raise the disease to the parts above, or return you must give your consent and heal just as we have said.
Captulo 61.
Chapter 61: Removal of foreskin in women.
Foreskin in women is seldom produced.
If there is foreskin on any of those, then it makes the treatment difficult for her and is prohibited by too many methods.
The one among them is that in women childbirth stretches the vagina.
And the second is that you don't find a woman who tells you whether she had intercourse with a man when she was a virgin, or if she has married women having been with men before.
The third is that you don't find a woman who knows this art, especially the operation by hand.
And the fourth is that the location of the section on foreskin in women is far from the location of foreskin, so you need to focus on this area, and there's fear in it.
If necessity causes you to do this, then find one woman who knows how to perform it, and few are found.
If you are lacking that, then approach the almost subtle male doctor, or present a woman matron skilled in women's affairs, or a woman who has part of this art.
Then make that presentation, and command her to do everything you tell her, from the inquiry about foreskin to commencement; which causes is to check if the woman is a virgin, then make him touch her behind and wants foreskin.
Then if she finds that, secure the leather of hers, and then command her to cut over that.
If it's not virgin, then command the woman to insert her thumb in the patient's mouth and inquire about foreskin, but place her left hand on the bladder, and press that firmly.
Then if she finds that, then command you to gradually expand that from the opening of the bladder to your fingers within the strength of her virtue until it reaches up to the crease of her thigh.
And then cut over that location opposite the mouth of your mouth should reach up to the crease of her thigh from any part towards it, and place foreskin in that area, and his description should not be distorted by foreskin command him accordingly.
And the section should be small at commencement; and then insert your finger in that area, and if you feel foreskin, then adjust the section according to the amount by which he knows foreskin can be removed from there.
And know that the types of foreskin are lumps: those being small and large, rough and hard, long and round, and having ridges.
And then know how many types there are of her for this that you signify about what you want.
And if you see discharge of the wound, adjust in that wet place and take it for an hour until the blood is removed, and then return to your operation until foreskin is removed.
And make ready with your tools for the removal of foreskin in men as you said during the removal of foreskin, so that you are helped by those during your operation.
And if you want to see the discharge of wound, and know that the expulsion of blood is from the incised area, then you sprinkle powder on the place and strengthen it with dust and constriction descent, and do not continue this; leave foreskin and don't remove that one, as childbirth will result in death for her. And then heal the wound.
And once the intensity of the bleeding has subsided after some days, and the place is healed, then you return to your operation until foreskin is removed.
Captulo 62.
Chapter 62: On section regarding inguinal hernia.
Inguinal hernia is simply the addition of moisture in white sperm, which is left in the semen-containing canal, and it is called spermatic cord.
And sometimes it occurs in the proper scrotum which his nature prepares for him within that part of urine, when another urine has already been produced; and it is the semen canal between the white sperm which we have said, and it's not this but testicle.
The formation of this hernia is due to weakness that affects the genital organs, so it fills with this substance to those parts, and sometimes occurs due to hits made on the genital organs.
This dampness takes on various colors, where the color of it or it fades to yellowish or blood-red, or rusty, or is black and creamy, or is watery white, and this is what it is.
And the signs by which one knows where this water accumulation is in these: if it is on the white scab as we said, then the pus turns yellowish, elongating somewhat like an hourglass figure, and appears the genital organ, where the dampness contains from all sides.
And if the dampness is in the proper scrotum, then the pus turns yellowish at the tip of the hourglass and through this one estimates that it's another hourglass.
And if the dampness is between the chain of the genitals and the white scab, then it causes loss of sensation.
And how you want the knowledge of the color of the dampness, then you expand the color of the dampness in the pus within the middle interweaving where its shape is followed; and according to how it exists in the trace of the interweaving, judge from what is inside them.
Then when we come to the treatment of them, then command that if this is possible for you, the patient should have bloodletting, and make him lie down.
And return them to their back on some cause for a little or another, and place your moist cloths under them.
And place yourself on the left part of them, and command that the attendant follows on the right side of them, who extends their arm to one of the two sides towards the chain of the genitals and the midpoint of the abdominal flanks.
And take a broad blade, and divide the chain of the genitals from the middle spot longitudinally through to the pubis.
And make the section according to a straight line equal in distance from the line that you should cut through the skin of the genitals, so that it reaches the white scab including it.
And scrape that, observe, and guard yourself for not piercing that; and your scraping is such that it hangs down somewhat towards the hourglass and more subtly examine your scraping according to the quantity you can manage.
And then make an extensive puncture through the white filled with water, and remove all the water.
And then separate between the two folds of the section with scissors, and extend the white towards the upper parts; do not touch the chain of the genitals including it, and cut the white in that manner which is possible for you. And cut that entirely or in pieces, especially the finer side; if you do not examine the incision carefully from him, there is no certainty that the water will not return.
And if the hourglass proceeds from that outside of its chain during your operation, then when you have completed the section of the white, return inside him, and adjust the two folds of the genital chain with stitches, and care for it as other wounds until it heals.
And if you find the hourglass corrupted by another illness, then command that you remove the blood vessels which are under the retractor, and extract the hourglass, and care for it as we said.
And if the water is aggregated in two parts always, then you know that there are two hernias; therefore cut that part as you did in the other equally; and if it appears to be an operation to your sight, then do so.
And then you cleanse the wound, and interweave between both sections wool soaked in oil or in rubbed oil; place another wool that you have soaked in vinegar and oil on top, spread that over two genitals and the flanks of the abdomen; place wet cloths on top and powders, cover those underneath with a substance as this:
And then have two cloths placed and be filled with wet wool according to this resemblance; have the ends placed where they are pressed by hand or damp wool, have them attached to the belt of the trousers, and one of the ends take in the buttocks between the two, and the other end take near the knee bend, and two ends over two thighs, and two other ends on two hips, and all tightening be done inside the trouser belt.
And sometimes this hernia is artificially treated with a cautery instead of cutting in the section; so you take a fine surgical knife and cut through the chain of the genitals, and ignite according to what we have instructed, once the white part containing the water is exposed, then you take the cautery as follows: And it resembles Greek lettering.
And then make an incision in that white part, and ignite as long as all the dampness is released outside.
And then extend the white with scissors, scrape with scissors, and scrape with the fine ignited cautery; cut that as much as is possible for you so that you remove everything; be careful not to let the water touch the fire.
And know that this operation is placed safe and far from blood flow, and better than sectioning surgery.
If it causes you discomfort due to an abscess or when using a cautery during sectioning or cauterization, or blood flow, then consider what discomfort it causes you in this way, and apply the cure according to how it is said.
If the patient is scared and doesn't anticipate the second operation due to its horror, then perform a perforation according to what I recommend; and this is when you must confirm, according to what we have discussed about their meanings, that this is an aqueous hernia.
Then consider how you might place the patient on an elevated surface, then puncture the abscess at the lowest part of their body through a slit laterally, and pause the puncturing according to the length of the body.
And let the incision be wide so that all the water flows out.
And place your hand gently and smooth it there, to ensure that all remaining water flows away. And treat the area until the wound is healed.
If the discomfort is due to the removal of water at that time, you should puncture there: this procedure is done only when white pus in the wound's opening causes discomfort and prevents water from escaping. Then consider how you might place inside the wound a tool with which water from dropsy is extracted, whose shape follows; or adjust pressure on the wound area with something small.
And know that water returns and is somewhat healed approximately over three months or around those periods; and once it's added, then puncture according to that meticulous method, so the patient can spend their days.
Chapter 63.
On sectioning about a carnal hernia and its cure.
Know that during sectioning about this hernia, there is danger of infection in the major preparations; therefore, I consider it best to release you and save you with that.
And I remember the operation in that case and the specifics of the abscesses.
Therefore, state that abscesses are found in the parts where the glands combine and this occurs due to such causes: or by excessive acute inflammation which infiltrates the glands, or by impact.
And the color of the abscess is according to the color of the body, and it doesn't appear during pain, and it's a heavy abscess.
And soft fluid is pusified, whose color is dark, and there is no pulse in the patient.
And some instances are performed due to blockage of the arteries, and because of swelling in that way where the memory of the patient is already noticeable, or due to swelling of veins.
That which is due to arterial swelling is recognized by the spreading of pus when you press that with your fingers; and don't consider it if you touch that.
That which is due to vein swelling does not spread for any cause; the compression with your fingers shows it.
And it's possible that sectioning can be performed on this type and on other meats; for you would incise the nerve of the glands, then extend the hand to the upper parts, extract the white pus, release the suspensory of the vessels, tie them up, and incise the suspensory pus that you release from all parts of the hand.
And if the hand is already on those hard masses, then consider how you might remove the hand and incise there.
And if there is adhesion due to some cause of the pus, or between that which is within the veins, then consider how you might release all that adhesion and incise it through a round incision.
If it's a native mass in the location of the adhesion which is behind, then consider how you might incise all that belongs to you, and remove the hand like we've said.
And once your operation is completed, then fill the wound with wool soaked in olive oil and vinegar; and treat that using another method until it heals.
Chapter 64.
On the treatment of hernias that are venous.
Ampullae are abscesses enveloped by some wrapping resembling a bud under the softening of the testicles, and this causes difficulty in exercise and walking for the patient.
And in treating this condition, there's concern due to what follows it in memory.
However consider that when speaking of surgery, I follow the first method as described.
And say that when you place the patient on an elevated surface; then move the suspensory of the testicles to those parts; and touch the nerve of the glands with your fingers in those veins which are palpable near the belly button; and have another servant ready, and extend them with vigorous extension.
And then make an incision through the skin in a diagonal section across the vessels where you can see the vessels.
And then excise from all parts in this manner as we've said for removal of arteries which are located under the arms.
And then insert in those an needle with a double thread, and tie that at the first location where veins occur, and tie another vein at the last of them. And then enter those into the middle area by straight section according to the length of the body, and extract that which is added by the moist putrid and corrupted humors.
And then treat the wound with the cure of other wounds where you wish for health to be generated through which the vessels fall under two genetic types, which do not cause harm in this way.
If it happens to affect all the veins, then remove or extract the testicles or cause them to be removed through this method for their vessels, in order that they lack nourishment due to the obstruction of the vessels, and become hardened, or cause it so that there is no youth among those.
Chapter 65.
On the treatment of intestinal hernia.
The occurrence of this hernia is due to a section that extends over the belly from the sides of the abdominal muscles, causing the parts of that rupture to join some of the intestines.
And this rupture is either from the muscle or protrusion of it, and this condition affects these two species due to various causes: impact, or by jumping, or due to shouting, or due to lifting any heavy cause, or due to exertion.
And the sign of this, when it's due to extension of the muscle, is that it occurs gradually over a long period, and does not occur suddenly, and there is an abscess evenly inside the belly where the muscle compresses the intestine.
And the sign of this is when it's due to a section of the muscle, at the beginning it causes sudden intense pain; and there is an abscess visibly different from what you can see below the apparent cause, and this is due to the movement of the intestine, and his body towards the parts forward of the muscle.
And some ulcers are removed from within the intestine, and this is called intestinal hernia with scarring.
And some ulcers are caused by windiness, and some ulcers run into the intestine opening, and they get stuck there, and this is a great suffering for patients, and some ulcers cause painful conditions that worsen when pressed.
And in the treatment of these species of this illness we must be cautious, because it should be avoided to engage in that activity there.
And the method for performing this operation is to order the patient to reduce the intestine with his hand at the inner parts of its cavity if he resists during his return, and then place your hands under his chest between his legs, and lift his limbs.
And then stretch the cord which secures the testicles at the upper parts, and cut the part of the testicle's cord; and then make two cuts in the incision area according to your need to open this section among them.
And if the opening according to the amount that is possible from that, let it be made through the section.
And then cleanse that muscle which is left of the testicles' cord, while revealing the white firm muscle from every part.
And then you intervene in the place where the testicle is cut off, which is between the white muscle, which is left of the cord of the animal's tail, and the other side according to it, and relieve that adhesion behind the tail part.
And then take the testicles' cord towards the forward parts, and as such extend the white muscle on your left hand, lift the animal's tail towards the muscle at this part; and command the assistant to stretch it under you, you then dissolve that adhesion behind with a full solution.
And check with your fingers so there's no cause for the intestine wrapped in the firm white muscle. If you find any cause from him/her/it, then you remove that off to the belly side.
And then cut in the part left of the cord of the testicles through the section which flows with health and healing as we have recommended in what we have discussed.
And then apply oil-soaked wool, and place it on the wound; and administer the bandage as we have recommended (and some ulcers of the white muscle are cauterized, which we have mentioned in relation to preventing blood flow, for which ulcers occur), and smooth the bandage so that it falls by itself.
If the operation takes too long, then heat the water, and place it over the area where we instructed to apply heat.
And treat the wound with the other cure for the wounds until they are healed.
Chapter sixty-six.
On venous hernias.
In this hernia, nothing has been seen that should be burned during the treatment of the patient.
And the first said that it is done in this way as we have described for the hernia that is inflamed; which is to say that you tie up the vessels close to the section above that facilitates its movement; and then dry it around the middle point in the vicinity of the abscess where I open, into which the vessels would fall.
And treat the wound according to what we have said until it is healed.
Chapter sixty-seven.
On the disorder that occurs in the gullets.
Sometimes tears occur in the gullets as we have described, and you should identify the area.
And do not attribute any cause of the intestines to the veins; and if they do, there are only a few; and return them all at all times.
If the time is prolonged with this, there is a tear in the chest where the intestine descends into the chest; and this happens due to the extension of the chest which is present in the gullets as we have described, the cause being that the chest is extended, and it makes the area soft and it becomes inflamed, then you will notice.
And the treatment of the patient is with a cautery as described before in its treatment.
And some cases are healed with iron according to this manner: which is that the patient lies on their back between your hands, and then dry the area of the abscess rupture, place it under pressure in the middle according to the width as large as three fingers.
And strengthen the white chest that is below the collarbone where it is exposed.
And take hold of the rib and place it on the prominent part of the chest, and press it onto the navel of the abdomen.
And place both prominent areas on the end of the rib of the chest, and adjust one of those to the other for sewing.
And take out the end of the rib, do not cut into the chest completely, nor pull on the heart, or any other cause like those I have learned about in treating intestinal hernias.
And treat that in the treatment of wounds, and if you incise the roots, cleanse it and restore the wound until it is consolidated; which means that the chest has contracted and the prominence of rupture is not adjusted.
And cautery is better in this area, which is closer to health.
Chapter sixty-eight.
On the softening of the neck of the testicles.
Some cases the neck of the testicles in some men is softened due to this as the muscles that are within it are softened, and you should examine the patient.
It is necessary for the one who treats the patient to make the patient lie according to their two hands, and incise all of the neck that has been softened over the natural neck; and place two lips on the sewing.
And if you wish, take hold of at the beginning the excess of the softened neck with three or four stitches and make a firm sewing.
And place the stitches between them; and treat according to the treatment of the other wounds until it is healed, and they fall out.
Chapter sixty-nine.
On castration.
Know that castration in our law is condemned, but due to some reason, it has been mentioned to me that I should remember this in this free text; and it is not necessary to remember this unless for two ways, of which one is when you are questioned about this in the art of medicine, that they should know how to treat this patient who might have castration, and the other way is that we sometimes need castration of other animals for our children's needs, as well as for tools, and bowls, and pigs, and similar to these animals.
And so I say that castration is done in two ways: either by cauterization or through a cut to section.
When this is done by cauterization, the operation process involves cutting off the animal in hot water so that its testicles soften and hang. And take those with your hand until they are resolved without showing signs of the incision.
And in castration done by cut and sectioning, you should have the animal lying down with your left hand pressing on the neck of the testicles.
And tie the suspensory, and cut over each heart in one section where two hearts will proceed.
And cut those pus that you have found from anywhere. And do not allow any cause about the ones in the chest, but only the subtle chest which is above the veins.
And this method of castration is better which is done by cautery, as cautery gently leaves no cause for the testicles so that the animal desires intercourse.
And then treat the wound until it is healed.
Chapter 70.
On the treatment of hermaphroditism.
Hermaphroditism in men occurs in two ways: one is when it appears in the middle of the space in the scrotum, which is between the two testicles; there is a part that resembles the female partner where hair grows.
And some of those secretions cause urine to flow in the duct of the testicles.
In the females, there is a special case: that of the female genitalia being like two testicles in men somewhat smaller than half each; they are placed so as to be almost like the penis of men and similar to their testicles.
And the treatment is for three types: two from men and one type from women. And it means that you should insert those tightened muscles where the secretion of that thing escapes, and then proceed with treating those injuries along with other wounds.
And for the second type in men from which urine flows, which is in the duct of the testicles, there is neither treatment nor operation on it.
Chapter 21.
On lumps and flesh protrusions due to female causes.
A firm lump is adjusted due to natural causes and gets a regular examination; some swellings become exaggerated in certain women, spreading like in men, and enter during intercourse.
Then you should remove the excess of lumps with your hand or a tool and insert it.
And don't stop at insertion; particularly in the middle of the process, make sure that there is no flow of pus.
And afterwards treat that with the treatment until it heals.
Birth flesh is tissue that grows within the mother's womb filling it up, and firm lumps are formed in those parts forward according to resemblance of cow (and thus they called this "tail disease" initially); so you should insert it like inserting a lump, and treat it until it heals.
Chapter 72.
On the treatment of hernia.
Hernia occurs when the woman's uterus is not perforated, or when it descends slightly. And it can be either due to nature or by accident.
Accidental is due to tail disease which preceded it, and that is caused either by loose or poorly adjusted flesh, or by a thin or thick cord.
And it occurs either in the middle of pregnancy, or on her back, or in excess pus within her, or below her, and forbid intercourse, conception, and childbirth, and prohibit excessive menstruation.
The knowledge of that is made by examining the womb; if the protrusion is noticeable, proceed immediately; but if it's not noticeable, then you need to search for that with your fingers or by touch.
If the protrusion is due to a thin cord, and it's close to the two lips, then you should pinch and relieve that.
And you place your fingers on the two lips until they touch the inner folds of both breasts.
And the woman should be on her back, with her legs spread apart, and you then extend both lips until that thin cord is broken and the protrusion is opened.
And then take wool and dip it in oil and place that over the area, and keep doing this for a day until the inserted location is not consolidated.
And if the cord is thick and dense, then you should insert that in a fatty area or in laurel leaf.
And if the protrusion is due to weakness of flesh, then suspend that with a tool, and insert that.
And use medicines that stop pus discharge and throbbing, such as atkins, dragon's blood, and ashes, adjusted with almond oil.
And then administer a wide lead pipe for the wound not to be consolidated lightly.
And keep that there for some days and apply lime juice.
And then treat it with the other consolidation treatment until it heals.
And sometimes occurrences happen during pregnancy related to other tissues, and you should insert them according to this method. And if it's due to a pus-filled boil, then for the boil filled with pus inside the womb should not be made against iron in any manner.
Chapter 73.
On the treatment of hemorrhoids, tail diseases, and red bubbles that occur in the womb of women.
Hemorrhoids are an accumulation in the openings of veins where pus flows continuously; and old hemorrhoids occur like this.
And I have already mentioned the types of those and their signs, and to explain which ones receive treatment and which do not.
So it's said that hemorrhoids and boils during pregnancy that do not appear through the sense of touch, in those cases, there should be no treatment with iron.
And those ones which are on the openings of the womb where you can feel them, these are the ones that receive treatment.
And when you put the woman in bed, rub her and then extend her on the mattress or on rough cloth, and pierce those with the razors.
And then apply the powders over those, using the extracts of the tincture's urine from one of the digestive powders for a few bites, similarly to how it is done with those.
And then soak her feet for an hour, and after that, let that be in hot water.
And if the urine keeps flowing, then have her take a decoction of sumac and dried hawthorn berries and gooseberries and similar things.
And then take flour from oats, mix that with honey and wine and make a poultice of that to apply on the back.
And if the bleeding stops, drink it; otherwise, stick two bandages on her and on each breast make incisions.
And then take wool and immerse that in the juice of vinegar or in the juice of hyssop or in the whey of vinegar and wine, and stick it on the spot; and then treat the area with ointment until it heals.
And treat that until it heals.
Chapter 74.
On the operation of accidentally piercing an appendix in pregnancy.
Special symptoms of abscesses occurring in pregnancy, such as swelling, abscess from urination stones, ulcers, hemorrhoidal abscesses, menstrual abscesses, fistulae with bleeding, ruptures, and other abscesses. And I have already mentioned these ailments and their specific symptoms, as well as the signs of them, and the treatments for them in this division.
And when I say in this treatise about gynecological abscesses caused by pus, if you want to know how the operation is performed for them, then consider it.
Then consider if the pain from the abscess in its beginning is sharp upon percussion, phlegm, and fever, and sometimes there may be redness around it and if there's discomfort over it, then you suspect a perforation of it. Treat that with what helps during maturation until the intensity of the accidents ceases.
And then consider having the woman cut on a table that has two surfaces; lie her back up and adjust her feet to the lower part of the belly, have her thighs spread out, place her arms under her buttocks, and tie them firmly with what is appropriate.
And then the midwife should follow with the right hand and administer the instrument over which there is an opening in the belly, its shape will come from those causes that we shall explain further.
And when you want to administer this tool, fix it on the line of the mother's belly in the woman, and let nothing from the tool enter the belly more than the line of the mother, thus saving the patient. And if the tool is larger than the line of the mother's belly, then consider sprinkling powders over the texture of the line to prevent all of the tool from entering within the line of the belly.
And when you want to place the vibration that runs in the tool of the right side above and let the minister have the tool while shaking the vibration until it's able to open the opening of the belly.
And when you notice the excitation and it is touched with the hand and it is long and wet, then consider having that dried on the head of the tool with a heating lamp.
And when the healing is evacuated, consider having on the wound a poultice immersed in camphor oil or turpentine oil with some inflammation; place the foot in the section over the line of the belly.
And release the belly and over the navel, place clean wool cloth immersed in water in which there are boiled oranges.
And then after about two days treat it with ointment until it heals.
And sometimes the sores are washed and cleansed in water with honey, which then returns to being treated with water in which the bark of lime or the root of rhubarb has been boiled, and after that resumes treatment with ointment.
And if the wound is in the belly and swollen, consider prohibiting treatment for it by force, instead treat that with what we have said about its cure in this division.
Chapter 75.
To teach midwives in what manner to treat breech births when they occur according to an unnatural figure.
A necessary cause is for the midwife to recognize in its beginning the figure of a natural birth by signs. And when you observe the woman push from her lower parts and desires to smell the air, and upon this she is cheered up because of what is happening during childbirth, and accelerates fetal descent, then you know that this part occurs according to a natural figure, it's the fetus descending towards its head, and secondly attached or hanging from the umbilical cord.
Then when you notice those signs, consider that her belly is compressed by itself so the fetus descends lightly as it passes over its head; have her push the second time, and let there be a good reduction of those excesses for good restoration.
If someone else is this part of it not-natural and un-livable, when the child sits on their feet and the body of the person is in front of the head of the person and the hand of the person or at the foot of the person,. . . Or when the head of the person and the hand of the person is in front of them, or at their belly, and firmly they are turned onto their back, resembling the un-livable figures of the person.
A necessary cause is for the midwife to be knowledgeable and subtle in all those causes, and to guard against error and deception.
And I will show you every figure of those [conditions], and which organ is in those [conditions] through which it is signified and where it stands.
When the illness is sitting on its head due to natural evacuation, it's strong in women and occurs at their difficult part, and sometimes the virtue has already weakened, then perform this action for those that women have within them, and evaporate the sweat of their body with fennel oil and hot water.
And then the midwife inserts her finger between the woman's anus and rectum, or applies this to their navel where what is wetness flows out. And presses on the belly of the woman so that she gives birth to it.
If they do not give birth, then cause the woman to be irritated by colic of wind and fennel colic in their stomach.
And then order her, direct the water, that she compresses and makes her sneeze with a potion; and keep her mouth and nose open for an hour, so that the child comes out very quickly.
And if both parts of the child are expelled at mealtimes, then cause you to reduce those gradually with small facilitation in portions. If she does not follow the instruction, then lay the woman on one of her sides and lift her feet off the ground, and soon overturn the side on the earth; and keep the woman so that she does not fall from the concussion.
And if the parts are not turned inside out and the child does not come down, then insert those and remove the membranes of the child or place the body on the hand of the person with cloth and remove that equally, so that it comes very quickly.
When the child is on its feet, then cause you to push those inwards, and gradually turn the small child, and make that equal, and take one of its feet and extend those gradually.
When it is inside between the thighs, then command her to squeeze and make her sneeze with condition, so that it comes very quickly if God wills.
And if it is not expelled with what we have recommended, then return the small child gradually until you place that according to its natural figure, so that it will be expelled very quickly in slight labor.
And if it is prohibited to do all that we have recommended, then take fennel and dissolved gum, and crush them together in the mortar with good grinding, and apply that to the sweat of the woman, the lower pus of her belly. And then let her pass urine in boiling water so that she can achieve her sides.
And whenever the parts you left with are softened, then let her take inhalation of myrtle and rest it on her. And when she has the inhalation for an hour, then let her lie on one of her sides, and have her sneeze and open her mouth, and lift her from that, and press the lowest part of her belly very gently, so that the child will come out very quickly.
Positioning of the fetus in a lateral hanging position on one of its parts. Make it equal in reduction of her hand, but if you cannot reduce that, then raise the woman and let her go.
And if she cannot go, then make her lie on her side, and compress her thighs with strong concussion, and apply lime which I recommended of the remedies.
And if the labor has come, then make her sneeze on a side, and study about reducing her hand, and make the child equal according to its natural figure, and make the woman sneeze and command her to squeeze herself so that it comes out.
Position of the fetus over its back, spreading its parts, and the woman's flesh is at two points of her mother. When the midwife holds the baby's head and gently rotates that small one little by little, so that it becomes easier.
And just like this when they are equalized, and then place something on the patient's forehead as we advised previously about oil and poultices.
And instruct the patient to turn little by little, and when you have done this, then make that person sit on one leg and command them to lean over straight ahead, and also command them to press their head down; and ask them to sneeze in a certain way. The prepared fetal exit is made on the side.
When the mother's pain is at its most severe following this method, consider it, and then you should subside the second one inside your elbow where moisture can be expelled.
And if the baby is hanging over the neck and back of the patient, then you should subside that one from behind, so as not to be retained or stay.
And then push the baby towards the internal passages, while you pause that second one covering it, and command the woman to take several breaths, and let him out gently if God wills.
The delivery of twins or multiple fetuses. You must know that twin births are rare, and some have even seen them three or four times, but this is strange and difficult to understand; most of these are caused by natural reasons, not by living.
And consider those, whether they are multiplied, one second, and are separated by the placenta, distinguish those among them in their umbilical cord. Some births occur naturally like a single baby, and some births are impossible due to circumstances as we have advised.
And if some of them are difficult, you should guide the birth and proceed to what we have said about the unnatural figures. Then you treat those as we have recounted.
And if the midwife is subtle and does what makes it easy and subtlety, as well as delays, and adapts her method according to every figure once she has brought about health through her skill.
Remembering what forms within the womb from embryos, and those that abort.
Some lesions are formed in the first one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and even more than ten. You should check that out for yourself if a pregnant woman has aborted her fetus, and another x number of them have been formed; this results from measuring the glorious senses.
And all this is known to the midwifery science which allows her to deal with that small resemblance of what it is and therefore stands by it according to what she knows.
Chapter 76.
On removing the fetus when it is dead.
When you care for the dead fetus as we have advised in the division of medication and it is not expelled by natural birth, then if you are forced to use surgery with your hands, consider whether the woman is in good health and does not belong to any of the accidents through which her loss is feared.
And consider that the woman should be laid on her back with her stomach up, and her head inclined upwards and her thighs raised.
And the minister should have that of both sides or be bound on her back for so that the body of the patient does not extend beyond the removal of the fetus.
And then you moisten the mother's mouth with oil and wet cloths, as well as with honey, fennel, and sesame seeds.
And then anoint the midwife's hands with those oils and poultices, and then place her hand in a comfortable position under the mother, and then adjust the location where you will find the nails on the fetus.
Place yourself conveniently in this: then consider if the fetus is ready to descend with its head, and then place the nails on its heels, or around its neck, or in its mouth, or on its palate, or let your beard fall, or at its sternum, or near its spinal areas, or let your underarms hang.
If the descent is from its feet, then at the pubis, or in the middle of the back.
And consider that the nail should be in your right hand, and place the curvature of it in that place which is between the last two fingers of your left hand, and place your hand comfortably while putting the nail in one of those places that we have said, so as to reach the final cause.
And adjust and place another nail, or the third if necessary, so that there is an equal pressure and not an extension according to its straightness only.
And make the effort at every part, so that the extraction of it is alleviated as if it were done with the removal of a tooth.
And consider that the extension should be softened in what is between them; and if any part of it is retained, then you must know that the midwife moistens some fingers with oil and handles this skillfully while rotating around that which is being retained.
Therefore, if the part of the fetus is expelled, then the nails should be placed near that which is more suitable; and do this so that the entire fetus is expelled.
If the hand is embedded in front of the other one, and it's not possible to reduce that by squeezing him, then cover that with a cloth; and later extract that from all around, and cut into it or near the joint of the hand or along the side.
And apply this on the other hand and on both feet.
If the head of the fetus is large, or it occurs to him by squeezing during labor, or if there's water retention in his head, then apply this to enter between the fingers and slice open the head, or extract the water, or find that out with an instrument which is called "the scalpel", its shape will come close to these among the other instruments in the chapter which is approximately this.
Similarly do this if the fetus has a large head by nature: and then apply this to cut into it with a saw, or take that with an scalpel as we have said; and later remove the bones with the forceps.
And if the head is stuck and squeezed by the sacrum, then make a cut inside where the moisture which is in the feet can be dissolved.
If it's not complicated and there's no need for labor, then you cut the head just as it suits you.
And if the belly parts are stuck or in his urine, then apply this to pierce it where runs the moisture that's within him.
If the fetus is on its feet, then the pressure on him is light and the direction from him to the mother's mouth is slight.
If it's squeezed by the abdomen and feet, then apply this to extract that with cloth which you will cover your hand with, and cut the abdomen and feet where runs this as in those.
If the other limbs are still and turn the head, then insert the left hand into this; if the mother's mouth is opened, then insert your hand in her belly button, and encircle that with the head, and pull it towards the fingers to the mother's mouth, and later insert one or two inches, and pull him towards those.
And if the mother's mouth is squeezed by pus in the belly which happens to him, then apply this not to be overly lifted over him; before applying this, first administer an emollient for wet causes. And apply bandages; and care for the patient with waters that soften and moisten.
And if the fetus is on its side, then if it's possible, make it straight: and administer what we've said for the living fetus.
And if this is not possible, then cut open with scissors, and extract it.
And apply that you don't leave any cause for the second one inside.
And when you have completed all your operation, then administer what we've said for the care of the wounds from the pus-causing conditions that come from the mother.
And if there is bleeding, then apply in warm waters and administer the other treatment.
And I have already seen a woman in her belly with a dead fetus, and nearby around that fire another pregnancy was started, and a dead fetus is the result of this other. A long time ago it happened to him an abscess in his belly; and inflated inside that big fire, and began to sweat blood.
And I was called upon to treat him, and treated him for a long time, and the wound has not consolidated.
Therefore I placed on him of some causes strong plaster for extraction, and removed one bone from him, and after a few days passed, and removed another bone; and I was too amazed, because in the belly there is no bone.
And then I realized that they were of the bones of the dead fetus.
And then I gushed the wound, and extracted bones of the dead fetus from him, the woman existing in her own intimate arrangements, and had already seen such a manner for a long time, cured him of a little bit of blood.
And I do not attribute this to be strange, but rather that in this is knowledge and assistance for what the doctor artist does with his hand for treatment.
Regarding the forms of the tools that are necessary to extract the fetus.
Shape for turning which is open in the mother:
This is the shape of the stretcher on which they are equalized, to this equality there are two handles at both ends of two fetuses. However, this handle should be more delicate for squeezing and made of wood or bone.
And the width of each handle is as large as two fingers, and the edge of each on both sides is one finger, and the length of each is a palm and half; and in the middle place of two handles are two joints for those that fit the handles, which are already tight, from which the length is about a palm and a little less, and the width of each is as large as two fingers, or a little less.
And these two attachments should be inserted into the mother's mouth so that they open to those when you turn the two prescribed handles.
Another shape similar to that, but more delicate and lighter:
When it's caused by the presence of heat or fire according to the resemblance of forceps. However, at the extremity of their body there are two appendages like these as sometimes happen, and the length of those appendages is about a handspan, while the width of each is two inches.
And if you want to open the larger ones, then you should make a cut in the flesh while the feet are hanging down, and widen it as much as is between the thighs of them. Then open your hand with the tool like you would use a pair of shears equally according to the amount that you want from the opening of the belly of the larger one, making sure that the measuring tool does as you wish.
The way of giddiness which the ancients said:
The form of propulsion in which it is propelled by force:
The form of entanglement in which the large head is contained.
And it resembles forceps with teeth at the extremity, as sometimes happens, and some cases require being longer like forceps according to this form, as sometimes, which has teeth like those of a saw in which it is inserted and contained. The form of entanglement for few:
The form of a hook having one spine:
The form of a hook having two spines:
The form of a pair (possibly referring to scissors or another tool) that has two extremities where the head is severed.
The form of two spatulas laid out:
All those instruments are practiced, and when more of them have multiple species and they are prepared by the artisans, as much as it is easier to their operation and as much autonomy should be given to humans according to their quantity.
And do not use those instruments simply anywhere; what is necessary about those cannot be excusable.
Regarding the extraction of the second one.
When the second one is retained, you should induce birth. Then instruct the mother to retain her own breath, and make her sneeze with the condition, and hold your hand over her mouth and her nose. If it comes out this way, it's good.
And if not, then take a cloth and make a hole in the cover with a straw and place in that herb over the mother's mouth, like a balm and rudely and nettle and chamomile and powdered saffron and cinnamon sticks and absinth. All these herbs or some of them should be submerged in water in the cloth, and place that over the fire.
And place a calabash tube in the mother's mouth, and let that go inside so that the vapor comes to the cavity of the mother.
And have her sneeze as we have said, and the second one will come out easily.
May this treatment remain with you and not be forgotten. If it is not used, then instruct the midwife to submerge her left hand in oil of sassafras or in alum powder, and immerse that into her stomach, and pull out the second one easily. And when you have found it, take it little by little. May this attach to the mother's womb. Then insert your hand as we have recommended, and once you find the second one, remove it slowly according to its rectitude so that the mother doesn't fall due to her own effort. Before you start, make sure she is lying on both sides for ease.
And if the mother's mouth is constricted, we have already recommended the treatment with sneezing and using herbs in the cloth.
And if it is not removed by all the causes we have recommended, then make sure you don't tire working on her continuously. However, you should have that which comes out of her to her mother's mouth lying on the thigh of the woman, and apply a grease and tetracycline ointment; for that will cause that process to be clarified over several days, it will dissolve, and be easily removed.
And when it happens, the bad smell ascends to her head and stomach, and that discomforts the mother; and then you should know how to administer sub-smoke treatments and things suitable for this.
Such as the ancients already used sub-smoke treatments with nettles and dried figs.
The form of an instrument by which the woman is sub-smoked for the retention of her menstrual cycle and second fetus:
Made from ash or herbs.
And place the delicate tip in the stomach and the broad end over the fire, and the sub-smoke treatment should be placed over the arms of the fire.
And let that go inside so that that smoke is consumed and repeat it again.
Regarding the treatment of an unperforated baby's anus.
The child is born and its butts are not punctured, which are already thin and thick. Then instruct the midwife to puncture it with her finger; if not, puncture it with a sharp pair and make sure not to touch the scab.
And then press on that overheated wool in the air and smell it; and then treat that part of the ointment inside that is not burned.
If you fear it has become inflamed, then keep a tube in the stomach for several days, and stop when the child wishes to defecate.
And if there is pus in the buttocks due to consolidation of an abscess or boil; then know that this consolidation has softened, and apply the treatment we have said about healing and lead.
Regarding the treatment of the fistulas that happen to you.
The fistulas that occur in the lower part, causing a low discharge of pus and swelling, those that occur near the anus or in the space between one buttock.
And it's either a fistula or lumps.
And when that swelling is old and moistened by the white watery moisture or pus, some of these ulcers are due to these fistulas sometimes penetrating them.
And those that penetrate are known by the way they are affected due to discharge and ventilation; some of these ulcers cause discomfort in the patient during discharge, and others make the patient suffer from worms.
And some of these ulcers occur in the space penetrating into the bladder, and into the male organ; and some penetrate into the joint of the thigh and into the anus.
And in which a penetrating fistula goes into the anus and does not penetrate, it is that you put your finger inside the anus, and insert a thin tip of metal or iron into the fistula when there is no resistance.
If there is resistance in that one, then insert that thin tip of lead or horse hair into it where you feel the tip or the hair on your finger.
And if you do not feel that throughout or do not find any cause of discharge, vomiting or discomfort as we have said, then know that it is non-penetrating, and then take care in the treatment.
And when the fistula penetrates into the bladder or into the male organ, then its meaning is the elimination of urine from that and restriction for him until this condition is consolidated with medical treatment.
If it penetrates into the joint of the thigh or into the bone causing pain in the vessels, then this is a sign that the tip passes inside here if there is no resistance inside the bone and pain in the vessel circuit of the limb; and that there is persistent pus discharge; and it does not apply to that medicine, nor is it consolidated with ointment.
And in all those penetrating fistulas, there is not a cure of everything, and the treatment of these consists of hard work and patience from the surgeons on which they operate.
And for those that are not penetrating and are not old, healing with iron is expected as I will recommend you later, and what I have already and recommended.
And it is that the patient lies between your hands on his back and lifts his limbs under him, making his thighs inclined towards his abdomen, then insert a tip of iron or horsehair into the obstructed fistula, where you know the location from which the tip passes.
And if that is the patient near his stomach, then know that you should insert your finger inside his stomach.
And if you feel that the tip is already out of your finger, then insert it carefully so as not to expose yourself to discovery. If you feel something between your finger and a siphon or flesh, then you know for sure that this is penetrating; and thus do not work on this, which does not have a cure, as we have said.
However, some say that it can be cured in certain people quickly.
And about the treatment for which youth is expected in him, that you use subtle cautery according to the size of the fistula as previously described, and insert that burning into the fistula until it reaches near the stomach; then repeatedly do this two or three times until you know that all those flesh parts that resemble feathers are well adhered.
And then treat that with bandages wrapped in grease until all those flesh parts that are adhered can heal, and also treat that with medicines for the producing and consolidating flesh, and if it is cured, it's good; otherwise, then this will not be healed within time for any other treatment.
And if the tip enters and does not penetrate into your finger which is in the anus, and between that and a tip that is densely covered with flesh or siphon, and sometimes the fistula in this that sears the surface of the anus, then dry out the anus from the beginning of the fistula, and you see if it dries on the tip, and whether inside the fistula until the drying reaches the place where the end of the tip passes, and through the tip it is liberated and escapes.
And then normalize those fistulous flesh parts that resemble a feather pen tube and do not break them by any cause.
And when the discharge of pus comes between you and your operation as you touch those flesh parts, then let there be a moderate amount both of blood and pus with a minor instrument to cauterize with fire or with acute medicine, where fire cauterization adjusts two good habits: it is adjustment of those adhered flesh parts, and removal of pus through drying of the moisture.
And if it is an area covered with bandages or in which there are blisters inside the affected area, then carefully treat that place with grease or hard oil ointments for healing and strengthening.
And so medicines in which there is inflammation and discharge; once these are restored, it is already healed and you do not fear repetition.
May it be that the fistula has already penetrated into the anus and is elongated from your body's surface, then intervene with your tool in the anus and ask about that.
And so if you test it and between you and her is quickly through the flesh or meat, and it is prone to penetration, then not an operation in her but according to the path of faith and hope.
That cause must be administered in her one of three ways: either by cauterizing that as we have said; or by searing that where you achieve the cavity of it so that you are able to intervene with those and the healing is likely; and do not proceed with a section through the discharge for fear that you do not enter the containing fluid, and that you carry out over your thigh according to the desire of the patient; and then treat that as we said that strength leads to recovery; or lengthen that quickly and remove that pus that you sear inside near the anus, as we said, or on the testicle or with another sharp tool, and then change those fatty tissues that are fistulated which are in the discharge section; and strive to restore the entire wound from that section, and if the pus holes above are not consolidated, and opens the open fistula at the exit of the anus, and leads less pus over your thigh. And sometimes the fistula is closed according to this manner: when you introduce the test into the fistula, and near the anus around your body on the surface of the thigh, and near the exit of the anus, then take a test for perforated extremity, which is like a needle preparing the skin in this form:
And intervene in that field covered with many fields or around those; and then intervene the test on the field inside the fistula where you achieve the cavity of it.
And if it penetrates near the exit of the anus inside, then you remove that field as far as your tool fits in the anus; and you take out the extremity of the field and adjust both extremities at once, strengthen each one, and leave this for a day or two, and when more enters the field into the flesh, strengthen again inside where those tissues are pierced between the two ends of the field which fit.
And then treat the wound until it is consolidated and healed.
And if the hole of the fistula is not penetrable, then make it penetrate in any manner you are prepared for, but only inside the anus, which is not up to you to do so that you do not enter the fluid; and then make it inside until it is healed.
The shape of the spade for what is slit in the fistula: its curvature is quite sharp on one side and not so sharp on the other part, so that you do not enter what is unnecessary, as sometimes.
Sewing of hemorrhoids where there is pain at the opening of those.
Hemorrhoids are according to two ways, either they resemble inside the anus like charcoal, or those are similar when it comes to grease like that of raisins. And from those they are small and large, and the pain that comes with those is one, it's like a lump, and it's inside the anus, and at its extremities.
But those that are inside the anus are according to the types of less humidity, which have yellowish water or a little pain in the body continuously, and according to the color of the body.
And the treatment for that inside the anus is to command the patient to lie down and squeeze so that the anus discharges and the hemorrhoids appear to you. Then you prepare yourself and support with strings or what you have those under your nails, and then you cut the veins that are their arteries.
And if the nails are not there due to their moisture and softness of those, then take them with rough cloth or with cord or with wool blanket, and cut those with your scissors, and then cut those and sprinkle over them some powdered medications near the opening, so that they replace it for cauterizing; or cauterize those according to what is instructed in the section on cauterizing. And then treat those with the other treatment until they are healed.
And if the anus does not allow an exit, then restrain the patient with restraint in which there is a slight biting, and wash it with that water that is inside the anus that allows easier discharge when the body is squeezed.
And if the hemorrhoids are outside the anus, then their cause is minor, and you take those with your nails, or you take those with strings, cut those, and then treat those as we said until they are healed.
And that which you have cut open, consider to administer sewing for them according to this manner: take a wrapped field and introduce that in the needle and then remove the hemorrhoids from their sides, and make it penetrate through the needle on the other side of the opening; wrap both ends of the field around the part after removing the needle, longitudinally; strengthen the hemorrhoid with strong structure, and then pinch the field and pull out the needle.
And do this to all, leave one out, by which the excess of the illness can flow from that.
Then place on the buttocks a pad drenched in rosin oil or in wadding; and place that under the buttocks, and instruct the patient to lie there. Then place that within the container; and when it is cured, treat those with grease or apply another remedy until it is healed.
And since they are old and no longer effective in that medicine, then apply them at the tip of the sword or with your thumb until they become wet, and let the pus scab over there; you must prevent it from consolidating; and when they have consolidated, treat them until they heal.
And you should apply them with a good amount of pus that the first enters and causes abrasions; and then treat them until they are healed.
Understand that knowing how to drain the pus, this is crucial, and it should not be done unless its redness resembles a spot of a knife, and it occurs throughout the body but especially in the feet and hands, and for those, you should continue until you feel relief from the pain.
And then apply so that it penetrates what is in the circuit of pus, and keep it with forceps or with tweezers, and remove it from its base; and then treat that.
And if you want, apply a cautery after what precedes in its head.
True warts are small, hard, round fistulas on the surface of the body, and wounds that occur in most children.
And for treatment, you should spread or cut that, or apply the mustard or with wax until it heals. And if you want, apply a cautery to this, as we have said, with fire or with acute medicine.
Ants are small, furry or fleshy, large fistulas on the surface of the body that occur in the armpits, and when you find this one, it resembles the bite of an ant in them, and they occur around the body.
And for treatment, take a silver or horn pipe, and it should be strong, place that over the ant, so that it contains the circle of the parts around the ant; then rotate your hand around the pipe until you cut what is in the circuit of the ant, and stop that at the base of the skin, and remove the ant from its base.
And if you want, do this with a copper or iron pipe as follows:
Take the part above the pipe that is thin, silent (that means not perforated), wrapped around so that its appearance resembles it and is erased, and rotate this.
And if you want, apply the ant according to what was previously mentioned in the cautery treatment of ants in the head of the cautery.
Regarding the form of the instruments that are used for bleeding.
Some wounds are treated with bleeding using silver or tin or melted copper or hammered metal instruments; and some wounds are treated with those small and large instruments according to the ones used, where the one that is used in the treatment of small children's sores should be small; and from those whose buttocks are freckled or painful, the bleeds for those should be small.
The form of a large but few:
The tip of the pipe above where the bag is tied should be wide according to this manner; and at its distance, as many times the bag is tied.
And the end of the pus in it, which penetrates into the anus, should be silent (meaning not open) and bent forward slightly; and on one side of the hole there are two teeth, and on the other side one tooth, and the width of the tooth according to the thickness of the rays and large pus is small.
And the bag in which you place the medicines of bladder beast or sheep skin, its base should be a palm.
And it should be pierced by the teeth in this manner as they are twisted; and if the space between the teeth is the thickness of the said.
And then insert into those teeth strong raw lead that is the size of ten pieces or about so many; and adjust this bag to it; and when you place this bag in them, make sure it's straight at the tip of the bleeding device between two distinguishing ones with firm constriction, and bleed under each tooth: The quality of bleeding under each tooth is that you fill the bag with medicine until it's hot according to the tolerance capacity of the patient; be careful not to let too much fluid out or too little.
And the patient should be lying on his back, and raise their knees towards him and place a pillow under them or a rug; then smear the edge of the cautery with oil or with egg white or with fennel or celery paste; then insert that into the anus with ease, and guide this to remove the bag; and when you have it, squeeze out that from two places at the same time in a strong manner until everything inside the bleeding device is evacuated; and then take off the bleeding device and raise the patient's knees to the wall.
And if medicine forces him to abstain, have it as much as possible; and if he stays awake for the whole night, it's better rather than later in youth.
Better if you sterilize him in the illnesses of stomach obstruction and the pain in his thighs, then you will apply the cautery inside until he is healed.
And if there are bloody discharges or abscesses in the buttocks, then it is a subtle and dangerous operation of sterilization, among which children are sterilized.
For the treatment of the plagues.
I have already spoken about the division of the treatment of the plagues as was suitable for the free, and I also describe here the treatment of those with me and according to medicines as per their preference.
So it says that the plagues are diversified according to how the plagues occur and according to the location upon which they fall.
And the reasons why some places swell from plagues are thus due to metal poisoning, or incision of space or of a boil, or striking with a spear, or with a staff, or with an arrow, or similar to those causes of swelling.
Better the plagues that are in parts of the body are thus as a plague that falls on the head, or neck, or foot, or stomach, or groin, and similarly to those of the limbs.
And I am recommending the treatment of some plagues, for which you should pause that reasoning and rule on the others.
And I start with the simple head plagues, for which the recall of the composed ones will come at the beginning of the next chapter.
So it says that when a simple head plague occurs and is not a fracture, then consider: if it's due to metal poisoning or something similar, and you have drained the fluid only as much as possible and it's a large head boil and you fear the sudden development of an abscess in the patient, then apply a cautery and perform a cephalic leeching at once, don't delay; and extract from that point according to the amount of virtue there is if not any other cause prevents leeching, especially if the fluid that comes out of the boil is little.
And it's leeching from the opposite side of the affected part; and watch over the patient for fullness, thirst, and heavy foods.
Better if you have excluded any cause of the diminution, then it should be reduced in food and not approach meat or drink.
And pause about the plague, if it happens to him that an abscess develops with a cautery, apply oil that has been rubbed or in wine in which it is anti-inflammatory.
Better if you are sure of an abscess with a cautery, then pause about the plague, if it is early in their pus and the air has not changed that powder which I recommend to apply slightly.
And if the air has already changed that, then pause about applying some ointments until it is healed.
Better if the boil is large or due to incision of space and something else, and if the patient's lips are not adjusted by pins, then adjust those according to how I recommend for their suture.
Better if the boil has already opened through the bone and pen, and it is not retention of the pus but a small suspensorium, then incise that and treat the boil with medicines until the flesh is restored at the site of drainage, and command the patient to eat only foods that cause groaning: caps and meats similar to them, until it is healed.
And if you find decomposition in the drainage and it doesn't stick to the bone, then you need to incise all this pus and flush it out, and treat that.
Better if in these plagues there is an artery or vein from which pus flow could occur and it cannot be severed with medicine, then you need to inquire about the artery, and if you find that it's not severed, then you should incise that at a spasm point, or tie it; and if necessity demands that what we have said does not hold, then you cauterize until pus is released.
And if these plagues are simple and small, then their cause is minor; therefore, you should pulverize this powder over them until it solidifies before the air changes those.
And the method of the powder is as follows: take one part oil of sesamum, two parts dragon's blood, and three parts of unextinguished charcoal; mix it all thoroughly and sift it, and let this cover the entire boil, and bind it well with good compression so that it sticks to that area and coagulates with pus.
And then remove that above with dust and let it cool down, and do not wash it while like this until it becomes swollen, or until the medicine has healed it.
And sometimes people do this alone with a cautery, when they don't have access to sesamum oil and dragon's blood.
And this surgical operation is done for large boils when it's necessary to pause on those and stretch them out, and the boils that are recent at their pus, which have not been changed by the air.
And if the air has changed them, especially during summer time, then it's not appropriate to use this powder in its usual position, but rather treat those with what we have mentioned, so you should apply some more digestible ointments, or that you apply on those powders made of flour from the dough mixed with water and honey until they solidify; and treat those with another treatment until they are healed.
If a small fracture occurs in bone, then you extract it through surgery.
And I prescribe the treatment for skull fractures in cases where poisoning is involved.
From lung diseases.
If the disease occurs in the lungs, then there is no difference in treatment, but compared to a simple skull illness.
If the nerves in the lungs or artery are cut, then if it's a nerve issue, it is not within their capability to avoid the treatment that causes intense constriction, like zinc and say that it is corrosive and resembles their nose on nerves causing constriction. And do not rest on any cause that affects them all, for the substance of nerves is affected and their continuation goes to the brain, which is the source of all parts of the body.
And if such is treated with mild medicines, as when it's washed with boiled water, some rest after being immersed in oil that's either refined or unrefined, and the scab heals when it's washed with boiled water, and the other minor wounds heal according to this method, and it's ointed moist.
If the disease is large, then you should perform suturing or ligate the veins of the person, and afterwards cure it with powders until it heals.
If the disease is deep or occurs near the base of the lower part, then puncture that area in the deepest part.
If the disease has already cut through an artery and there is bleeding from it, then separate or dry that area, tie it, or cauterize it if necessary.
If it has already cut through the vertebral joints or completely, and the veins in the lungs have been saved, then you adjust the muscles of the neck with suturing above the windpipe, don't touch that; prepare for that and return it to its natural shape, then strengthen that with proper tension, and let that rest for a few days; afterwards, cure that with ointments containing tension and stimulation until it heals.
If the disease has already penetrated into bone, then you puncture it, and if there are fragments of bone in it, extract all those that you can from them; what cannot be contained by you, let it rest until the disease disappears, and separate it so that its removal is alleviated.
And if the disease is recent, then apply over that powdered medicine which I have recommended. If there is a fistula in the disease, then cure it with what will be remembered by its effect in their head.
If it's a blow to the chest or back, and you gauge its depth, then consider that if there is wind escaping when the patient breathes in pain; then know that the disease is fatal.
And if there is not depth in the disease and it's recent on their breath, then you should take care to apply powder immediately, without straining that so that the breath is not retained at the depth of them and returns to the heart causing discomfort; rather, pause with attractive ointment, and wash that twice a day.
And if the ointment is not available to you, then you should pinch near the wound opening with your finger so that the fluid from moisture exits; and make the patient lie on the disease for the fluid to flow as adjusted in them.
If it has been three days or more since the disease occurred and no spasms, heart failure symptoms, or constriction occur to the patient, then if other good conditions are met in them, then you should know that the disease is saved; and thereafter treat it with remedies and according to other healing methods until it heals.
If the healing of your condition is justified, and all this time you have been open, then you should know that a fistula has already formed; therefore, treat it according to its head.
And if the disease is due to a cut in the back or rib area, and it's simple on the surface of the chest or back, then treat it with what precedes stitching, if it's large, or with powder, if it's small.
If it has already penetrated into the bone and you have incised lumps, then you should squeeze the disease and press to extract those lumps if they are separate. If they are not separate, then let them rest until the disease disappears, making the extraction of them easier.
And for other diseases that occur in other limbs during treatment, it's similar to what we have discussed.
Regarding belly diseases.
The indisposition that occurs in the stomach can be great, little, or intermittent.
Small disruptions are made more difficult by another method, and it's known that returning them to their place is much harder, if you don't quickly insert them back into their position where they expand due to the internal organs making the process difficult.
And thus the best intervention is migration, in which it's not difficult to reduce the hernia, just as it's not difficult in the two species mentioned beforehand.
Know that there are four ways to stitch the abdomen, but two stitches are common and fit in stitches of other parts of the body.
And two others, specific to them, connect with the other illnesses, but they are more specific in the stitching of the abdomen.
I advise you for every exposition and declaration.
So say that when the illness is small and a cause of the hernia occurs in that way, making it difficult to reduce it, then this is one of the two methods: either due to the smallness of the rupture as we have said, or when there's swelling on the hernia due to the coldness of the air.
And when it's like this, then you should cut that area and immerse a sponge in hot water alone, or take it in hot water squeezing, and cyperum, and spic, and bury that around the hernia until the swelling is resolved.
And I sometimes do this when there's inflammation in the area, and it's better than just hot water for resolving the swelling.
And when the swelling has resolved, then you soak the hernia in water with herbs and lemon juice, for which it soothes the patient with little cause.
And if you excuse the internal organs near this treatment, then divide the rupture with a small instrument on which there are incisions.
And the first treatment is better when it's appropriate that there's no drying, and no need to dry without necessity or deficiency.
From the instrument, let its form be dry:
On one part of the tool, make it sharp, and on the other part not sharp, and the extremity subtle, and do not make it as subtle as a point, before it becomes blunt for a little.
And when the illness has been amplified and has come out of the abdomen, then it's to be noted that its reduction should follow its natural form, in its proper place; if this is possible on such grounds, which is better.
And when the rupture is wide, and it's in the lower part of the abdomen, then you should make the patient lie on their back, place their knees higher than their head; and if it's in the upper part of the abdomen, then you should place their head and feet higher than the parts left.
And similarly if the rupture is in one of the two parts of the abdomen, then pause your understanding and consideration at all times for that reason so that the part with the illness is higher than the other.
And similarly, ensure you provide this treatment in large illnesses and in smaller illnesses.
And in small illnesses, pause that it's under your preparation, and let the one who ministers be among your most experienced, which has the entire rupture under his hand and adjusts the lips of him, and let it reveal from this to that where there's any cause for another reason.
And this is the common method of stitching: one that you take the needle, or count by the length of the illness; and let it pass from the end of the rupture in the ring finger, and hold the needle down one, or another where you don't put a thimble in both ends of the cord, at two ends of the handle that leaves the cords inside when you make it enter that part; and you have added both ends of the cord and both ends of the handle, and they are made into four orders.
And let the thimble double in the circuit of the needle, and some times from both parts together, and let you add both lips and the illness by proper addition; and let it smooth out the thickness of that one and place another needle in that one, and let it tie that with a thimble like the first needle; and don't stop doing this with needles until you complete all the contraction of the illness.
And let the needles be in between coarseness and subtlety, as subtle needles hardly cut the flesh; and the coarse ones make it difficult for the thread inside, therefore let them be in between subtlety and size.
And don't let the needle be stuck at both ends of the thread nearby each other, so that the flesh is not cut lightly and that the illness does not burst before its consolidation.
And don't make prolonged stitches for the illness not to be prohibited from consolidation.
And let the ends of the needles cut each other so that they don't cause the patient to lose their sleep; place over the stitches the powders expanded from all parts, which have the ends of the needles; leave them until you know that the illness has already been consolidated.
And these types of stitching with needles in common manner are more convenient in small illnesses, which until in the stitching for them one needle or two or around those.
And the second stitch is common: and it's that you administer in stitches all four ends, of the thread and two ends of the handle, at once, with a needle which has a thimble wrapped around it equally in subtlety and size.
And when the needle has penetrated these four extremities, return the needle from that half of the metal part where it began, so that the gallbladder retracts the pus cavity from that other part going up to the wound, so that the suture is according to another suture of fabric, on which the fabrics are tightened.
And pause between each stitch the amount of thickness of the said thread.
And this suture I know how to do.
And with this kind of suture, I healed the wound that had happened to a man in his abdomen where he was bitten by a snake, it was the rupture of the major wound up to one palm, and it extended around my intestines for two palms from my mid-section; it was the rupture in the middle of the body member. And then I returned that deposit which had been removed from my intestine when the wound was opened for twenty-four hours.
And the wound was consolidated in the space of fifteen days or so, and healed him; then he took care of it for several months, and got used to his condition.
And other doctors had judged that he was not healed; and by miracle alone, since I did not treat him with ointment, which was in the place where the ointment could not be found or any medicine, but only applied to the wound like every day twice and washed diligently with honey water internally until it was cured.
And I may tell you two kinds of suture that are according to the narrative of Paulus.
And this is how you start with the suture of the thread, and insert the needle from one part to the other part inside.
And when the needle penetrates through the thread and inserts those points according to the correct direction and length of the entire body, leaving the end of the cord in which you have inserted the needle; and makes the needle penetrate in the other end the part inside to the part outside at the other end of the body.
And when you have made that penetration, then you make that penetrate another time in that half of the body part from outside to inside; and leave the end of the cord which is at this side, and make the needle penetrate in the other end of the part from inside to outside.
And make that penetrate through your penetration which you have made to penetrate in the cord at the end of the body which is in the part under him where all of this penetrates.
And then start from this side, tie that at the end which is on the cord in the opposite side to where the needle penetrates, and remove the thread needle that penetrated, and then bring that back into the same thread, tying the other end of the cord which is on the opposite side to this end of the body; and remove that from the thread which comes from his part.
And do this once and again, and repeat this between that you cook all what is outside according to that example.
And the whole of this way of suturing is that you sew with thread on which you sew the skin, so that you sew the cord once from the end part of the thread, and leave that other round until you have completed it.
And the second kind of my own suture which I tell you is Gualia's method, and this is by telling him about it and recommending him, that you sew this according to its similarity in which some doctors sew it, so that they add all parts to their corresponding parts according to nature; and apply the end of another of them and the end of his body to the other end of him, and this is done as I have recommended to you.
And when you hold the needle at your fingertips from the outside part, make it penetrate into the inside part in that sole, and leave two ends of the cord; then turn the needle and make it penetrate from outside to inside in two ends of the cord.
And then turn those each one, and make them penetrate from the inside part into the outside part in two ends of the body other than which are at this side opposite.
And this way of suturing is better than the common light sewing, and it is the kind of suture that precedes memory.
This is Gualia's method.
And they might say, the stomach suture is corrected with two needles, so you insert into each of these a piece of thread, and start by inserting the needle that should be yours, and make it penetrate inside the other side according to the sewing which sews equal bodies.
And know that when there is a rupture in the middle part of the stomach, then this suture becomes more difficult than from the other parts of the stomach.
And the method for treating wounds is judgment about the other wounds.
And this is the cause that when you cure the wound recently in his skin before air alters it, and return the intestine and sew it and properly dress it, then pause over that carnal powder.
And if air has already altered the wound, then pause over that several ointments which are in your possession until they make hard wax and coagulate the gallstones; and treat it like the treatment of other wounds until it is healed.
If you do not have the remedies at your disposal, then rest on that until, as it begins to warm up and cool down, change that with two baths a day, as you are taught, until you are healed. When there is no need for other medication under ordinary circumstances because the illnesses are simple.
If you fear that the disease might spread to the main body parts, then it's advisable to immerse the wool in oil of high quality or boiled oil, and place that in a circuit among the armpits and leave the oils there.
And if you feel pain or putrefaction in their intestines, which remedies are to be used here, then apply a stoptipic black stick extract, and especially if the pus is inside the intestine and causes an excision penetrating into its cavity.
And know that what comes from the large intestine is a lighter healing pus, while that which comes from the finer intestines.
And it is difficult to heal what is from the intestine which is called "gungun", which does not receive healing for disease that affects them entirely; this is due to the large number of veins that are in them, and the vastness they have within those, and the subtlety of their body, and their closeness to the nature of nerves.
If what you are dealing with in the disease is the thread, and if you get that fresh, adjust it according to your judgment on which you reduce the intestines evenly.
If it has already spread to them and there is already a boil or blackness, then strengthen that with clay over the area that is deteriorating in them, so that fluids of infection come out, as in the thread there are veins and arteries.
And then insert what is another piece of string in this, and suspend both ends of the clay so that they hang from the point of the disease's opening on them, so that your relief comes with the attraction to it; you should remove the string and the exhalation of the pus of the disease.
Reminder of diseases when they occur in the intestine.
When there is disruption in the intestine and it is small, then it might be healed in some people. This was shown to me by him who had been ill in his stomach from the thrust of a lance, and that was the disease of the right part of the abdomen, and the disease was old and caused a fistula, and relieved his flatulence and belching.
Then I pursued the healing of him even though it was not completed in his healing, but I continued to delicately apply it until he was healed and the place was consolidated.
And I saw the place already consolidated, thinking about what happened to him when he experienced an illness in his stomach; and avoided any further accident of that kind and maintained his daily routines eating and drinking, and then took baths and exercised regularly as instructed.
And some experienced people say that when there is a disease in the intestine and it is small, then it's recommended to proceed like this: you should take large caps; and adjust both sides of the diseased area, and place one of those with an open mouth over both sides of the diseased area. Then, when he takes them on these and tightens his mouth, cut off its head, which sticks and doesn't dissolve.
And then place another cap near the first one, and don't stop doing this with caps one after another according to the amount of the entire disease.
And then reduce that and make the disease disappear; and break those additional caps inside the intestine until the intestine is healed; and it does not harm the patient with any injury.
And it is possible that the intestine is treated with a fine thread made from the intestinal tissue of beasts attached to them, as they are more robust; and you should take the end of these intestines' threads, and make sure they are neatly trimmed, then place the end of them against this thread, wrapped, and insert this thread into needles and around that intestine, then reduce it in the disruption.
And this method of sewing with caps is merely according to the route of faith and hope.
If the disease is large and broad, especially if it's in one of the finer intestines, then here only a slight improvement occurs, not a full healing of them.
Regarding the treatment of ulcers and fistulas.
Know that any disease and abscess when they become old, and it forms a ulcer, but is not consolidated and continues to leak pus continuously, then; wherever it may be in the body, it's universally called a fistula, and we call this one an ulcer.
And a true fistula is a hard, white nodulation that doesn't cause pain and which cavity is solid like the cavity of pus; for this reason, it's called some worms, namely pus.
And there are some people who have a dampness that leaks pus; and when the dampness is slightly stronger, it becomes dry within a few hours. And sometimes this dampness turns into pus, and it's small, but thick, and subtle.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors. And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out. You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
And this is how I will teach you the treatment of fistula which is made through surgical operation by me.
Know that fistula happens in all parts of the body; those are the ones that occur within large veins and arteries, or nerves, or the liver, or intestine, or bladder, or any part of the backbone, or any joint formed by the hand and chest. And those give proximity to the main limb and resemblance.
And those are the ones among these fistulas that occur in this manner which is difficult to heal and does not receive treatment or care, and dealing with it requires labor and ignorance.
And if there is some fistula whose depth does not reach these locations which were mentioned and you hope for its healing, and want to understand it, then try by means of surgery or instruments. If the fistula follows straightness, and you explore that with it.
If the fistula is tortuous, then investigate that with lead which sinks due to its density in his body and you must bend according to the tortuosity.
And if the fistula does not have any movement, it is not within your ability to indicate it upon him with surgery.
Therefore cleanse the orifice through its orifices; that is to say, with moisture by which you enemas it flows from the other orifices and comes out of them.
And inquire thoroughly according to how you are able to know if here are the nerves, and whether the size of the fistula is remote or nearby. Or it is a fistula with which there are many orifices and this is in accordance with all your strength, through your interrogation of the patient, by placing your hand on the area, and understanding the meanings and causes of accidents to the abscess.
And when you have established the truth about all those causes on the true basis, then proceed with treatment according to confidence: at this point, you consider whether it is an apparent local fistula or in a place of health, remote from joints, nerves, artery, vein, or any other location I mentioned.
Then you dry the fistula according to what was said about its healing process, maintaining that which is in that filtration and corruption of flesh, and that which is born within the flesh cavity or part, and heals from within until it is healed.
If the fistula is of remote depth and follows straightness, then dig into it as deeply as possible, and thoroughly modify all its corrupted flesh; and prepare bandages wrapped in sharp medicines, and insert those into the cavity of the fistula, which you have understood through surgery.
And do this for some repetitions inside where the sharp medicine corrodes everything that is rotten in the cavity of the fistula.
Then restore it with ointments which generate healthy flesh until it is healed.
If it has not been healed by this method, then you cauterize it according to what we have recommended.
If the cause of fistula is bone and you must certify this, then inquire about it and dry it according to what we have recommended. If you do not prohibit any cause related to veins or nerves or main limb as we said.
If the bone is discovered by you and there is corruption and darkness in him, then cut it open where all the corruption can be removed; and then heal that area from within as long as his flesh heals.
And if it is not healed like this, then know that you have not achieved the total eradication of corruption. And so you uncover him again thoroughly and carefully take out the reason for him and the modification of him through your last strength, and restore that area afterwards.
And if it is healed, then good. If not, then know that this corruption is in the remote depth of the body, which has not been achieved, and therefore you leave it alone in that area.
And if the bone is corrupted to be small, or it is within your ability to pull it out, then you pull it with fine tongs suitable for this task.
And if they are hard bones, then thoroughly perform the extraction of all those, and leave none behind through your strength.
If it encounters any resistance from the moisture, and in their dissection there is neither fear nor error, then cut those ligaments or muscles if they are here, and free the bones.
If it is not your preparation to leave the bones of your time, then pause over the wound so that you should heal that wound there, and leave it within where this surrounds those bones and muscles, and guard against leaving a non-consolidated wound, and ensure the section that you have cut in your operation remains open.
Oil, if you fear, pause over the cut immersed in a heated oil, or immerse the cut in Egyptian ointment, or in any of those ointments that are hot. When those ligaments have been treated, and the bones can be separated from them, then the healing process is facilitated.
If there is a large lesion like the one of a leg or thigh or resembling those, and what from him is corrupted is only his face, then that alone becomes that dark spot only behind it where the corruption was, and immediately restore the wound.
If what from him is corrupted is a large part, and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to close that one completely and allow it all to sink into the place where the corruption has penetrated, and then heal that inside until it is consolidated.
And I advise you to do as an example and assist with this on your operation when dealing with someone in their thigh.
Treat a young man around thirty years old, who suffers pain in his thigh, and the affected parts internally are about the substance inside the body where the substance has penetrated to the thigh, and it is pus of a large abscess, and do not attribute this cause to an external factor.
And then extend treatment for that according to the mistake of doctors until the abscess bursts, and evacuate the moving parts, and her cure is almost completed when the change has become fistulated, and make incisions in those pus orifices which were all producing inflammation and the body's moisture.
And then treatment by doctors lasted for more than two years, and I didn't know in those cases but rather in the art, when I was called.
And I saw the change in him and what flowed from his those orifices through great veins; and already the body of that man was completely yellowed and the color of him was lemon.
And then I inserted the thread into one of those orifices and brought the thread to the bone.
And then I closely examined all those orifices and found that they were connected to every part of the change.
And then I explored and pierced into one of those orifices where I discovered part of the bone, and removed that corrupted thing, it was already earthy and corrupted and degraded; and it had already corrupted part of the change, in which it had penetrated to the marrow.
And then I tightened that which was discovered by me and prepared from the exposed bone.
And I concluded that it was not in the bone but that corruption which expanded and tightened, and I had already removed.
And then the restoration of the wound with consolidating medicine for a long time, and it did not consolidate.
And then I retraced and re-discovered on the bone for the second time after the first discovery, and found continuous corruption on the bone.
And I tightened what appeared to me from that corruption, and then I tried to perform the cure of this and restoration, but it was not restored.
And then I discovered on him the other way and did not cease to carefully and gradually insinuate the bone little by little and restore this and it was not restored until it had been pierced around a hand of him, and he extracted from his marrow, and then restored that with medicines, and it consolidated slightly and healed.
And it is not necessary to repeat the operation of this and this section of him, but only due to the arrangement of his pulse and due to the lack of tolerance and breath of him that caused death, which happened to him continuously because of excessive evacuation leading to poor syncope.
And thus he heals through total recovery, and nothing is in place of hard flesh bone; and it is done well by arranging him inside his body and restoring the vigor of him; and he adapts to his conditions and does not oppose him during movement or injury in any cause.
If the bone is prominent in a location of the body already wounded, then follow this method when you wish to perform another on: and you must take hold of that ligament and strengthen it at the extremity of that prominent bone, and command someone else to extend that further. And place that piece of woolen thread larger than the first one; and lie that over the flesh that is left by the bone, and extend its extremity in order to pull the flesh towards those remaining parts, and uncover the flesh on the spot you wish to tighten so that the saw does not cut into the flesh.
And place a pole or table under that bone properly, so when you do this the saw is not prohibited from reaching the corrupted flesh.
And know that the saw should be placed on the corrupted spot little by little, so if it is in the cavity of the corroded bone and does not appear in its manifestation at feeling, force another opening for the closure.
And if the bone is corroded and not prominent, before one part continues to the other, and the corruption is at its best location or in a part of it, then uncover the flesh from all parts entirely; and place a pole under you, and proceed with the saw for the first part where there is corruption so that the closure continues with the second part.
And make the saw according to the location of the corruption a little smaller, as we have said.
And if the corruption is in the joint, pierce that corrupted joint, and saw the bone where it continues from the other part.
And if corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it's not at their reason but between them.
And if the corruption is in the chest of the hand or the chest, it's very difficult; however, you must inquire about the corruption on how it appears to you, and that by cutting it open, exposing it according to each disposition which is possible to you, and adjust every instrument as necessary when doing so, without causing any contrariety to veins or nerves.
Know what are the knives and the tools to use for incising these bones is very much according to the position of the bones, the preparation of those, and the size of those, as well as their subtlety, size, and smallness, and their hardness and their rarity; so that you should prepare all kinds of surgical instruments suitable for that operation.
Know that this operation means to you about the type of instrument you would need; when you are very well studied and long-experienced in understanding the techniques of this art, and have evidence from practices of diseases, ones you've already handled yourself. So now you understand what is convenient for the use of instruments for every disease.
And I advise you at the end of this chapter about the number of tools which you will use, like the simple ones among them, for your prohibition which you will experience on others. Shape of the saw:
Shape of another saw:
Shape of a large other saw:
Shape of the reed: The tip of this reed should follow the shape of the head of a star key, and its points should follow the form of the points of a star-shaped object.
And it is only necessary that at those points friction be applied to the heads of the joints when they are corrupted, or that the mouth be large and wide.
Shape of the smaller knives:
Shape of the saw knife:
Shape of another well-made saw: let it have the curvature of excess pus and the sharpness of its iron blade, and let the member be descended from a sword puncture. Shape of it:
Shape of the knife in which there is a hollowing out:
Shape of another subtle knife:
Shape of another curved-ended knife:
Shape of a small saw resembling a tentacle:
Shape of another smaller cutting instrument:
Shape of another cutting tool; this resembles a reed, and its end is like a saw. It exhibits in various locations along the bones:
The shape of the reed corresponds to the one that penetrates the bones, as you have observed.
And its end is triangular with a sharp point.
It's made of Indian iron, and it corresponds to all the causes that we've mentioned about knives, cutting instruments, and saws.
Regarding its end and the locking mechanism of the bones.
The ends either press or due to an intrinsic cause or extrinsic cause, or as you have treated that corruption with the curative of those medicines and the cure did not yield results, or sometimes the corruption escapes from the body of the part you haven't hit for any cause, then it's necessary that you incise that part within this corruption, so that the patient does not suffer death or harm which is a greater misfortune to the part.
And the sign of that to which it happens, is that the limb becomes black inside where there was a scorching mark, or you let the darkness come close to that area where the burning thing has entered into that limb and spreads throughout its body; and thus, take your incision on that.
And similarly if it's caused by the impact of some toxic causes such as from a sea scorpion or a viper or from a snakebite and similar.
And if the corruption or impact is in the end of the finger, then you cut the finger and do not give space for the corruption to enter into your hand.
And similarly if you reach the hand, then you cut that from the base of the elbow, and do not give space for the corruption to spread within the forearm.
And if it's deeper than that, then you cut the arm into the armpit at the joint.
And if the corruption passes beyond that and even around the armpit, then that is death for the patient. And administering another cause to this requires a great amount of skill in treatment.
And similarly do so for the chest when corruption reaches up to the hand of the chest, then you cut it into one of the knuckles.
And if it goes into the groove of the chest, then you must cut the entire chest. May be that if it invades below the waist, then you cut into the groin at the joint of the pelvis.
And if corruption has already spread beyond the waist, then there is no method but for discharge and leave the patient to death.
The method of incising or sawing the limb is that you strengthen the ligament at the part where you want to incise, and place another ligament over the area. Extend your arm with one ligament at the parts left out, and extend your hand with another ligament around it; then you separate the flesh that's between two ligaments so that all the flesh is exposed in a space that's latitudinal between them; and then you cut or saw it.
And cover him/her with a cloth from all sides so that it doesn't touch the area there, and that the wound goes to the patient's lesion correctly and the abscess is treated by cautery.
If it happens that there is an escape of pus when you operate, then you should apply the cautery moderately to the affected area, or place some powders that alleviate the pain on them; and then return to your treatment until it is completed.
And guide the injured member back to its place as conveniently as possible, and treat that area until it is healed.
And I advise you that when someone experiences pain in their foot, this kind of incident which I and you have advised, which occurs to them in the darkness of their foot under circumstances that were assembled for the combustion of fire.
And that corruption first happens inside his/her hand, spreading throughout the foot.
And then that person prepares for self-inflicted pus that goes towards the healing to move within the limb with the intensity of its fire and the pain, and it spreads across the foot into the joint, achieving healing.
Long ago this corruption incident happened in his/her hand's indication.
And then it hits me, and so I allow the reflection of this excess on what touches my hand with the application of medicines, towards the transformation of the body; and the excess does not recur but starts to spread into another limb where it started in the hand.
And he/she commands me to insert my hand into him/her, and I do not want to do this fearing the reflection of that excess, more than I fear the insertion of my hand into his/her corpse, where the virtue was in burning.
And when he/she dies from me, they return to their land and I learn that this person prepared and burned his/her hand completely, and it healed.
And I have not recounted this story merely for the sake of providing assistance on what happens with this disease, and it is its significance which makes it significant and according to which it has been done.
For the treatment of colic and the quality of enemas combined with medicines.
When there is an abscess occurring in certain fleshly members and the space of the abscess extends until it collects pus, then it bursts and perforates, and the pus is drained from him/her, leaving the area empty as if it was a vessel, and the cord that gets exposed by this event behaves like a fine cloth, and it does not reach deep corruption, nor spreads into bones or nerves or muscles, it's called a sinus, and it is not named a fistula.
However, if the space extends until corruption occurs in some member, then it is called a fistula and not sinus.
And the treatment for this is to insert that cord entirely as it is twisted, especially when it's very fine and behaves like a cloth, making sure not to stick to the area due to its corruption.
And if you hope that the cord will stick and this corruption has not been reached by subsequent consequences, then in the case of the cord getting hot on its surface, then you treat it with an enema.
And you consider it as a sinus; and if it is large, the arm that you use has an unpleasant odor. Then you treat it with an Egyptian enema made of oil, vinegar and honey, with equal parts being mixed together, they are placed in a vessel, and they are heated over fire until the medicine is boiled down and gets concentrated to a syrup-like consistency.
And then you take what is necessary from him/her and dissolve it with water and honey; and treat that area with the sinus, strengthen his/her passage, and let the medicine stay in him/her for the duration of two hours.
And then you remove that from its position; and do this for several days until the sinus is transformed and his/her sense of smell returns.
And for some occasions, you treat with ash water, when this medicine is not available to you; and so you take the ash from wood, put it in water; and then boil that water and treat that area with it until you notice that the sinus has been eliminated.
And if your body does not tolerate the Egyptian medicine nor ash water, then treat that area with water and honey mixed with finely grated honey, and also treat it with vinegar and honey mixed together. It is the property of honey that transforms and cleanses, while vinegar causes adhesion to the sinus, especially when there is excess acidity or dryness in the vinegar.
And when you do this for several occasions and notice that the sinus has already been eliminated, then treat that area with what causes birth of flesh in him/her.
And you take the dyafinicon salve and dissolve that in rubbed oil and vinegar; or you treat that area with some medicines and other salves that have properties as I have written about them in the chapter of salves.
And if the opening of the sinus is tight in such a way that the enema tube cannot be inserted, then you gradually enlarge it with a small metal instrument, and pause while covering his/her back with Egyptian salve or basilico salve until it is enlarged.
And similarly if the opening is spacious, then you add his/her lips with stitches and let him/her have the quantity in which the enema fits inside.
And if the exits from which blood flows in the patient are elevated towards above parts, then dry that area where pus is present within them so that the blood can flow inwards. When the blood is constrained in the depth of the sinus, the flesh will be produced there.
And if it is not within your ability to dry the sinus inside the area of the base pus as you desire, then you should puncture and prepare the limb for surgery so that blood flows from it slightly according to what you are accustomed to do and ensure there's no obstruction caused by the blood.
Allow that which is at the sinus opening to be done, which you increase constantly in order for it not to obstruct the blood flow. And so that you know whether what flows from the patient's blood is much or little, if it is digested or not.
And also always consider the location of that sinus, whether the patient feels pain there or not, and if it's in an abscess.
And as your treatment is prolonged in such manner, observe the material that is being discharged over the sinus opening, if it begins to adhere or has a tendency to stick. If you find this occurring, carefully remove any stuck material or debris, and when you clean the wound, change the dressing for another one and reapply the ointment.
Allow if near the sinus there is ample space for small organisms to reside, do not be discouraged by the sticking of the material, as this is part of the healing process for the patient. This occurs in some individuals where meat production takes a long time in their wounds, and it also happens with those who are contrary to this.
And if for several days near the sinus there is indigestion of blood, then know that the sinus does not adhere; and if the adherence to the sinus takes a long time making it prolonged, then adjust in drying out the medicines. And if the medicines are wet in their substance and their efficacy, they are dried just like fat-drying ointment, when there is excessive addition of zegi (a type of ingredient) in the patient's condition.
And the best after this is that you take from fat-drying ointment and dissolve it in roasting oil, apply it on their skin just like its original substance, then place this over them, and use this.
And just pretend in that action, when there is no blood, fat-drying ointment and honey, when they are mixed together to become thickened, use this on them; or if you take myrrh and aloes and mix them, then crush it all with honey when heated on the fire, apply this over linen laid out on a dressing for support under the sinus; and apply this with the thickened honey from which they are mixed together, then crush it again and place it on linen to reinforce that area.
And some times these simple remedies are administered to the aristocrat's long-lived life and the secrets of heavenly lilies (which are heavenly lilies), as well as flour from beeswax and centaurine, use these simples or adjusted ones, crush them, sift them through a sieve with the honey I have recommended; and use this on them.
And if the sinus is prolonged and does not heal with this treatment, then know that corruption has entered into it, and now an investigation should be made in bones or other hard limbs or joints; then you treat it with tuberculous healing, as described above.
From the treatment of boils and trimmed nails, and cutting of fingers added to the prescription.
A panaricle is an abscess that leaves nails at the tip of a finger or toe on your hand or foot. It often spreads to other fingers and if it persists and its treatment becomes expensive, it either heals with cautery, gets corrupted, or lets blood flow from within causing the nail root to soften and become fetid; then cutting off the end of that finger is performed, and the color of this turns black.
And so, when you have done as we instructed in the division and it does not agree with your treatment, then proceed to incise all the excess that accumulates at the nail root and apply cautery near this area; for hot cautery is beneficial in this respect.
And if the bone is intact and the nail is healthy, and all the extensions of the nail reach inside to the parts, they start piercing it and guiding it accordingly. If this occurs, proceed by placing the thin edge close at the corner of the nail that pierces the flesh, pushing it forward and incising that flesh with ease, then place over what remains of the flesh from the burning corrosive medicines so that everything is thoroughly removed; and cure this area with ointments until it heals.
If the corruption has already spread to the nose, then dig into the nose and remove it, because there is no health when that which is corrupted resides in the nose.
And if you find corrosion and decay reaching into the mouth, then you should dig there according to where their memory is pressed, and soon cure that which is within them so that it becomes healthy.
If there is percussion or abrasion at the nail, and there is severe pain in that area, then dig when you begin to bleed the patient, and quickly remove the nail from its sharp edge to its dry section across longitudinally on its skin. Make sure that the wound does not reach into the flesh left by the removed nail; this causes the patient intense pain and leads to the production of excess body tissue in that location; then cure that area with what relieves pain.
This is a normal condition, which naturally occurs in many people's breasts, it is slightly fatty everywhere, or slightly fatty are they in their bones, or slightly fatty are they in their nails.
And such things occur naturally at the base of the joint, or it is the nature of them in certain parts of the bone. That which occurs naturally in these bones of the bone is not bad, whereas what occurs naturally at the joints is somewhat detrimental.
And for those who are naturally fatty, the wound is slight, so when you dig that part, do it with a broad blade.
That which naturally occurs at the base of the joint heals difficultely; therefore, be cautious about its removal.
This occurs when it naturally happens in the bone; dig so that when you begin to bleed him, the flesh of his is rounded into the hole inside the mouth, and then use one of those suitable saws with this method, and soon cure that which becomes healthy.
This is consolidation which occurs between the bones or through the natural process of growth in a person that has developed it, or through the consolidation of disease or by fire burning, or due to similarities; then dig so that you release this consolidation when the bones return to their natural shape.
And place between their layers that are fused by oil rubbed in, so they do not consolidate lightly; or separate between them a thin sheet of lead where consolidation occurs according to when you dig.
And similarly if consolidation occurs in some bones on the palm, then you dry that consolidation according to preparation and aligns it with the shape of the limb.
From a diseased wound, they are varicose veins.
Vices are varicose veins, and they are thickened swollen veins full of melancholic excesses which appear in the folds of the body's limbs, and their main occurrence is on the chest, especially for travelers, workers, and carriers.
Then dig when you administer blood purge of the black cholera for several days with strong expulsion, and then bleed the patient from the basilic vein.
The treatment of their iron absorption occurs according to two methods: one is that it be cut and the black blood be expelled, and the other method is that the vein be elevated and all of it be extracted.
The wound occurs according to this method: start by filling the chest with warm water until the large blood is dissolved, which becomes fluid in the chest, and then strengthen the chest of the patient at the lower part of the thigh into a part higher than the knee on one bend, and then bleed the vein in a location, or in two, or three at wide sections, and then raise the black blood to his own hand at the exit point of the chest inside it, and above it in its surroundings, until you have extracted the quantity that you wish and is sufficient, which will remove the properties of the patient.
And then rest for that, and command him to refrain from eating any food that produces black cholera.
Continue the treatment by bleeding when the veins are full and you notice improvement in the patient.
The elevation of their condition occurs according to this manner: if you remove the chest of the thigh in the patient's folds, then you should submerge it in water and fill the chest with warm water until it reddens and the veins become prominent; or if there is no water available for bathing, have them exercise vigorously so that the limb is scraped.
And then dry the arm along the right side of the vein by section from front to back or at the rear of it; or if you are at the lower part of the limb, you should do the elbow.
And then open the arm with cuts and scrape the vein from all parts until you see the reaction, and it is that you should observe the appearance of the patient as they decline to blackness.
And then when you have freed and opened the arm, you seek that white place which is the artery.
And then you put both of those lines into it so that it is elevated and placed at the level of your arm's elbow, and suspend that like a small lion.
And then dry another section close to that section for three inches, and scrape the arm near the exit point above the vein until you see it.
And then raise that and dig that in the final section where it is at the elbow, and then extract that and raise that until you have seen through the second section, and then extract that from the section above that.
And do this inside to remove that from the section which is pus-covered or pus of all sections, inside where everything is infected; then insert that.
And if you don't follow to extract and elevate it, then insert a needle made of strong metal twice as thick and tie that one, or pull out the pus. Or make them hold the rod and turn your hand all around inside where it is embedded. And make sure not to insert it too far; if it breaks, you'll find it hard to lift that out and risk spreading the illness throughout the patient's body.
And once all of that has been extracted, place a cloth soaked in oil and wool over the wound area. Apply oil-soaked wool and dry wool, then cure it from within where healing occurs.
And if the blood flow is constricted without having any bends and does not follow rectitude as we have said, then cut open all parts of its twists and in the areas where it wraps around him, suspend that with thread inside where you lift everything.
And remember, you should not insert your section to damage the vein or trouble that area. It will be difficult for you to lift that part; exercise caution in this matter.
Shape of the instrument used when bleeding occurs:
It is not like any other threads or with sharp ends so as not to damage the vein; it is made of a thick, flexible lion's hair. If it were too thin, it would cut into the vein due to its thinness; instead, we have emphasized its excessive thickness, as we said earlier.
Regarding the extraction of the femoral vein.
This vein is formed in the regions of the thighs, similar to Al-Ategi in the desert areas of Arabia and in the dry regions of India where little vegetation can grow or even bear plants.
And it grows stronger elsewhere in other parts of the body, except for certain areas of the thigh region.
And the formation of it is from putrefaction that you see from the chain, like poison within the body as if snakes and worms and insects and parasites are breeding between the chain and the flesh.
And the sign of its potential occurrence is when this vein strikes in the thigh with vigorous inflammation; then, the area swells up; and from that swelling point seems to sprout veins from the location like roots.
And when you see the manifestation at the extremity, then find that you should place upon that one piece of lead with a weight equivalent to that of an eagle, within two eagles', and move it around while allowing the lead suspended from its harness.
And as many times as the symptoms are caused by something outside in certain parts, wrap that with lead and place it there. And if the illness is prolonged, then cut a part of it and cover the remaining; do not insert that directly where it is infected because if you insert it, it will contract and enter the flesh causing an abscess and pus formation in the area, resulting in a bad ulcer.
And when it is treated gently and extracted little by little, inside where it is removed from the rear of the thigh and not because of any cause in the body.
And this vein is found in some people who are as tall as five palms and seven, already I have seen one of twenty palms.
And if it is cut during its treatment, then insert the rod into his leg and puncture that in long strokes through the body, inside where all of that which is in the material is evacuated, apply putrefaction to the area for a few days with medicines; then cure it for abscesses.
And this vein in some instances has increased size, especially when it appears at the junction of the thigh or in the thigh, and it causes swelling openings, and it is from any opening branch.
And thus cure that as we have said in the division and with what was mentioned above.
Regarding the removal of worms generated under the skin, it is called cattle sickness.
This illness is named in some territories as cattle disease because certain symptoms are present among cows and there's a worm affecting many of them, one that is born between the chain (likely referring to clothing or bindings) and flesh, it goes up and down throughout the body, and can be felt by touching as if bursting through its passage and appearing externally.
And the generation of it is due to the putrefaction of some fluids thus causing worms, snakes, earthworms, and roundworms within the belly.
And it is found due to the cunning of it; when it goes through the body and rises to the head, then it becomes strong within him and enters, destroying the tongue, and this causes various symptoms.
And when you want to cure that and extract it, do not proceed unless you've observed its movement and appearance through touch, then take care that what is over it and what is under it is in harmony and strong constriction, then dry off around it and remove it.
And if it gets stuck in the flesh and does not loosen up, then you should place a cauterizing fire over that area where it resides, and the main cause feared is corruption of it which corrupts the area as we have said.
If you find that it has traveled to the head close to the temples, then apply pressure on his eyebrow with a strong constriction, and keep applying until it is done, then extract it; and let him use medicine for transforming his body's condition by removing bad pus-forming fluids, and avoid eating anything that can cause fermentation.
Concerning the discussion on illness of the stomach.
This disease is called "nafir" in our land, it is pain that appears in some limbs, and later spreads from member to member.
And I have already seen the second one that I will describe to you. I was summoned to attend a female patient in a village, and I found her arm swollen with a small lump on the vein of the arm. After it had been pressed for an hour, I saw that swelling go away as if it were blood rising up to this point, somewhat more slowly than water, like living silver when it flows from one place to another.
And then the pain of that spot stays in the muscle, and continues for about an hour here.
And it moves into the other body towards where it reaches the other arm.
And I was told that it would move around in its own body according to what I saw; and I was too amazed by the transformation of him and the speed from member to member. And I had already seen something similar in front of this according to that manner, however I have seen movements that find the pain being transformed from limb to limb. But I didn't see it like this in the stomach as with the woman.
And I do not think it is like this simply because the woman was pregnant, since in such cases there are feelings of heat and exposed veins, whereas here appears that sensation of moving wind.
And it is necessary that this not appear according to this reverse flow in those who are delicate and have human veins that are somewhat swollen.
And if you want to treat him/her and the patient feels this pain, then it does not appear in his head like we said, so apply pressure on that area and leave him/her a little exposed over that place where there is that sensation of wind being contained, and cauterize the area.
And if you do not find it in your stomachs, then treat that with bleeding of the body and whatever expels wind, use pills of putrefied flesh and pills of sulfur and resemble them.
Regarding the extraction of arrows.
Arrows are diversified according to the species, and according to the locations in the body where they are found, their diversity is that some have large points, small ones, concave ones, and dull ones; some are solid; there are those that have three angles, and those to which ones have tongues; and those to which ones are stings.
And of the symptoms of the spear, when it hits in the spear and penetrates the bone, and is situated above the skull which occurs through his excessive heat, blindness, dizziness, nausea, swelling and heat on the tongue, spasm and confusion of mind and vomiting from anger, weakness, some words are cut off and her voice is destroyed. And it is situated at the location of the wound with a moist white spot resembling dust, and his eyes resemble moisture in the flesh.
And if you see these symptoms appearing, then refrain from treatment and extraction of the arrow, unless it is outside.
The symptoms of the arrow when it hits the heart, so that it is close to the left breast and feels as if it has been stuck in a hard cause, not visible; and the movement of the arrow is somewhat like the movement of the pulse, and the disease spreads blackness, and seizes with cold extremities, and sweat chills, and syncope; and you know that death descends from above completely.
The symptoms when the arrow has pierced the lung are a sensation of thick blood in the wound, and the vessels close to the throat become swollen, and the patient's complexion changes color, and expires large breaths, and asks for the inhalation of air.
And if the arrow hits the bladder which is in the feet, and the pain is near the small ribs, it causes a great strong pain and sighing, and does not affect all the muscles of the limbs.
And if the arrow hits the stomach, then one feels symptoms like food that is somewhat undigested in the wound.
And if the arrow hits in the abdomen and is stuck there, one feels some wound opening or the skin, or the intestines which are ruptured; there is no hope for treating this injury by extracting the arrow.
If the needle hits the bladder and urine is forced out externally due to some cause outside the body, and there is pain over the abdomen upon this happening, then you will know it is fatal.
Instruct the others as well for each of them, such as the face, neck, shoulder and auxiliary areas, shoulders, spine of both sides, the sternum, ribs, waist area, and corresponding parts of their bodies. They are treated according to major dispositions when the needle does not hit a vein or artery and is not venomous.
And I advise you to consider this what I have observed about these needles, so that you may understand the treatment for them.
This is because when someone pricks themselves in the eye socket of their upper eyelid, causing them to remove the needle from the opposite side; they are left with scars on their ear, and yet they recover and do not suffer harm in their nose.
And when a judge pricks themselves with another needle that hits them on their eyelash, leaving them only with the eyelid intact, and the needle was already hidden; it could not be obtained from there but rather had a small end to which they attached to their shaft. This was an extremely sharp needle akin to Turkish needles made of lion bone without any ear.
And when treated correctly by the judge, there is no harm in their nose from a bad incident.
And when extracting another needle from a Christian man that was stuck in the shoulder, it was an Arab needle and had ear markings on it. Then I pierced through between two guides, which was already submerged in his shoulder; after that, I made this subtle incision and then extracted the needle, thus the Christian recovered.
And when extracting another needle from a man that was stuck in his abdomen, I thought it would cause death due to it; and consequently, since it did not change despite passing thirty days with no cause affecting its disposition, I pierced through the needle and held it there. The person then recovered and did not suffer harm from any accident.
And I saw a man in whom a needle was stuck in his back. The wound healed on him, and since it had been around for about seven years, the needle was forced into his thigh area.
And I saw a woman in whom a needle was stuck inside her abdomen; the wound has become hardened within her and does not change with her natural operations. The woman has not experienced any harm during her usual bodily functions.
And I saw another man in whom a needle was stuck on his face; the wound has become hardened and the needle is protruding, without causing any noticeable pain or appearance like this.
And when extracting the needle from the king's prince who had it stuck in his middle nostril and which had already receded slightly to the right side; the entire needle was hidden.
And I was summoned for his treatment approximately three days after the insertion of the needle.
And then I identified the wound of the needle's insertion; and then I probed around with a small instrument without feeling anything. But he felt this puncture on his right earlobe, so I surmised that this puncture was at the tip of the needle.
And I applied ointment to the area with a stimulating and digestive effect, convincing me that this location is where the treatment should be performed so as to reveal to me the site of the needle, thus succeeding on it.
And there was no harm at the significant location where you have obtained that spot; I continued applying the ointment on him for several days without any harm. Meanwhile, the wound has become hardened, and I can feel the nose retracting through this space of several days until I felt the needle inside his nose again and informed me accordingly.
And then I placed a corrosive medicine on the wound for several days until it opened up; and with this tool, I probed and identified the tip of the needle, which sticks to its shaft.
And then I adjusted in the opening of the wound through this medicine until visibly the tip of the needle appeared to me; and with this process, it took me time over a period of four months.
And then when the wound was enlarged, it became possible for me to insert forceps into him and refine them, without causing any harm. Once I no longer had difficulty identifying and engineering around this tool using various techniques, beginning one day on these techniques with forceps that are made to descend under his caput, according to how their shape will appear at the end of the skull; then I extracted it; and subsequently, I restored that wound.
And such doctors judged that the nasal cartilage is not restored; but I restored it and the wound has healed. The nose is fully recovered in health, and there is no damage to him under any cause.
And I advise you to consider the quality of extracting some needles in order that you may apply this rule and significance to what I have not said; for neither are the parts of this art nor their definitions comprehended by my narrative, nor can they be understood freely.
And the craftsmen compare with few on matter; and in this, you should consider what is presented compared to what is absent; and find a new operation and a new tool when it comes to descending the causes of foreign things in the art whenever such an occurrence happens.
And therefore I say that taggles are not outside-wounds in the limbs where they are stuck, but according to two methods: either by piercing into the place where they enter; or against the other side.
And the one who is wounded by the place goes in it, or the taggle proceeds through meaty place and is thrown outwards.
And if you do not follow the advice of the time when you cut, then consider that you should leave it for a few days until the meat around it heals, and alleviate the pain and exit of his and its cut.
Similarly, if it is stuck in bones and you do not follow your advice, then leave that for a few days and make this cut with the incision and movement every day, and already it is an outside-wound.
And if you do not follow your advice for a few days, then consider that you will drill into the path of the taggle in each bone along its subtle travel until the place expands from the taggle, and then extract it.
And if the taggle is already hidden in the body's place and is hidden from feeling, then you should try it with temptation, and if you feel that taggle, then pull it with such means that are suitable for its extraction.
And if you cannot do it on him due to the constriction of the wound and its length in the preon, and here is not bone or nerve or vein, then cut over the wound where it can be expanded and taggle extraction becomes possible.
And if it is located at your earlobes where it is stuck from all sides to the entire root; then deliver the meat in which it is stuck from all directions to every means you can do. Proceed with this, if you cannot perform on the removal of the meat in the breakage of the earlobes and within their twist until you follow this.
And when you manage the extraction of the taggle in any location where it is, then you use twisting of your hand with forceps from all sides until this follows; and delicacy with extreme delicacy so that the taggle does not break and that makes its own difficult extraction for you and for that removal.
And if you cannot do this on that at your time, then consider leaving for a few days until the parts that are in its path can heal, and proceed to repeat this when it is relieved. And if it gives you the opposite of our recommended bleeding, then consider administering what we have said about treatment in his chapter.
And keep your virtue from starting on vein or nerve, or heart, and use whatever means possible for you of taggle removal; do this with ease, calmness, speediness and firmness as I have recommended to you.
And therefore you should make the taggle reverse for as long as the thigh behaves according to the figure in which you should place the taggle's setting on it, which is more advantageous. And if this is not possible for you, then consider administering what is possible for the figures.
And if these are taggle outside-wounds on the other side or that already progresses some part to the parts of outside, or makes the tip of the taggle gill-like by feeling the part above its source and sometimes pushes that significantly; then you should consider it on that; and make sure about this section according to the quantity in which they take forceps; and then pull that, when it is made short by following.
And if it is stuck in the bone, then you twist your hand against the contrary so that the taggle starts to enter into the bone, and expand yourself, and then pull out that taggle.
And if not, leave that for a few days, and proceed to repeat this until it heals.
And if the shaft of the taggle is in there, then you push that towards him.
And if the shaft is stuck and you want to administer impulse, then you insert this inside, if it's silent (meaning the patient doesn't move), use convex tool so that enters in the cavity of him into the tip of the taggle and then push that towards him.
And if the taggle is concave, then you push that with a strong convex tool entering in it, which makes the taggle relieved by that.
And if the taggle is externalized, then consider that you must hollow out all the meat in which it lies, if this is possible for you, and proceed to care for it with what suits.
And if the needle penetrates in the feet, or in the belly, or in the bladder, or on the side, and it is close enough for you to touch it with your hand near that point, then you can burn there. Do so by burning there, take care not to damage a vein or nerve, remove it if necessary, then cover the wound as needed, and treat that area until it heals.
Form of forceps on which arrows are mounted:
Let their ends resemble a duck's bill, which are made like pliers when they grip the arrow, so that they do not let it go.
And from those, special marks are made, large, few and curved, depending on the size of the arrow and its delicacy, as well as the width of the wound and the constriction there.
Just like a needle, so that it eases the insertion in him for the concave arrow and it is pushed by that one.
Regarding phlebotomy of the veins.
The veins for phlebotomy which usually require phlebotomy are typically .xxx, or .xxx., meaning it refers to a specific set of veins commonly used for blood withdrawal. of which there are in the head .xvi., meaning there are sixteen (or .xvi.) veins located in the head region. so it are two pulsating veins which are close to the temples, they're called alhasisain; there are two leaves that are visible in both of them; and two veins that are in two lacrimals of each nostril and they're named aspicientz; and a vein prepared in the middle location of the forehead, and the vein that's at the end of the nose; and two guidegi that are on the neck; and two veins that are above the lips; and two veins that are below the lips; and - these are the veins that are called "allegoric"; and there are two veins that leave the tongue. The veins that are subjected to phlebotomy in the arms are .v., meaning there are five (or .v.) such veins typically involved in arm phlebotomy. Of those, one is cephalic and belongs to the wild lizard's heart; the populace calls it "the head vein", and it is blunt, curved. It consists of a branch from basilica vein and another branch from the cephalic vein. The populace also names that as "vein of all bodies," and the basilica vein which is placed in the domestic lizard, called "citillar". They refer to that other as "the belly vein"; it's part of the arm veins, placed on the elbow; this one is where phlebotomy takes place and is visible above the wrist due to its obvious appearance. Salvatella is the vein located between what they call the big auricular pouches and a small pouch near that area. They are two branches in it.
And in the chest and ribs are three veins; one of those is that which leaves behind the curve of the small lizard's heart. And the second is sophena, its location being just below the rib on the domestic lizard. And sciatic vein, its location corresponds to the curve of the wild lizard's heart. And in the rib area are other veins resembling these.
The youth of the veins that are close to the temples is akin to catarrhs, emigration, bleeding and old ulcers in the head.
And the quality of feeling those (veins) is according to what I advise you: it's that one finds the head of the lizard on the patient's forehead, and massages the head of the lizard at the back of the neck in the location between both veins with a broad cloth for good friction; return the lizard to its usual position, and if you feel the pulse of those on your forefinger, there is a point here where there are two pulses which are close to the temples near two depression points on the head. And place that one under yours, and if you feel the pulse of those ones under yours, here is the point.
Approach you take the surgeon's lance, it is that which pierces, and approach you introduce your forefinger into the vein in the neck where phlebotomy leads to the opening. And approach raise your hand to the vein and neck up to the parts above, then cut into the vein with a place where it pierces. And make the length of the cut equal to that of two fingers or close to it; and bleed out as much blood as you wish.
And afterwards strengthen with powders and leave it until it heals.
And this has been provided in the introduction of the book concerning the incision of those and their cauterization.
The youth of the two arteries that are in the temples, concerning phlebotomy, is towards old emigration and malevolent coldness, frequent eye infections, and excessive, acute, eruptive body diseases.
And the quality of phlebotomizing those (arteries) is according to what I advise you: strengthen the lizard's neck motion within which two veins appear by palpation, and demonstrate that your forefinger can feel their pulse; then you will detect it.
And approach raise the neck above the vein up to your forefinger's indication, and introduce phlebotomy there which pierces, then raise the vein upwards; and cut that like you did with other veins; and let blood run according to the amount of your need.
And then relax the constriction of the patient's leg, place your finger on the vein for an hour, and then place pressure on that spot and rub it, strengthening it against strong constriction, and leave it until it is healed.
And already the recall of their memories, as well as that one, and the beginning of the injury in the commencement of the narrative.
And thus the juvenile phlebotomy of the vein on the forehead is near the phlebotomy of the cephalic at the old facial ulcers and migraines, as well as fever and pus-filled ulcers.
And the quality of the phlebotomy for you is according to what I advise you; it is that one where the patient strengthens their neck with a bend where the vein appears; and then take the tool called fossi, which this is its form:
Place the point of the fossi on top of which is at the head of the tool over that vein and strike it against you with your elbow or with another reason in the manner of you, let the blood flow according to the quantity that you desire; and then relax the puncture in the neck and strengthen it until it is healed.
And some veins are opened during a phlebotomy at the neck, but not that the phlebotomy is of acute extremity like other phlebotomies, before being on its side, and this phlebotomy according to the transverse, where the bone is close and strong it would break in you when it is delicate.
May the youth of both veins that are at the tear ducts of two eyes by pus from the eyes by fever and sepsis in the eyes, and to the facial ulcers.
And the quality of phlebotomy is that the patient strengthens their neck with a bend, and then perform phlebotomies on those parts, and you should stand over their head.
And the phlebotomy is done according to the transverse and longitudinally for a few at phlebotomies each, where in the place there is no flesh; and if the phlebotomy is delicate, break its end which is strong.
And then let the blood flow as much as it is necessary to you, place over those spots, strengthen them for a night, and then relax those.
May the phlebotomy of the vein in the nose be related to acute fever and strong heat, as well as facial ulcers, migraines, and redness that occur on the face, especially if it's an old condition.
And the quality of the phlebotomy for you is that the neck strengthens and you place your nose on your left hand, take the delicate long phlebotomy and place it at the center location of the nose according to straightness, where the vein does not appear here, and when the blood starts flowing immediately.
And after you finish your hand with the small phlebotomy gradually and let the blood flow according to your need; then relax that for a night, because it is quickly restored.
May the youth of the phlebotomy of these two lead to constriction of it and beginning of leprosy, as well as bad facial ulcers, itching and corrosive ulcers, especially with scabies.
And the quality of phlebotomy for those is that the neck strengthens each one in its own bend; and it's up to the artisan on the head of the neck, and the neck should be placed on a seat.
And then perform phlebotomy for the vein along its length with ample small phlebotomies gradually; and then extract blood according to season quantity or according to how much you need which is in this way; and also pretend to be another vein.
And then relax the bend and strengthen both veins with mid-contraction for fear that the neck might become inflamed, and leave until morning when the disease is healed.
And the youth of phlebotomy for veins of the algerich (likely referring to veins in the face or around the mouth) corresponds to small abscesses and pus-filled lesions on the mouth, decay of gum tissue, bad ulcers, and cracks, as well as bad ulcers that occur on the nose and within your body.
And the quality of phlebotomy for those is that you shave in front of you, strengthen their neck with a bend, then rotate your lips and observe which two veins among them is one on the right side of the lip and the second on the left; and the demonstration of each is through the darkness of each of both, and more so if there are small black veins in that circuit; and then cut for insertion according to each.
If you are uncertain and don't know which one among them is, then you discern through the incision of the largest of those, and from the visible pus in those.
And pretend to be the two veins that are on the lips above.
Mays, the two veins that are left in the tongue, is similar to phlebotomy of the cephalic near pre-inflammatory conditions in the glandular area, for the tonsillitis, and throat ulcers.
And the quality of performing phlebotomy on those is that follow the neck between your hands in front of the face, lift the tongue for you, observe your own tongue, from one side of your vein and the other side of the vein, and the color of each declines to darkness.
And then puncture some veins; and be sure not to end your hand in venipuncture there, because leaving them there are arteries.
And your veins that are venopunctured in the thigh are in those where the common blood flows in all men, and their venopuncture is done according to two methods, or they make a venopuncture with a millet or olive needle by thinness; or they do it with a surgical knife, and call this method of doing it: this is how it is done.
The method of doing it is such that you place the patient in this position as many times, and you are to open the concave veins filled with obvious large blood flow, and towards those which contain large solid stones.
And this type of venopuncture is of lesser breadth and with a more subtle extremity, it applies to venopuncture of subtle veins that contain small stones.
May the youth of venopuncture of the basilic vein which is one of three veins: extract the gallstone from the patient's thighs that are on their left side and in the liver, and this affects their feet and stomach.
And when doing venopuncture there, the surgeon should watch that and be overcautious there, because if there is an artery where he has punctured, if he makes a mistake in the venopuncture, it will pierce that artery and cause bleeding, so you should not do venopuncture with a sharp needle before testing it with olive method, until you have tried it.
And if the basilic vein does not appear clearly, then you should stop there and try another place or look for a small branch; or do venopuncture at the end of the arm where that is clear; test that with olive venopuncture just like we have said.
If you want to do venopuncture of the patient's side, then look in front of the arm where you feel the area between your elbow and wrist that you know is near the artery, press on this area with your hand; lift up the arm and place the hand over it to test; test that with olive venopuncture just like we have said; make sure not to apply pressure for too long in the area of the artery.
And when you press, with strength on the muscle, swelling appears in the area that you pressed with your hand; then this swelling is the swelling of the artery, so avoid that.
And if you feel the blood flow in venopuncture like that of an infant, and the blood is thin red, then know it's from arterial blood; and thereafter hold your hand on that for a long time; and place your hand again softly here, and if the blood stops flowing, where the reddening marks stop, then lift your arm and leave that.
And take care of the patient's wound, be overcautious about it and don't allow any infection for a few days until they heal.
And if the blood does not stop flowing, and you should not apply medicine at this point; then you will have pierced the artery, if it appears to you; where its extremity is contracted, and the blood has stopped; or take a small suture thread, make it that way, and hold one end firmly with your hand on the area of the vein in contraction under the muscle and powdery substances the next day.
And then if the blood has stopped flowing, it's good; otherwise, take care of that with medicine from which it was preceded to recall the location of the powdery substances causing bleeding.
And the cessation of blood from him is difficult in many situations due to the small location of the wound and the possibility of muscle contraction in the arm.
The method of the dark vein venopuncture is done in youth to extract the gallstone from the upper part of the head and towards the left side of the body; for this reason it consists of branches of the basilic vein and of cephalic veins, as we have said.
And when doing venopuncture there, be careful that the area is over-touched in venopuncture of this patient, because leaving this area is a nerve; then if you make a mistake in venopuncture and find the nerve, it will cause him to lose consciousness, making healing difficult for him, and he may not recover fully. And this nerve is visible when felt; but if it's hidden in some people and is subtle and not shown, then be careful that you pause your venopuncture at the point where you are doing venopuncture with olive method, and avoid hitting nerves with your strength.
And if the vein is between two nerves, then you cut the vein along its length.
The youth of venopuncture of the cephalic vein is to extract blood from the head and apply it to patients' thighs.
And be careful in this manner, if you want that the puncture is done with olive venopuncture or millet venopuncture; which is the safest for all veins, not leaving you an artery or nerve.
However, in some individuals, it may happen that there is no blood discharge during the first percussion, but rather a pus accumulation at that site.
The first thing to know is that if you understand the nature of blood from which and the circumstances it should be handled for the benefit of health, hope for recovery, and caution against potential future illnesses. You must perform a bloodletting on one of these veins located in your thigh: the cephalic vein, the deep blue vein, or the basilic vein; you must do so during springtime after fasting, at the beginning of spring and autumn, and just before meals in winter when signs of overfilling appear.
And a bloodletting should be performed, or after the first three hours that have passed during the day.
Bloodletting should be administered when it's convenient and necessary, whether at night or during the day, at any time and under all circumstances.
You must know that an infant should not undergo bloodletting until after fourteen years of age, a pregnant woman should not be bled until the fourth month by the seventh month, and elderly individuals should not bleed as long as they have already surpassed sixty years.
And when someone wants to be bled for any reason, you should know that it's necessary to alter their intestines before bloodletting with a pessary of lion's bile; if they have a retained hernia, so that the veins don't pull out excess in the bloodletting from the intestines which are purified and do not affect the main members.
And do not bleed patients during fasting or drunkenness, nor from illness or intoxication until it's healed of their conditions, nor in those with dropsy, and more than bloodletting should be feared upon colic pain, upon vomiting, upon abdominal discomfort, upon multiple pregnancies or labors, upon exercise after meals or night vigil or any cause that dissolves their virtue, whether physical or animal.
And when considering the subtle manipulation of humors before this if it's gross, in foods and beverages, and with medicines if it's feasible for you.
And within this limit, between eating and abstaining from any cause that prohibits it or exercises through some activity in order to refine the illness.
And pause the bloodletting for your patient during the day, so around three o'clock in the afternoon, as we have said.
And be aware that the state of this person's day regarding all animal illnesses, such as distress, anger, fear, and all bodily accidents, such as labor, unnecessary worry, sexual activity, and similar occurrences.
And to his will, make the reasons be presented in the use of those things that men commonly like regarding fragrance and odors, and for balsams and similar things according to their capacity.
And let the bloodletting take place on a pillow that is softer than that of the person to be bled.
And when he extends his arm, rub that with his hand the bloodletting tool for two or three times; and then strengthen it with a thong and wrap that around twice.
And for a tightness that isn't equal, or for a tightness due to excess, then prohibit the flow of the illness. Or if it's due to alleviation, then prohibit the body of the illness entirely.
And when the tightness occurs, you should rub that which is to be bled between their hands while the veins are swollen and can be felt.
And when the bloodletting tool is anointed with a little of an ancient medicinal oil; and then pause your left hand's indication on that vein, place your hand where you want the bloodletting, so that the vein lets out a little, and stop pressing upon it until the vein has been identified. Thus when you identify heartbeats you must proceed with the bloodletting from there, as those are full of air; and if you pause the bloodletting tool on that area it is contracted, then proceed the bloodletting tool, and reveal the bloodletting tool; and do not press upon the vein, and if you do, that one is pulled.
And therefore, you should know that the bloodletting tool should be held firmly and take care of all these reasons.
And then pause the bloodletting tool again, but if the vein has been opened in one try, then you're done; and otherwise, continue that process, leaving your hand at that place for a while, or with haste, if the spot is not reopened.
And if the spot is reopened, or if the illness spreads, then you let it be for a day or two, and do not tighten the thong, because forcefully he will produce pus, nor during bathing.
And when appropriate, proceed with bloodletting again if it pleases you.
And if the appearance is small and allows for subtle illness, and you fear that it won't produce enough of the illness quantity desired, then proceed with bloodletting in that vein according to reason and adjust the appearance slightly. Do this with haste before the spot reopens; for those who reopen spots quickly after bloodletting, you should reduce the number of appearances.
If you have already opened him as he should be, then do not go over him again, for there is no excuse for any mistake; and pause over that part of the olive's aperture, which alleviates the body's pain. And it is better in this place than oil and other oils.
And similarly, administer olive oil apertures in every phlebotomy where there are many veins causing body pain, and do this with the therapeutic technique of cooling and dissolving when it is paused on one of those places, as pain is relieved and moves when it becomes thicker.
And if a large abscess is formed in the area of phlebotomy, where oozing occurs, especially when only that lump has not been bled but rather that oozed spot, or at the insertion of the small vein, then you press, and pause over the area with an infused sponge soaked in water and salt, one cut. Then strengthen it for an hour, as it dissolves.
And indeed, have the person perform this close to the seat of pain from that vein in accordance with their own or another's pulse.
And if there is any darkness or greenness in the area for several days, do not notice this; and if you wish, pause over that with some aloes or myrrh dissolved, or some extract of mint or camomile or something similar.
And if oozing occurs from abscesses and prominences, you should perform phlebotomy on the basilic vein.
And then place your hand on that, and if you later feel softness, apply pressure to it with your hand. Then, that prominence is bad and dangerous; hence, make sure to pause over that with any of what we have said, as strong blood will flow from the blood artery.
And apply plaster in the water where it is bandaged, so that the area endures, and then treat that with the other treatments while it is being healed.
And indeed, remove from the blood to each man according to the amount of his virtue and according to the color prevailing over the blood as it appears.
And if the blood is black, then you let it drain until it becomes redder; similarly, if you find it thickened, then you let it drain until it becomes thinner; and similarly, if it's sharp, within which you keep its sharpness.
And it's best for the one who is full and strong, needing blood extraction in a lump, to widen the phlebotomy on the vein and have the phlebotomy be deep.
And for the one who is pale, do the opposite of that. And indeed, extract it in many oozing spots, and make him lie straight.
And the best thing to be administered in phlebotomy of veins is that it be a cross-section section, not piercing.
And this method of phlebotomy saves from blood flow and nerve paralysis, and it is more acceptable and safer than phlebotomy according to width and length.
And when it is accustomed to cause fainting, you should perform phlebotomy, and indeed, cure that before the phlebotomy with a little of the infused water of milflowers or simple diluted oxymel; and extract some blood from the body in three spots or four.
And if it is diluted with composition, then take before phlebotomy a drink of mirra infusion or aromatic honey syrup, with spices like pepper, cinnamon, ginger and similar ones, or an aromatic and fragrant syrup.
And if fainting occurs, you should perform phlebotomy, and it is caused by their blood's movement, then indeed, have them drink water from meat and a slightly fragrant syrup; use aromaticity with garlic, and limit his feet to that.
And use the other causes we have mentioned in the division for treatment of fainting due to evacuation.
And if someone wants to strengthen their arm and dissolve their blood gradually in another spot, for which phlebotomy is through evacuation method, and the strength of them being pale, that drains the blood little by little, so it's according to the quantity of their strength on a continuous day.
And if someone wants to strengthen their arm and gradually drain their blood again, and their body is strong, then do this about seven or nine hours after the first phlebotomy.
And if someone wants to draw their body's blood in the opposite direction from where it declines, then have this done on the second or third day.
And this blood of which the movement is already drained and it's sharp causing fever, then have him drain his blood in a spot and make it large, with an insertion that causes fainting if there are any oozing spots, since you will have maintained all the conditions for phlebotomy; and place your hand on the pulse of him must be this blood flow, so that no death occurs instead of fainting when the phlebotomizer is ignorant and negligent.
And do not do this when you want to move the arm and drain blood again, as soon as the opening of the vein is closed and it becomes difficult to drain blood, then press under that with vehemence and slightly bend his extended arm, for this is too harmful.
Have him lie down until he is bled again; or keep this with the sharpness of the phlebotomist that coagulates in the opening of the vein from the blood; or pause over this with camphor, or myrrh, and compress slightly under which the blood will be forced out.
And if the vein is inflamed, then smooth that out and do not touch it until the inflammation subsides.
And if necessity prompts you to cause evacuation of the substance according to that, and it is not an excuse, then prick that area over that location or in another arm on another vein.
The vein referred to as "the arm's string" is drained in a location of the dark or basilica veins, when they are not obstructed or hidden; it consists of those.
The quality of the bloodletting procedure for the patient is that the sick person dips their hand in hot water until the lesion becomes red and the vein appears clearly.
And then strengthen over that with ligature or tourniquet; and also perform bloodletting according to the transverse direction, not laterally nor longitudinally.
And if the incision is wide and your bloodletting is such that you bleed over the joint of the hand there, a little.
And if the flow of the substance is prohibited, then you immerse your hand in hot water and let the substance run in the water until you achieve your need.
Maybe if you were in the days of summer, then you are excused from immersing your hand in hot water, and similarly, keep the body of the substance warm in hot water during winter.
And the bloodletting for this vein is better than for all other veins; it leaves you without a pulsating vein or nerve.
And bloodletting of the wrist of the right hand is related to the diseases of pregnancy.
The quality of the bloodletting procedure for this patient is that you strengthen your hand with ligature or with your own hand, as you have it placed in hot water, until the vein swells up and is clearly visible; then perform bloodletting on that transversely; and if you incise all over it, do not let that bleed again.
And remember not to finish your hand with bloodletting, for it leaves the nerves of the fingers exposed without skin.
And then immerse your hand in hot water and let the substance run through it; if you do not immerse that in hot water, the substance will clot in the opening of the vein, and there is no flow.
And like extracting the substance according to the quantity needed, then you press on the vein with oil and salt so it is not consolidated too much; similarly do this throughout all branches straight.
Maybe the youth of the bloodletting for that on the left hand is related to the diseases in milk.
And do something similar with the bloodletting of this as you did with the other one.
And the youth of the saphenous vein in bloodletting relates to diseases that are in the parts on your side, similarly as with pregnancy and retention of menses, and diseases of the lungs and ulcers in thighs and old chest pains, and they relate similarly to diseases.
The quality of the bloodletting for this patient is that the sick person dips their hand in hot water and does friction over it until veins appear; place your hand on the chest joint with a metal rod; the location of the visible vein you should do towards that spot, and from there its branches spread on the chest face.
And thus perform bloodletting on the larger vein or if it is necessary to increase it, then you do it towards that spot, which is better and with salt.
And if you perform bloodletting on the chest face, then you protect yourself from the nerves that are on that part of the chest face; pause your bloodletting at the location where you bleed across it, as if you wanted to incise it.
And if possible with bloodletting.
Maybe if the discharge of the substance is prohibited; then you immerse the person's hand in hot water and let the substance run through it until evacuation occurs.
And if the bloodletting tool misses in the first attempt, then do it again with bloodletting on his one part, where the location is salt; and don't fear its evil, rather protect yourself from nerves as we have said.
And similarly do for the saphenous vein of the other hand in equal manner.
And regarding the sciatic vein, as we have said, you should do it towards the hollow of the wild part.
The youthfulness of bloodletting for this is in the buttock pain when it's due to substance congestion.
The quality of the bloodletting procedure for this is that the sick person bathes and steams themselves, then strengthens their arm from the elbow of the longer side up to above four fingers on a long, delicate bend; which only appears in this manner.
And when it appears, then you perform bloodletting on that according to each organ that is possible for you and in the transverse direction, which is better; or incise that through incision or puncture that through suction, where the location is salt.
And it is in the dense, thick area of men's thighs; and if you find that, but does not appear to touch, then perform bloodletting on some branch of this, and it will be that which appears behind both sides of the chest towards that auricular and annular.
And protect yourself from nerves, let blood flow as much as you want through the veins.
And then loosen the constriction and place your hand at the site of the phlebotomy cut, strengthen the area slightly, where it will be somewhat healed later.
Regarding suction and the quality to use those [items or tools].
Suctions are from leeches, or from air, or from blood.
And suction is performed in two ways: one of them is through incision and blood extraction, and the other is suction after incision.
And this suction that follows incision is done in two ways, whether it's with fire or after using fire.
And the places where blood is extracted through incision are in fourteen parts of the body. The first place, on which suction is made, is in the navel area, and it's the last part of the head; the second place is halfway down each side of the throat; suction from the chin leaves the jawbone but not the mouth; suction from two spatulas; suction from alohoster, and that's at the tip of the penis; suction from two fire tools, and they're two handbreadths apart; suction from two quills; and suction from two thighs.
And suction does not remove blood but from small superficial veins in the flesh, thus it lacks effectiveness like phlebotomy; nor should suction be done with fire or after using fire on any illness made by overfullness inside that doesn't allow the body to fully evacuate.
If necessity requires suction due to illness or continuous pain, administer that throughout the entire month and at its end, and in the middle of it and at any other time as needed.
And therefore when times occur in any of those causes, especially if it's around the third or middle of the month, then commanding suction to be performed is necessary as long as more than three hours have passed since dawn.
And the youth of neck suction is that when it leads to congestion in the head and also into what infiltrates the eyesight; but know that such corresponds to full evacuation of the entire body.
And this suction is at the site of phlebotomy for cephalic issues.
And it's not written that one should use what is full of blood flow or in which there is catarrh, for this gives great harm to the person.
And for that reason it's not fitting to use those elderly methods, and in the heads where illnesses occur.
And for the one who remains continuously over it upon it is commanded forgetfulness; thus know that you should order the suction operator to pause his hand slightly away from the area where you've placed your cushion, fearing the generation of forgetfulness.
And alcohol suction is at the site of phlebotomy for the black vein and basilica: thus it leads to asthma, constriction in the neck, and division of the lymph nodes, also causing coughing and overfullness.
And know that the alcohol suction should be kept slightly on, if removed beforehand it causes weakening in the body and stomach.
And the suction with hagdahan leads to sudden headaches in the head and eye problems, migraines, feverishness, and toothaches; it's at the site of phlebotomy for the basilica.
And know that you should command the suction operator not to press their hand too much at incision so as not to pierce an artery and allow blood flow.
And mouth suction leads to alcohol in the mouth, and corruption of the gum, and resembles symptoms that are from illnesses within the mouth, and is at the site of phlebotomy for allicherec which is between the two lips.
And the suction that's performed on the two spatulas leads to heatstroke, which is caused by overfullness of quality.
And the suction in both parts inside the fire tools leads to youthfulness of phlebotomy from three veins, they are basilica, black, and cephalic; it extracts blood from all those superficial veins that are in the flesh, as well as those small veins from other veins that allow access to the three veins.
And command the suction operator not to proceed with incision, where the area is stripped of flesh, and leave your nerves and arteries intact.
And it's one suction on which hemorrhoids are suctioned and leads to the hemorrhoids in the anus as well as sores left behind.
And it's wise to command the suction operator for a large suction, and with leeches, where the area needs strong drying; his soft drawn suction is fine when done with incision as well.
Strong windings in the joints lessen through clear manifestation, which bring on the sensation of pain throughout the body, and confirm the presence of old ailments in the limbs, stomach, and uterus, and cause menstruation, confirming the condition of obstruction and discomfort; they are located in the spot for a double phlebotomy, alongside the neck, and in two small punctures.
However, it weakens all the body and causes fainting during sudden movements in men.
And with the winds, they ascend from youth to youth among the winds of both sides.
And the quality of the position of the winds is that you stop the wind when it starts to see and continue through well-aged, do not prolong the position of the winds, more pause those slightly, let them be slowly, and let the humors come to place for equal advent. And do not cease repeating this, continue until you see the place already turn red and swell up, and that the fever of the pain appears.
And then you scrape it off, gradually repeating the heat one by one, and more carefully consider in the disposition of the body.
That person who has a rare kind of flesh that heals slowly, you should scrape him once and not more, so that the place does not become ulcerated.
And command the wind director to expand the scraping and stop a little, and always heat it with ease.
And if there is thickening in the pain, you should know that you need to scrape twice, in the first scraping you open the way of dissipation to the pain and the fluidity of him. And in the second one, during the examination, look for the extraction of the thick pain.
And if the pain is very solid, then it should be done with scraping for a third time so that it achieves its end.
And gradually, when we want to extract the pain little by little or a small amount, until it reaches one scraping.
And if we want extraction of liquid pain, we scrape with more scraping; and if we know that the pain is thick, you should know that you need to scrape with wave-like scraping.
And the end of scraping is at the depth of the chain only.
And if the chain is thick, hard, dark, and his pores are tight, you should know that the points for the suction cups should be greased more gently, open more decisively; if it's during summer time, likewise use oil of aloes or oil of violet, or oil of melon seeds, or oil of camphor; and if it's during winter time, then use oil of narcissus, or oil of iris, or oil of chamomile, or that sort.
And if the excess is thick and rough, then use oil of turpentine, or oil of benzoin, or oil of aloes, or oil of juniper, and similar types of oils.
And if the wind director has large pores of thin flesh, you should know that oil is prohibited, and it's recommended that for this place where the suction cups are near to suctioning, they should be washed with water or with turpentine-soaked water, or with water from grapefruit, or water from borax, and similar types of treatments should be applied.
And for the one whose pain is of liquid humidity, wash his suction cups with vinegar or with water from myrtle and sumac, and similar types of treatments should be applied.
And for the one whose excesses are thick, wash his suction cups with old vinegar or with water from sweet basil, which is marjoram, or from the decoction of juniper, or chamomile water, and similar types should be applied.
And it's important that the suction be done before bathing; you should know that it should be taken close to the bath for an hour or two, and that sleep near to the suction should be ensured.
What is needed is for the person administering bloodletting before the act of suctioning, to regulate the wind.
And you should consider at the beginning: when it's necessary for the one who is to perform bloodletting or the one giving suction, if they have bile and wind over his sharp pain and inflammation, then he should take cooling causes, such as vinegar lettuce and milk drinks, and spinach, and julep, and similar types.
And let his meals be such as roasted meats, furred animal meats, and meal seasoned with herbs, and similar types for him.
And for the one whose complexion is rough, it's recommended that he drink essences of almond oil or almond essence mixed with vinegar, sumac, and wine fragrant between old and new; and it should be advised to him to limit his drinking and eating, and pause meals of roasted meat, cannabis, pears, small furred animals, and pigeons.
And it's important that the day of suctioning and bloodletting his drinking should exceed his meals.
And it's important to give him to drink in some hours before for those with tyraica alfarac or medicines containing musk, such as musk oil, or cinnamon before suctioning or bloodletting or nearby, so that the main limbs are comforted and the pain is dissipated; but it should not be recommended to take that rubbing.
The suction cups that are results of scraping should be suction cups that are applied above the navel, and on gout, over the umbilicus, in the areas of the elbows, and the armpit, for these limbs do not suffer from scraping by themselves.
And it is not sought by those methods but rather the irritation of the member's nerve ends, as with a suction cup on the breast in mastitis due to milk flow obstruction; and we use that to dissolve excess wind and relieve viscosity in the member, similarly placing one over the abdomen and the umbilicus; for that dries out the member and calms it down, eliminating the pain associated with wind.
And when placed on the testicles if it happens during their erection or ejaculation, through the power of irritation they make a person lose their erection and eradicate the ejaculation from its place.
Similarly, when it is placed on the thigh and the area of excessive wind in those confined.
And these suction cups are applied with grease, not just that; some treatments are done with fire as well.
And some treatments involve boiling water in foot sores due to diseases of the feet.
And that's why the suction cup is filled with a large amount of pus, either it's just hot water or water in which herbs suitable for the remedy have been steeped.
The method of administering a suction cup with fire: the size of the opening should be as wide as two fingers; we formed it accordingly. The amount of pungent substance is as much as one palm's width; place it on his back, in the location where the pain is at the point where the veins are, as large as him, and make it small according to the quantity that enters with a needle into him.
Make cuts from the arm or lemon, with thick slices, lion, equal and clean, such that it doesn't allow the member to deviate from its position over him.
And at the middle of his back crosswise between the arm or iron, where a candle is placed when it's set ablaze.
And this large suction cup is from the one we described; and use less wax according to the foot sores and the state of the person using it.
And the suction cups for children and those experiencing exhaustion are different from the ones used by adults and those with severe symptoms.
And the quality of placing this suction cup on fire over the member is that the wax from a decent wood torch in front of a small candle of beeswax, place that one over the middle of the back cross at the middle location of the suction cup, so that the fire be lit around the area to prevent burning of the patient's body.
And place it over the body part of the sick person, and let it be on the stick we've mentioned. When using suction cups and they do not hold up the stick that steams above that area, then the suction cup will soon dissolve.
And apply fire according to its method, and repeat this if you need more of this treatment.
Mud to the suction cup that is administered in pleurisy, with water, without any back cross or stick, and it is not administered unless it's filled with water, and placed only on the body part.
And this is how it's done: This suction cup; the larger it is, the better, so that it can receive large quantities of water.
Chapter 97.
Suction cups are not administered in the mouth of limbs but in those parts of limbs where it's impossible to place suction cups due to their small size, like the throat and gum tissue; or on naked flesh such as that mentioned and the nose, similar to them.
And the quality of using those ones you have found as blood-sucking devices that are in the hot waters used for purification.
And let them rest in hot water for day and night within which they become accustomed, without causing any harm to their stomachs; and remove the body through bleeding and suction cups; and clean the sick person's body until it turns red; and place them on him.
And once they are filled, in case.
And if it is possible to use grease from the body with suction cups, it is better to do so during adolescence.
And if not, then wash the body with warm water and proceed with hot water; and clean it and squeeze it.
And if the body of the disease lasts towards the location of the blood-sucking devices, and this is its result, then you put a wet cloth in cold water, and place that one over it until the discharge is eliminated.
And if the disease is multiplied, then sprinkle it over him with vitriol trisated or gallstones and similar remedies that stop diseases; until the disease disappears; or place the ashes of the mayts on his body, let them rest so that the beans adhere to his body, until the disease disappears.
And if needed, repeat the blood-sucking treatments, whenever it's possible to change those ones.
And if blood-sucking devices are not allowed to be suspended, then wash the body with recent disease or leave a needle in those areas where it steams disease; and let them rest, so that when there is any disease they quickly disappear.
And when you want them to go away, grind a little bit of trisated aloen or salt, or ashes over those and chase it off quickly.
Thus begins the treatment for the lower part: restoration. This chapter discusses necessary procedures in the art of medicine; it deals with the treatment of fractures and accidental dislocations in bones.
Oh, child, know that this chapter is known to both doctors and laymen, and even those who for time may not have read the works of the ancients nor understood a single letter from them.
And for this reason, this method of the scholars on earth is kept private; I have not forgotten what I learned over time; and I did not include anything that was not supported by extensive reading of the works of the ancients and studying their understanding, within which I extracted knowledge from them.
And also direct towards experimentation and study throughout my life.
And I have already described in this chapter everything that comprises my science and on which experiments were conducted; since this is summarized for you others and relieved from the occupation of extension; and shorten it at the end of shortening; then show it at the end of description; and form it into various forms of disturbances that are administered there, as done through the addition of description, similarly I did in two previous chapters.
First chapter.
A summary and collection of fractures in bones, from which it is necessary to start before we begin recalling the parts that are fractured or different for each. Know that in the prologue of this chapter, we speak of summaries of speech; and chapters whose understanding is what the artisans focus on at the beginning, based on the truth of those; these are you and those who are quick to learn or acquire this noble art among you.
And thus say that when a fracture or dislocation or twist or compression occurs, then you should attend to the beginning with bloodletting or correct it there, or at any time if no cause is forbidden, such as excess of vital energy, or from which the event occurs, or rather in old age, or during intense heat, or intense fever.
And then be content with food that includes herbs, rabbits and crabs; and forbid large meats and fill instead with various foods and all foods that fill the veins of sinew, so you can rest assured of a pus abscess, and if you do not fear leakage of material in the body.
And then return the patient to their initial position where they usually recover.
And when the broken bone begins to heal, then you should feed the patient with nutritious foods rich in energy and bulk, such as foods made from ground wheat cooked in water, rice, carrots, pork, stomachs of cows, hams, fresh meat, and similar large foods. Under this regimen, there is a slight coagulation of pus in the fracture, which is beneficial.
And know that bones mature when they are in young men and in old age, it is not possible for them to continue as such and become consolidated according to their nature due to the desiccation of their limbs.
However, nature adjusts and corrects on the broken bone from every part any cause similar to glue in which there is a thickness that adheres to it and strengthens it during which times of conglutination occur and settle at times, within which come the end of strength and firmness; such as fire at the beginning, where you do not forbid it for its works.
And for this reason, it is necessary that you stop feeding the patient with foods that contain gravity, viscosity, and bulkiness, as we have said.
And know that the species of fracture are various according to the diversity of limbs, a fracture of the rib bone is different from the fracture of the skull bone; and a fracture of the foot bone is different from the fracture of the leg bone; similarly, all other limbs differ among themselves.
And I conclude with a recall of every species of fracture, detailed in their respective chapter separately from the other.
A variety of fractures within oneself. A variety of fractures occur in their own parts; one is curved fracture and another happens as it occurs in the stars. Sometimes fractures are made according to the length of the bone: these are the fractures of the thumb and asterisk and those that proceed or do not proceed, such as when writing preparation is made and it's called fracture at the tip and disruption in the head, and small fissure fracture.
And for every species, there is its own disturbance in the restoration according to that which will come from recalling their distinctness in their respective locations.
A variety of signs of bone fracture. And thus we know a bone fracture: it is the bending of it, and the prominence and adjacency of it to touch, and from it when you press it with your hand.
And when it's not visible or palpable in the location of bending, and if you touch the bone during pressure and the patient doesn't experience significant pain, then there is no fracture here.
There might be the possibility of being twisted or having a small crack, then don't allow that under your hand and apply compression to all; pause over them from the medicines in which you remember to approach that moment, which suits the area; then stretch it gently through subtle constriction.
Know that when the area is curved and does not split into two or more parts without affecting its structure, such as when it swells throughout the entire part of its anatomy, then you should start from your own time to rectify the deformity that has happened there.
And if there has been a cauterized abscess, then smooth that over several days until the abscess ceases; and adjust it according to any method you know of for elevation and skill.
Know that the restoration and the adjustment of your area are as delicate as in the bone where it occurs internally.
And strengthen that according to what you remember about it.
If in the bone there are swellings, then it is necessary to extend this broken member from two parts, if it's a hand or a foot; or with your hand if the member is small; or with two strings or with one string and your hand.
And make your position so that you pause the member at its natural location evenly, while stretching the parts of the broken member outward; then force yourself to return those additions according to any method you can apply in their respective places.
And observe so that your strength does not fall upon the patient during your operation or injury, and force yourself according to your ability to apply one bone to another of its better forms as a companion.
And make sure that in that useful moment you touch with your hand there, and if you find any different cause here, correct it and adjust it according to the amount of your virtue.
Avoid excessive extension and compression; even as some doctors' motions cause the formation of cauterized abscesses through their operations, or cause contraction in members like we have seen with their swollen motions.
And the quality of the tension in the member is what you should seek. Know that broken members vary in their size, in their magnitude, and in their form.
And for those that are small, like the arm and as you said and is easy to compare with them, then ensure that the covering is of a very soft cloth.
And for those that are large, like the thigh or abdomen, ensure that in these there is a layer and hard covering, so that the stiffness of the layer connects the large member from all sides with equal tension, lest any blemish occurs.
And start slowly, and begin your operation for correction, gently place them at a spot on that fracture about three layers or four depending on the member's size; then strengthen your hand slightly on this.
And move to that more superior part of the fracture site, and strengthen gradually so as not to apply your tension on the place where you have strengthened the fracture site. And slowly stretch the layer around the fracture site a little, and gradually soften your tension as you take hold of a large portion from the location.
And take another branch and wrap this second swelling over the broken part with layers, then move towards these layers to the more recent fracture site. And in your operation focus on adjusting tension and softening that area as we mentioned in the first layer above.
And pause between the layers of linen or cloth that matches the curvature of the fracture, if there is curvature in it; and otherwise, do not stop at any cause.
And pause on the other branch, and adjust over these layers that are roughly made just now, if there is no swelling or cauterized abscess in this area, then pause on that which has the abscess and causes swelling; leave it for a few days; then strengthen over those stars.
And let the stars have a cylindrical shape, and be formed wisely; or they may be made of wood; or of palm leaves; and let each star's width follow this shape and this figure:
And ensure that the star placed over this fracture is larger and more refined than the other stars, with the length of the star according to what has been read about its magnitude and size in relation to the member; then strengthen on these stars from another branch according to your first tension; and observe it for improvement as we have said concerning tension, so that your tension is more based on the fracture site, and the longer you stretch from the fracture, the less tension should be required.
And it is known that during pregnancy and subtlety, the threads become thick; if the threads are thick, as I have seen in several operations on certain individuals, cutting them during their cord tension, this is a large mistake, when the constriction was equal.
And thin threads are inconvenient, for you will not achieve what you want with constriction in those you wish to apply it to, and do not think that between here and there is a span of less than one finger.
And if the patient has been located at the ends of the strings near the constriction in the sensitive areas, then place this cushion under your foot or a piece of white wool inside so that it does not cause injury.
Some fractures occur as injuries, and there is disruption in the sequence, and I will recall this in that case according to singularity in the Capitol.
And know that not all broken members are treated with stars on the first day; this is because when the member, if it is large, cannot be placed over its stars until about three or five or more days, depending on your confidence in the development of pus from the cautery.
And this is the method of applying plaster to which the ancients resorted, those who applied them on fractures, dislocations and twists.
Method of applying plaster as reduced for the restoration of fractures, convenient for complex injuries and mostly for women and children, which is about what does not feel heat or friction: it is that you take powdered rice flour, and this is the starch that comes out when rice moves in the mill walls.
And do it like this, or sieve it as such with chicken egg white, and prevent the formation of the not-thin nor subtle; then use that.
Another method of applying to treat fractures, dislocations, and twists in the restaurant: mix assafetida, lapdanum, acacia, nux vomica, and myrrh, each in amounts equivalent to a thousand grains, all together making one eagle's weight; add myrrh and aloen in five eagles' weights; mix alochil in twenty eagles' weights; then blend them with water or the yolk of an egg if the patient's skin is irritated; and apply this ointment which has good composition and restores fractured bones gently, aiding to strengthen limbs for men.
Another way of applying an ointment that helps with fractures and twists: mix myrrh and white alum in one eagle's weight; myrrh and aloen in five eagles' weights; acacia in six eagles' weights; and Armenian mastic in twenty eagles' weights.
All these are ground in a mortar with the twisty part, they are sieved and mixed with water or chicken egg white then applied.
Method for applying plaster to joints and bones separated from their places, and accidental pain occurs in those and cracks and fractures: take twisted wool thread and immerse it in vinegar and oil of cut fat then place it over the area.
In this plaster there is not instantaneous restoration, it expels pus from the cautery and eliminates pain properly.
Another method of plaster that restores broken bones: take fig leaves and leaves of salvaged poppy, crush them together and make a plaster from it.
A shortened plaster method administered for the restoration of bone fractures and when you want resolution of pus remnants: take grated pine tar, chamomile flowers, violet blossoms, rice flour, from all parts of .1.; All are ground and mixed with vinegar if the member has not been cut.
If it has been cut, then apply this to water of squeezed moisture or to water and use it.
Another method of applying plaster that promotes faster resolution than the first one when pus is persistent and requires restoration of the member: take grated pine tar, garlic seeds, mallow, honey suckle, marjoram, violet flowers, chamomile flowers, from all parts equally; everything should be ground and mixed with water of sauerkraut or double water or vinegar depending on the quality of the member and the color of its recovery.
Mentor or Aphrodisias does not advocate freely spreading the mixture on a broken member for its restoration, instead recommends using wax and oil mixtures rather than any other cause; it is recommended to be of medium thickness and subtlety.
It is seen that when the joints are broken, the restoration of their health and the causes leading to dryness from small heat quality, such as myrrh, plants and similar items, should be considered among those causes we have listed.
A method of dressing for healing injuries and pain: take equal parts of ground ashes from burned human skin or hazel bark ash, and another type of ash, along with salt. Mix them thoroughly, sift them, grind them to powder, and create a poultice with this mixture.
Determine the amount based on how much pus is present and when it starts to subside. You should consider whether there is no pain or swelling and if the bone is not broken, then you do not remove any bones for several days. And if you encounter pain, swelling or inflammation at the site, then you should remove or intervene immediately, and keep this dressing on it.
And take a cloth and a wet sea sponge, submerge that in hot water, then wash the area where it is within you until the pain stops and the pain subsides; then let it rest for an hour. And place on it wool soaked in vinegar or oil, then cover it with another layer of the same during night, so long as you are sure there's no pus under your scabbing, and to allow the swelling of the limb to subside, ensuring that the pain is relieved for you.
And again apply that tightness repeatedly with a small dressing and don't tighten it for your first strain, and do this until the injury is healed.
And if you notice that the pus and heat and pain and swelling and all other accidents have completely subsided, and you need a dressing or tightness again, then continue doing this as you started, equally.
And if no cause from those we've mentioned happens to the limb, then don't remove it but wait approximately three days or four, or five, or seven. And some burns of all this are left for twenty days according to how you appear with the release of the limb, as we've said, during which time the fracture adheres and it comes close to clotting the flesh over that.
And then adjust with more tightness than your initial tightness altogether, and adjust according to the enlargement of the patient's thigh meat, as the memory of that occurs.
And if you notice that the fracture site is already dried and exhausted more than it should be, then know that nourishment cannot reach there; hence soak that completely in hot water every time; do this for all three days; ease the tightness a bit, and through this operation bring nutrition to the limb, which heals slightly.
And that which the folks who restore limb fractures do differently than when restoration begins at the start, according to how it heals, and is restored in accordance with curvature, is an error according to their operation, and great fear; if this were done correctly as they expanded the Ancients' in their free writings and healed them.
And I haven't seen any of theirs do this, so it's more reasonable that this doesn't happen.
Chapter 2: About fractures when they occur in the head.
The types of fractures are blows, and their shapes are diverse, with distinct causes. Some fractures occur due to impact from space, where the impact remains entirely inside the skull, leaving it intact, just like in a blow on wood, thus this type is called 'ascial'. Or the space impacts part of the bone, then cuts into the flesh but doesn't penetrate the rear end of the object; and this type of fracture is called absolute elevation.
And the severity of these two types of fractures can be great or slight, and for crushing or pulling fractures; and the cause for them is impact against stone or striking on rock, and they are similar in nature.
And this fracture either penetrates closely to the sinew, leaving the bone intact; or it occurs in the facial part of the bone. The severity of these two types of fractures can be great or slight.
And for a fracture that expands in the bone, in the subtle weakness of the hair follicle, thus this type of fracture is named 'capillary'.
And this is the fracture that happens due to impact or stone hitting, and it looks like them, causing some layer of the bone to enter its parts inside, and it occurs in the concave area, as when they are hit with an axe and the part of their entrance enters the inner parts.
And most notably, this occurs in the bones of wet bodies, such as children's heads.
And for all these types of fractured bones, they are heavy like stars that are separated. And I will come back with a review of all this in its place.
And I know all these types of fracture through detection on those and through inquiry about their smells and examination of the putrefied flesh that is on them.
And the capillary type is known in this way that it's revealed over the bone and is washed away, with its edges examined, so that the fracture appears black.
And when considering the treatment of fractures at the beginning, consider the symptoms of the patient, and thus if you encounter symptoms that clearly indicate an underlying condition such as vomiting due to cholera, expansion, loss of understanding, bleeding, fainting, acute fever, and sweating or heat, in addition to other major symptom patterns, it's likely that healing won't occur.
And if you encounter unforeseen incidents during treatment, you hope for recovery, then you start the treatment of the patient.
This cause is that if you are affected by the cold in eating as it affects him and this happens on winter days, then seek to study at the back of your skull on the fourteenth day completely in order.
And if it is on summer days, then seek to rest on the back of your head for the seventh day, having ascertained that what remains in your skull has been corrupted by heat, and that incidents occur which we have recounted.
And if the fracture has already reached the heat, covering the brain, and is in parts that are cut and burned, then seek to engrave the prescribed part and grind it, as I will instruct you.
And you measure the head of the patient affected by the cold, uncovering over the skull according to custom and manner as best as you can according to the figure of the disease, making it lighter on the body.
And if it happens to you, you must detect the skull, pus or abscess discharge with a cautery, then you resist him against this, and you do as you instructs me, by smearing the area with infused oils and rubbing oil, ensuring that the abscess is sedated; and you make sure of blood flow. Then start around the skull and in removing him.
And this should be done according to one of two ways of operation.
And one way is that you cut the skull with a straight incision tool, this is his form: Then administer another incision tool next to this, slightly lower than the first one; and this is its form:
And then administer more with the scalpel that is slightly further than the second one.
And you should know that you need several types of incisions, among which some are further than others; and among them, some are shorter than others and they end at the tip of their extremities, and they are made of iron or steel.
And use them for ease in percussion on the incisions so that you don't damage the skull and harm him.
And if the skull is strong and hard, then seek to puncture at the circuit in front of where you administer the incisions with the drills, which are named non-deep drills.
And they are not called like that just for the ones that do not reach the end of the skull inside which is close to him, where at the drill tip is a round end or margin resembling the edge that remains on the skull as if it were sharp like an edge or small circle, which should not be submerged and pass through the thickness of the skull.
And it is convenient for you to use many of these drills that suit the thickness of each skull, within which is present everywhere in all tests of the brain, the tip of which is sharp, the quantity in length and width should be according to the amount of thickness of this test.
And this is the form of three kinds of drills: The quality to puncture in the circuit of the broken skull is that you stop the drill on the skull and turn it with your fingers until you know that the skull has penetrated; then move the drill to another place, stopping where you can take the quantity of the thickness of the ray or around this.
And then cut with the incision tools which are between each ray of the skull, make that subtle cut on what remains in height as we have said, when you remove the skull, or with your hand, or for some other reason using certain instruments which you will have equipped for this, such as forceps and fine tongs.
And you should know that with all caution the incision tool does not touch any part of the brain.
And so when you have made the incision through the skull and separate it from the brain if it continues with him, extract that part, and you measure and compare that against its roughness in what is like an incision tool of another instrument similar to a scalpel, but moreover seek for it to be more precise and more subtle than other scalpels.
And if there are any small parts of the bones that are petrified and solid, then take that with ease using those instruments; and then treat the wound with linens and ointments as we have said.
And the other way of operation is lighter, far from pain, which was said by Gualia and by lauzec through great suffering; and this is what he says: It is necessary for you at the beginning to start discovering the part of the skull in that place where the fracture is most violent and most apparent. When you have discovered that part and stopped him there with the end of this slow and cheerful incision, here is its form:
And it is that the lenticular part is round and does not cut any cause, while the sharp part has two parts ahead in length, as you see; so that the lenticular part fits to the brain against his sharp incision on the skull.
And then you hit on the incision of one part with a slight angle so that you cut all the skull as easily as it has been turned, and you be sure of heat that no damage occurs in the accident you fear in any manner. If the doctor was the most common and ignorant among humans; certainly, and if he was sleeping.
When any cause is attached to the bone in certain places of bones near the annular lesion, that material comes out from his extremity through the oblong incision, and it is removed easily, which is removed from his internal organs and his flesh.
And if the bone fracture does not penetrate into the flesh, and what is adhered or leftover from the bone is the skin around him, if it has bumps and subtle depressions in him, then you must smooth out that roughness and remove those small depressions with a fine razor blade which you have prepared in number, using different quantities so as to possibly apply them at all locations in accordance with each's convenience and drain the pus from these according to where you are performing your operation on this broken bone and its shape.
And make sure to apply in your judgment when you sharpen the bones at the beginning of each application from these razor blades, and then use close to his subtle pus from him, and do not stop doing this until you reach the point where you need to drain all the thick pus and the subtle pus from all of them.
With every other minor capillary fracture and subtle fracture, make sure to apply treatment according to what you lost regarding rectification of it.
And this is why it isn't healed over all those that have studied in that art. And we have shown on what has been written about large fractures.
And if the flesh contracts when you drain the bone, then make sure to take lint according to the amount of the wound, immerse it in oiled water, and place it over the wound; and also take another piece of folded or tripled lint, immerse it in vinegar and oiled water, and place it over the first lint; and do so with a small amount of pus that you can apply to it, without injuring the skin; then administer oil on top of that, and don't press it unless the wound demands only that much.
Let it rest with this treatment for one or two days until you are sure of the pus discharge; then remove it and apply medicines that prevent excessive drying, such as linseed oil, flour of arsenic, powders of alum and artemisia, and substances like those.
And you should apply powder of these medicines that is finely ground on the wound, such as dry ones; universally, administer any medicine with properties that cleanse it without causing irritation.
And follow your judgment in this respect that the wound during your treatment should be clean; it should not be within the greasiness of ointment or any other substance; nor leave an irritant behind. For when adjusted over the brain's flesh, it decays and spreads there, which results in malignancy spreading to the body nearby due to this harmful quality.
And it happens in the skin of the head, like how his bone changes and much more so when treatment is neglected for him; then observe that if you experience accidents similar to what we have said about these matters occurring in the body, know that this is harmful throughout his entire being.
And if you do not experience blackness but rather the color from the medicine placed on it, and this blackness is due to the nature of that medicine causing that coloration, then make sure to take one part of honey and parts of oiled water three times. And make these lines with lint, then place this over the skin; and treat it with healing spices as needed until it heals.
Chamber three.
Regarding the restoration of the nose when it is broken.
Know that the nose is not broken but divided into two parts at once, or a few times over the forehead, due to there being two bones in him, where the part left is cartilaginous, and it isn't broken; it doesn't hurt him directly but causes swelling and deformity and nasal obstruction.
And if one of the two parts is broken, then make sure to insert your index finger into his nose, and equalize that fracture internally according to your index finger's direction, and outside it too, until the nose returns to its natural shape. And do this according to your ease, and be careful not to cause harm throughout the body due to your operation.
And if the fracture is in the forehead part of the nose, and your finger doesn't reach there, then make sure to align at the end of the ray where a small thickness occurs.
And if the fracture is in two parts, then you should mimic this procedure.
And assist him with the restoration of his nose on the first day after the fracture, if it's possible; otherwise, wait approximately seven to ten days for pus discharge.
And insert a piece of lint cloth into the end of the nose, if the fracture is in one part; or place two pins, if the fracture is in two parts, and adjust them according to the thickness of the pin as much as it fills the nostril.
And refer to some of the ancient restorers who place pins in silk bandages, which are changed every day; yet I don't see this practice myself. Rather, it is important that the cloth be filled with albumen soaked in water mixed with powder from sulfur; and have the pin stay until the bone is set and the cartilage has hardened.
And in some instances, insert into the nose instead of a pin, to prevent excessive pus from being wrapped in lint cloth, which is made of lion's skin; and because there has already been a strong fracture in the nose with the body not preventing inhalation.
And this reason is not something you need; if you want, do it, if you don't want to, do nothing instead.
And if another abscess should form, place the nose on a wet cloth or on an oiled and fluffed blanket, or use a lamp.
Otherwise, if no abscess forms, then cover the affected area with flour made from sassafras and powder of chestnut leaves; and place your hand on their forehead, and do not let anything cause the nose to bleed.
Otherwise, if they break the bones of the nose with small fractures or healing takes place, then cover so that you separate over those, and remove them with instruments suitable for those; and place your hand on the separation, and cure it with what promotes flesh and consolidates, and cover it with a plaster suitable for that.
And if an internal wound occurs in the nose, then cover so that you cure it with remedies and administer lead pipes inside until it is completely healed.
Chapter IV.
On the restoration of the jaw when it is broken.
When the jaw that I leave is broken and its fracture is not in the flesh, observe that when the fracture is only external, and is not broken into two parts but is curved towards the inside, then its knowledge (or understanding) is slight.
And thus, if the fracture is in the right side, insert your left index into the patient's mouth; and similarly, if the fracture is in the right jaw, then insert that same index with your right hand; and drive the elasticity of the internal fracture towards the outside parts, with your other hand on the outside part of the bone; do this equally accordingly.
And if the jaw fracture has already separated into two parts, then cover so that you administer extension of both parts according to rectitude while it is possible to achieve equilibrium for it.
And if there is the commotion of teeth to disruption, then strengthen those that you hope will break under the wire of gold or silver or copper; and place your hand on the broken jaw with a cloth, and place your hand on the patient's large square blanket, or one person equal in length to the jaw; and let that lie above according to how you understand the tension of him and what suits the application, while it is not destroyed.
And command the patient to take rest and tranquility, and stop eating for the lion's service of his food.
And if you estimate that it has already been altered in some manner, then take your time and release him on the next day; and properly correct what is already altered in him, cover that with moly powder, with duck album, or with flour of sassafras, because when you have removed his lion's fur, cover that with a lion's wool blanket.
And once this is done and the plaster is placed on him, and if the position of the bone has not been altered, let him go, do not release him until he is healed and strengthens the fracture; for this broken bone is strengthened in three weeks.
And if another gout occurs in the knee, then administer what we have said about the remedies during his rest until he is healed, and let that gout be reformed.
And if the fracture is in the flesh, then consider if it is a piece of bone separated or stuck, then you need to separate those stuck using what suits for removing those from the stones.
And if the wounds in the flesh are stretched, then you should widen them with a scalpel according to your need.
And when you have removed those pieces and that wound is not reformed again, then if the wounds in the flesh are wide, do so; and otherwise, cover that with one of the plasters suitable for that and allow it to heal.
Chapter V.
On the restoration of the sternal (or sternum) when it is broken.
Gouty pains occur when the sternal bone in front of the muscles is broken, and this fracture can be caused in three ways.
Or it is broken, or separated, or separated into two parts other than by pieces; and this is easier for the restoration of him; or if there are pieces in him, then it is difficult for the restoration of him; or perhaps the fracture is in the flesh.
And in that operation, when the fracture is in the flesh, you must have two assistants present, so that one holds the aid and follows the broken sternum, and the other extends his neck towards that part.
And then join the fracture with your thumbs while it is being made into the shape according to what you see, and do not let there be little elevation or depression in him.
And if you need more extension, then cover so that you pause against the patient's expectation of cloth or wool, and let its size be according to your need; extend and elevate the sternum and bind the swelling with your hand while joining the fracture as you see fit.
And if you cannot pull the end of the sternum to the outside parts because it is prevented by the preon, then cover so that the patient lies on his back with his head raised, and place a hand half the size over the muscle.
And the minister presses the patient's muscle to the parts that are left where the os of the furcula should be elevated like in the front part, and then you correct the fracture and align it with your own words.
If you feel sharp pains in the furcula and it aches, then dig through to that area and remove those pains with ease.
And if it is trapped in the bone, then you invent an incision for you among the scalpel tools that you have equipped for this task, because after placing the furcula back in place gently as needed; and this tool is made of wood or iron with which this is its form:
It is like a spoon with this being its curvature; and it's width according to what you need of it, depending on the size of the bone or its fragility.
The length of it should be according to what is possible in the operation; that there are two ends like sometimes, and one end should be wide while the other is narrow.
And if the wound disruption from the incision you made when removing the pain in the bone is wide, and you're sure there's pus in it, then adjust the two wound edges with stitches.
And if the disruption is small, or you fear pus in it, then you use the wound with bandages and powders according to the quantity of the wound's incision.
And if pus appears, then soak a cloth in vinegar and oil rubbed with honey, and place it over that area.
And all, if the knife doesn't cause a wound to the broken bone; and for you to see the lion's mouth every day, so that when the ligament softens or you notice the knife has healed over again, then you correct this and strengthen the bond.
And place the lion's sleep on the neck of the patient, and have its nose of the patient breathe in the night for a small pillow; so that with this, let his auxiliary by the back of him be elevated, and thus is elevated the fracture of the furcula to elevation of the muscle; or let his arm of the patient be tied to the neck of it.
And do not move the ligament if it doesn't swell or pus occurs in less than twelve days.
And then renew the plaster if you have seen its face in this manner, and adjust it in the narrowing, repair it and make it smooth until it is repaired and the fracture of the furcula has coagulated.
And it becomes strong and comfortable according to the month in twenty-eight days, and some cases are made in months of that time.
Capitol. vi.
Recovery from fracture of the shoulder.
The spatula tart is broken in the left area of your body and not broken through it, but only at its margins.
And when your body is broken - and it's broken in the middle of your body - and it's not known but by touch, then according to its fracture figure you prepare it and reduce that as per its natural figure. You do this with all means and methods of workmanship which are possible for you.
And then place on the area, a mixture of flour with egg whites and lion's stop. And then cover it with a double cloth powder; and then cover it with a thin table knife tip as per the quantity of the entire spatula or more than that little bit.
Mays: if you find the knife to be concave in some of the areas of the spatula, then you fill that concavity with lion's stop. And then you adjust the knife according to equality.
And then strengthen it from above with a long inhalation, and tighten the knife inside until it doesn't heal over its area.
And consider the ligament every day; in all times when it softens, take another treatment and strengthen it and adjust the knife if it heals over its area.
And keep the lion's mouth on its backside there.
The spatula is restored in twenty days or in twenty-five days.
And when this number is completed, then you dissolve the ligament, and be sure that once it started from these bones, do not fear nor its dissolution.
And if you are dealing with the bone location and place the chain there, then you cut over it, take it out, and do as we have said for the fracture of the sternum in case of pus appearance here.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
Regarding the restoration of the fracture of the foot.
The foot, in some cases, is broken at the midpoint of its place and heals there; however, its ends must heal without becoming swollen or fractured.
And concerning the injuries when his middle is broken, it tends towards the interior parts and events occur within him, causing great pain, difficulty in movement, coughing, vomiting; this is revealed in the cavity of the broken bone and is not hidden from feeling.
And the restoration of him is that his thigh be placed over his knee, and a cushion is placed between his shoulders; then pressure is applied to his muscles, and his back is adjusted against the hands of two assistants, and one carefully works on the operation, according to all possible techniques and in accordance with what suits, so that when he returns the bone's shape as it should be.
And then place an ointment and poultice over him, covering it from above with a fine table made of soap or chalk, as you envelop that in cloth; then carefully place that on the broken bone without causing swelling. Work it according to the curvature of several places, strengthen it with firm bandaging; and consider its tension at all times, and when softened, strengthen it.
And if it is necessary that the disturbance causes destruction or pressure, or pain, or abscess that occurs in this place, then remove and untie this one and eliminate that which you have caused with this manner of treatment; then return to adjusting the bandage within which he will heal. And reduce the bandage if you see this on the skin; and adjust the bandaging so that it is healed.
Chapter VIII.
Regarding the restoration of the ribs when they are cracked.
You should know that a fracture of the ribs occurs only in places where there are bones that span both sides; and from their ends, on the front part of the body, this friction does not occur with those that are cartilaginous. And the awareness of it is not hidden from feeling; you should inquire about it among these questions.
And the restoration should be this way that you equalize the fracture according to possible techniques, so that it is covered as it should be, and then apply an ointment and strengthen the broken bone with a table, if you need such.
And if the rib fracture tends towards the interior parts, then it causes severe pain and puncturing, just like puncturing that occurs in someone who has pleurisy, because the bone puts pressure on the membrane; this also causes difficulty in breathing, coughing, vomiting of mucus; and this is difficult to heal.
And already the Greeks have dealt with such matters through exercises.
And they say about them: cover the food that causes inflammation in the abdomen leading to bloating and windiness, so that the stomach becomes inflated and extended, and the fracture is pushed towards the exterior parts.
You may avoid this by not making it the cause of generating pus in a cautery, if it does not happen; and if it already happens, then help with that.
And they say that you should place it above the winded and adjust so that it sweats with strength; it is like reasoning, but however, it's feared that the windiness will cause excesses to accumulate in the area due to weakness.
And they say that you should: cover the area with wool that is submerged in a cautery oil, and place powders between the ribs until it's filled, making sure the bandage matches when you envelop that according to curvature; then heal the thigh through pleurisy of food and medicine.
And if the constriction of the thigh causing severe pain does not tolerate it, and the bone presses the membrane against puncturing teeth, we fear for the thigh; then you should cut over the area, expose the broken rib, and place something under that instrument that preserves its sharpness, which follows from memory, and insert the bone with ease, removing it.
And adjust the two lips of the wound if it's large with suture, and heal that with bandages until it's healed.
And if pus occurs internally, then you open it and place powders in rubbed oil over the area, and heal the thigh with this that affects the pus internally.
And when healed, place him on his side where he sleeps, until it's healed.
Chapter IX.
Regarding the restoration of a fracture of the vertebral column and the neck.
Some fractures occur in the bones of the neck, affecting their articulation, similarly with the vertebrae of the back. And if this happens to someone else and you want to know if they will heal or not, then consider that if their hands are already softened, numb, and dead, and cannot make those move, nor extend them, nor strengthen them; when you pull on them with your own fingers or stick them with a needle and do not feel any pain in those, then you know it is not healing, and during the months of dispositions, it is fatal.
And if you can move those and feel the constriction with your fingers and puncture them, then know that the neck of the bone is saved and that the thigh heals through treatment.
And if you see the spine in the neck resembling water and want to know if it is healthy or not, then consider the feet of the patient.
And when you find that it is already softened, apply to those situations which occurred in the hands, and soon as he sits on his stool, you will notice strength and digestion according to his desire, and sometimes he rises from his stool and wants to urinate but cannot, then you know it's fatal, and then you do not interfere with the treatment of him.
May if no cause occurs from those, the cause is better and more minor.
And the treatment of him is that you focus on calming the inflammation at the point of the puncture with a cauterizing needle over the spinal area torn and oozing pus, or in places between the ribs; place your hand on that spot for some days until the inflammation of the puncture subsides.
And then place one of the poultices soothing and moist, and press on that spot with your hand; and command the patient to rest and have calmness and not sleep on the part where he feels pain until he is healed.
And if it happens that the root of the tooth socket or some cause has been separated from him, then take care to heal on the neck and remove that bone; and adjust both edges of the wound, suture if it is large; and treat that with alcu's remedies until he is healed.
May if the root of the tooth is broken above the gum line, this is the end of the socket, then take care to place your left hand's poultice on his buttocks, and hold that broken tooth with your other hand according to possible symmetry; and afterwards apply a plaster and ash on him, if you need those, and treat that.
And if you feel broken roots in him, then take care of that, hold that, and treat the wound with the treatment that precedes until he is healed.
Capitol .x.
Of restoration of the anus.
The bones of the anus are broken, and if they break, then their fracture is merely communication at the ends of those and are inscribed along the length and decline towards the inside parts; this happens to the patient pain in that spot and puncture, and when it's a fracture, the area becomes numb.
And the restoration of him is that you extend your hand over that within which there is the fracture, which is the shape of him.
And if the fracture is only at the end of him, then you hold that according to which it appears to you through equality when it's aligned within as it resembles its natural figure.
May if the fracture is in the length or declines to the sides already, then you make the patient lie on his belly while preparing yourself for the restoration of that fracture. And when you have held that in place, apply a poultice on him, and afterwards place ash of wood or coal ashes on the spot, and press with strictness over the area without fearing of puncturing the fracture or moving the star.
And fill that hollow with what fills it while that accepts the pressure according to equality, and command the patient to sleep on his side or without his back.
May if pus occurs in the wound, then you stop extending him and his restoration until that pus subsides from the wound, and apply what soothes there as it's preceded; and afterwards return to his restoration, and treat that accordingly.
And if they occur in the gum or are broken, then you should remove them.
Capitol .xi.
Of restoration of the fracture of the (translated as "adjutori" which seems to be a typo or non-standard term, likely referring to an auxiliary bone or structure).
The adjutori is that which is between the shoulder blade inside the head of the shoulder.
And if it is broken, then the restoration of him can be done in one of two ways, of which you take wood flat of medium thickness according to this form:
And if they are located in two extremities two muscles, then he should be suspended from the elevated location.
And let the patient lie on one elbow; and afterwards, extend his broken arm onto the pole until it reaches the nipple in the middle location to which the curvature of the pole is attached.
And suspend over that some heavy cause, or let the servant extend that to the sides; and command the doctor to treat that with his hands in such a way, until the fracture returns as he wishes.
And the other way is that the patient should be laid on his back, and hang his neck from his collarbone with one hand; and command two servants so that one of them holds what is hanging down from the fracture with his hands; and the other holds the mess behind him; and each of them extends to their side.
And if you want the extension to be more forceful, then you press on the fracture with your hand and on that with another hand, and both of the servants should extend to their own sides.
And if the fracture is close to the end of the muscle, then you should place half of the muscle over the nipple and the other half should be moved away from the muscle.
And similarly if the fracture is near the knee, then cover that area and that knee with something.
Then facilitate that work and finish it off, and once the inflammation has been equalized according to what is covered and applied properly, then strengthen that so an abscess does not form after.
If an abscess does form after the cautery, then smooth out the constriction by the 7th day, and place on them knitted woolen bandage in between two layers of oil-soaked cloths as it rests on the abscess, and then strengthen that.
And the method to strengthen that is to place the plaster over the fracture, and then place an envelopment of new cloth around the plaster; and adjust your arms on that support, and place your hand open over their own muscle.
And place the cloth and support your arm over that support for them to be in a position like stars, if you do not prevent any cause of the broken bone.
And then use the stars.
And that is to place over the fracture that star which is larger and stronger than the other stars; and place between each star the width of this one, and let the length of the stars according to the breakage be added by three digits from all sides.
And then strengthen over the stars along the constriction which I mentioned at the beginning of the treatise.
And that your constriction over the place of the fracture be more strengthened. And when much has been facilitated for the fracture, let the constriction become smaller.
And so if you change the position of the stars and the constriction as we have said in the time when you restore the member to its original position, then do it.
And if you fear an abscess after the cautery, then let the constriction and the stars be smoothed out by the 7th day as we have said.
And then consider the ligament in all directions for three days so that it does not occur at the pressure point or swelling; or is prevented from food reaching the limb by adjustment of an excess constriction; and therefore correct all this as we have said.
If you are confident that no cause will occur from this, then do not release the ligament but wait for three days or longer.
And let their sleep be on their back, and their hands are on their stomach.
And place on the support a full plate of wool in between, and consider at all times of the night or day that the figure of the broken member is not disturbed nor dissolved, or that the ligament is softened; therefore correct this entirely according to your skill.
And provide the food of the patient according to the order we have prescribed beforehand, so that the food is delicate at first until it starts being strengthened; and then place that you make the food richer for them.
And the custom of the support and the patient's chest is that they should be strengthened in 40 days; then let them be released and have baths and are treated with ointments which correct those.
And if the fracture is laid bare and rubbed, then do not release that ligament and stars within days or within two months.
Capitol xii.
On the restoration of a broken arm.
An arm is composed of two bones which are called the forearms; of which one is small and that's what we call the wrist, and the other is large and it is the one laid down on top of the small one, from the side closer to the body.
And a weak break affects only the larger forearm, or the smaller one, and it breaks at the same time.
And when the small forearm is broken above, then the restoration of it is easy, and its healing is easier.
And when the break affects the forearm below it's bad, and its healing is difficult.
And even worse than that is when both bones are broken at the same time.
And so if the bone that is broken is the small forearm above, then it's convenient for the doctor to restore it, that you facilitate a slight extension until that one is equalized.
And if the large forearm is the one broken, then place an extension more vigorously.
And if both forearms are broken at the same time, then you should perform the reduction movement much more forcefully.
And you should place the hand's figure to restore it and the extension of the arm on a pillow, so that the wrist is above all other digits, before than any other digit, and the little finger is lower than all other digits, and the back is on one knee bent.
And place a pillow in front of them at the height or straightness of their body, so that the back is not forced to work.
And then let the attendant extend the arm from the side closer to their body or to the ligament, and another attendant extends similarly above.
And then let the doctor equalize the bones as long as he reduces that according to the best figure that can be.
And if there are deviations in the bone's structure, then you must reduce all piece to its place by your skill.
And if there appears as a separate deviation that cuts the connection and is not within your hope for restoring it, then you operate on them and keep that according to the method we mentioned above.
If the fracture is due to an illness, I have already dealt with this single case, and therefore proceed with the treatment of that.
And if an abscess appears during your recovery process, then you should lay out a cloth with ointment-soaked and white wax bandages, making them of medium thickness between roughness and smoothness. Then cover that area tightly with the cloth inside which the abscess can drain; afterwards replace the bandage and apply a plaster made from ground clay mixed with oil, and place stars above it; then let this star plaster rest over that fracture, slightly spreading pus in all directions.
And know that the number of the stars on the arm is indicated by major dispositions or whether the fracture is in one place or two at once.
And place your bandage tightly on the spot of the fracture strongly and vehemently. When it is easier for the stiffness to go up from the parts above the fracture or from the lower parts of it, then place the bandage a little moistened according to when you are beginning the treatment process in relation to the single case of the illness.
And the cloths that cover the fracture should be moist and wet, neither hard nor rough. The paste applied on which they are strengthened should be of medium thickness between subtle and thick, as we have recommended.
And consider the limb and its condition for several days. And if there is any cause that requires correction, such as when something happens to the limb, then take a bath in hot water until that pain ceases.
And let the limb rest without strain until it has rested, and then return to applying the bandage.
And if the stiffness has already been softened and the bone has already grown back to its original state, then correct all this with your own strength.
And consider more if the nutrition is prohibited from reaching the limb due to excess stiffness; then take care that you slightly soften it and leave it for several days until the nutrition flows back to that area, and then strengthen it.
And if to the patient nothing happens of those causes we have mentioned, then take care that it is released about 20 days or roughly around that.
And then have the hand of the patient suspended by its own strength in movements of agitation, and make it sleep on its back.
And know that this fracture is restored within 30 days or 40 days, or a slight fracture is restored within 28 days, and all of this depends on the disposition of the complexities and the dispositions of strength.
Chapter XIII.
On the restoration of fracture of the wrist and fingers.
Know that in the wrist and the joints of the fingers there is fracture, and it does not happen to them but simple swellings.
And when there is fracture or swelling in the hand, then take care that the patient keeps laying down and stands before it on its feet according to equality, and then place the hand of it over that extended.
And have the minister extend the broken bones and the doctor equalizes those until they grow back in good growth.
And then take care to place plaster and wadding, if there is no abscess. And then place stars according to the amount of the area; and you have already wrapped that in cloth.
And if the swelling is in the inner parts under the palm of the hand, then make a resemblance of a bowl of cloth, and command the patient to hold that on their folded palm; then let it be strongly held with long cloth.
And let the star be made of cloth in which it floats, so that the body is applied to the palm; then strengthen that according to what you take care.
And if the fracture is in the outer parts, then take care to place on top of stars and another star from the part left on the palm, so that the hand may be opened and straightened; then return the bandage, as when the hand revolves with the fingers at the wrist.
And if there is a fracture in some of the joints of the fingers, then if it is the joint part, it should be equalized according to what you take care and then strengthened on the palm; if you wish, place a small star upright so that the fracture may be elevated and not be crushed.
And if the fracture is in other fingers, such as at the middle joint or on the index finger, or on the ring finger, then it should be equalized and laid on that particular joint; or they should all be flat according to continuity, which is better; or place a small star over that point, as we have said about the joints.
And consider in your recovery and afterwards the disposition of the abscess and opposition - during your operation - to what you take care when any cause arises from those, according to the repeated narrative.
Chapter XIV.
On the restoration of fracture of the bone in the leg.
The bone in the leg, having swellings, is broken and is declared by feeling as it converts to the part in front and to the upper pus.
And the restoration of it is done in such a way that the muscle is strengthened over the fracture and another muscle is left under the fracture, and the patient lies on his belly and his face.
And then, according to their quality, the surgeon extends all the ligaments to their side when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
If it is near the curvature of the ankle, then the ligament is directed towards the heel on the side of the ankle joint. So that when the extension reaches its limits, and the other ligaments leave the fracture.
Similarly, if the break is near the heel, then the ligament is made directed towards the heel, and the extension is performed on its sides.
And then the surgeon equalizes the bone in both of their hands so that it reduces according to its natural shape, and the bone is united by good union; then cover with a dressing and bandage, if there is no pus formation in the limb. If pus occurs in him, then you let that heal for a few days until the pus comes out through one of them, and then return to your treatment.
The bandage of his strictures is made: cover the fracture with a hard bandage and fold it two or three times, removing any excess; then wrap around the area so that it reaches to the ankle and the curvature of the ankle.
And insert the long needle between the ankle and the area near the heel on its sides, extend the ends of the needle from the sides passing through both parts, then rotate around the ankle and ankle so that excess bandage remains.
And place on the ankle at the location of that fracture points, and place one rod above the bone of the ankle.
And then fill in the gaps between the ankle and foot with many cloths, so that the bandage can coagulate.
And then start with a strong bandage in the middle over the site of the fracture with three or four wraps, and as much as possible away from the location of the fracture, your bandage should be smaller and softer and wetter.
And extend both ends of the needle through its sides until it reaches into the chest cavity, strengthen both ends of the other rod's points so that the ligament does not move from its place.
And let the bandage lie on that area, so that it does not cause corrosion or pus formation with cautery nor swelling and resembles those; if any of these causes occur, then prepare to have a breakdown in him, and adjust accordingly as we've mentioned several times.
If in the bone there is a hole where you can put it, then adjust that as much as possible according to what is possible; and if not, do something on him and continue with that until it heals.
And some of these times strengthen this fracture of the ankle in another way that fits with your rods, as we've mentioned in the manual and on the arm.
However, in the restoration of him done in this manner, do not cause the patient's gait to be limited; and if it is restored alone, another as was applied on his leg, then it is necessary for that ankle to be inoperative.
And know that the ankle is strengthened in about ten days or a few months, and all this depends on the diversity of compositions and other dispositions.
Chapter XV.
About the restoration of the fracture in the ankle joint.
And know that fractures to the ankle joint are not uncommon, but they occur through several times twisting.
And if a fracture occurs to him, then it is merely a crack or strain in its sides, and this is due to either a cold or heat, and all of this is determined by the feeling.
And the restoration of him is such that it should be equalized whatever breaks from its parts with what was mentioned, added and united according to what is possible by proportion, ease, and fabrication.
And then place the plaster and place a round rod on that if you need it from that; strengthen above with bandage as is suitable.
And then consider all the dispositions that we have recommended in other fractures, as well as pus formation with cautery and similar ones so that it resists against any incident as long as it is convenient for him until he heals.
Chapter XVI.
About the restoration of the fracture in the ankle.
And know that in the ankle there are two bones, one of which is thick and is called by the name of the ankle; and the other is thin and is called easy.
And accidents to any of the types of fracture as it happens with both bones in the arm, and thus the restoration is done like the restoration of the arm equally, and the operation for him is one.
And if two bones are broken at once, the ankle turns in all directions.
And if it is fractured with the thin bone, the ankle turns forward.
And if it is broken with the thick bone, you cannot do anything about it, and these are causes that are not within your abilities.
And then administer extension, proportion, and ligature of the rods according to this equalization.
However, if the fracture in the ankle has no obvious symptoms, then let the extension be mild and softer, and bring it to your strength.
In the abdomen there are reasons for operation on the arms, and it is when you equalize the stars that complete your entire operation, then you will take weights of metal rods which are placed under the causes which are in solies, and they are made by turning branches of palm; remove those to which small stiffness belongs, and do not exceed the length of hands, and make them as long as the length of the abdomen, and inside the pus place these.
And then envelop each bandage with two layers according to the length of it, placing one over the side of the abdomen on one side and the other side of the other side, and have them inside the pus at a location in the chest.
And then tie the two stars in three locations of both extremities and at the middle one. With this structure, the abdomen is prevented from bending to either side, it stays in good position.
And already a rod of metal has been administered according to the length of the abdomen; and place the abdomen so that it preserves that movement.
Especially ensure you do this in a fracture, and when there is that particular disease.
And consider each day the abdomen and study it from back to front, and protect it from abscesses and inflammation or other similar causes; and if any cause of those occurs, then keep it so that what goes into it is for its healing.
Chapter XVII.
On the fracture of the heel bone and bones of the foot and fingers.
With the heel bone, it does not occur to have a complete fracture; but with the bones of the foot, fractures do happen occasionally; and with the fingers of the foot, few fractures occur, and they only occur to them during months of dispositions.
And if fractures do occur in the bones of the foot and those bones are elevated above each other, then the patient should lift their foot onto a prepared ground like this:
And place one foot on what is elevated from those bones, and press that area, apply pressure, and equalize those areas until they return in the locations.
And then place plaster and cover it, and place a small table under the belly of the foot on which there are two padded heads.
And then strengthen that area of the foot with its structure descending, since you have enveloped that with cloths and for other reasons as well.
And as it passes three or four days, then you loosen the ligament, which you will find that the bones are equalized, they are broken or dislocated, and the operation in those is like what you know.
And if some fingers are broken, then restore those, and equalize them like I have recommended to you in the restoration of fingers of the hand. And place the broken finger with a star according to the length of the finger, and make it slightly higher than this surface which I have recommended to you, and strengthen that area with its descending structure.
And if what is broken of the bones are two or three or more, then place on each finger a star of its quantity enveloped in lion cloth, and strengthen the table at the lowest part of the belly, and stand on one of the heads of the table through the belly so that the tongue has good retention.
And it is convenient for you not to forget that you do not consider all the causes which I have mentioned to you in the other fractures of accidents that we have discussed; and keep yourself ready for every accident so that what goes into it can be healed.
Chapter XVIII.
On the fracture of the thigh bone, and bones of the knee, and of the spine of man.
When the thigh bone is broken, then make it rest on its slope, and then incline that slightly towards the side of one, and have it held behind.
And then the midwife raises the thigh bone to the knee, and do this in the thigh bone as it is expected; and the woman should be bent down, and lift the two of her child gradually, so that all of this occurs forward like how it's expected and the broken bone returns.
And then place powders on her back, and when she wants to urinate, relax the knee so that it's easier for her, and let her urine out, and return this according to the method by which you mixed this at the beginning, and then return to her original powder.
And do this for seven days or approximately that duration, until it is restored.
And if you wish, take an animal's bladder and place it over her thigh with a tube of aloe; and insert the entire bladder into her thigh, and then blow through the tube with force so that the bladder is inflated inside the thigh, which returns the fracture.
And then it should be filled with knee and stay for several days as we have recommended, until it is healed.
And when the bone of the knee of man or woman is broken, then administer in its restoration and adjustment what we have recommended about the bone of the hip.
And what is straight does not get concealed in these nearby fractures that rarely happen, especially with those who have some knowledge and understand my free advice; for this fracture means to you in the main roads of navigation in its restoration and adjustment, so understand well.
When in the groin area of the man when it is scratched, grasp it with your hand and place the groin there; then press on the patient's abdominal cavity wrapping, making sure to wrap it completely, and let it rest for three days or around that time, allowing it to heal.
Chapter XVII.
On the restoration of bone fractures when they are infected.
It is convenient for the one who suffers from bone fractures infected, and especially if the bone is large such as the femur or the humerus, or similar to those, you should care for them and use suction instruments on them immediately if the conditions of suction therapy suit you just like we have described.
And if the infection begins to flow out, then you should take care of him as needed, applying powder over the reddened area that is affected by inflammation if there is no other cause presented.
And then begin to restore the fracture on that day, and do not prolong this, if it does not cause abscess formation.
If an abscess occurs, then you should let the restoration of him happen within nine days, until the abscess discharges, and do not approach him on the third day and fourth in total, where you will cause bad accidents.
If the broken bone is prominent above the exposed cavity, then you should take care to reduce it and equalize it with your own hands in a way that facilitates this and limits excessive movement.
If the extension is not to your preparation and the equilibrium of him with your hands, then you should reduce it with your hands using this instrument; this instrument made of iron, its length being seven or eight dits and its width according to the size of the infection; and for this reason, every doctor needs three or four of these according to the amount that he needs in treatment in all types of fracture.
And if it is soft, and with a slight hardness for fear that it might fold during the operation, you should compress over it during surgery.
And if it has an acute extremity with a margin in all its extremities; and let the normal size of him expand outwardly and towards the parts internally.
And this is his form:
It is called in Greek "voluntz atelarem" (or "willing hernia"), so it is a small palette.
So you should allow the extremity of him to be raised above the prominent part of the bone when it is paused.
And push that in a groove until the bone returns, and equalize it with some equilibrium.
And so, try to equalize the ends of the fracture among them, and if the broken end is subtle and does not take that instrument well for access, then you should insert the end of his bone into a place where the instrument can reach this.
If you cannot reduce the bone of all as we have advised, then cut it with that which suits him among the scalpel instruments which we said; or cut it with one of the saws in any way that is possible for you.
And then carefully remove what sticks out in the bone from roughness and small remnants.
And when the bone is reduced, and upon the reduction the patient feels intense pain, then know that the bone has not returned to its natural place; and from this you should give him rest for the patient.
When your restoration to the bone is completed, then immerse cloth in a black antiphlegmatic ointment, and especially during summer, do not apply wadding or any other cause over the infection if it contains oil, so that it does not cause him to develop inflammation and putrefaction.
And then apply powders during the completion of your restoration to the bone, and leave the infection exposed so that you can scrape it with scalpel blades and use bandages according to the size of the infection.
And take all caution that you do not damage the infection on the fracture, for what doctors have done in this way causes them to die or the patient's body or bones to corrode or severely suffer, it is health. And if your narrowing is slight, soft, different from the constriction of other fractures.
And if the infection is large or a bad infection, and you fear certain bad accidents that we have mentioned, and you feel pain in the place, then do not take care to apply powders over this, but use hard bandage cloths instead of powders and support him with these.
And as soon as the infection starts to develop in him after one or two days, then remove the cloth that you had placed over it with vinegar, and from our usual remedies provide ointments for infections, such as tetrathrefarm and similar.
And it is advisable for you to loosen the bandage and consider the infection each day in the morning and evening until it is consolidated and solidified, and know that the inflammation should flow from him towards the remaining parts with ease.
If the infection lasts for several days and is not consolidated or removed by him of the powder, then know that here are the small ones that you should apply ointment over as long as the infection persists. And from those joints that are separated and removed, those that are not separated and put the member and cause pain, you must carefully remove them according to which it is possible for you.
And if it happens that it is black or greenish, then it's inflammation, or another kind of corruption and putrefaction. In this case, you should carefully consider which one among those suits the treatment method for the condition that will be preceded by a detailed explanation in its chapter.
And when it comes to the place where there's the most smell, show your patient: when the bone is cracked, press over the limb like the bones of the knee and helper, resembling those of large limbs. Don't assume damage from this, nor the removal of the blisters that form due to this would lead to death; lay it softly in that place where it can stay, which will gradually reduce itself by its own after about 20 or 30 days. And then treat the wound if you see it, and if not, leave that one alone.
Chapter 20.
Regarding the treatment of gangrene that occurs in the aftermath of any fracture.
These blisters occur in this gangrene in the aftermath of healing from a fracture, especially near the joints, and are characterized by the swelling figure of the limb; forcefully prohibiting movement of the limb from its natural operation.
Then consider if the gangrene is recent and administer medicines that have a stanching effect such as aloes, onions, garlic, and others, which resemble these. You should take some or all of them, and check if they are effective in stopping bleeding, or if they help with whitening blood from sweat, or if they promote healing, and place this over the gangrene on a poultice, and ensure proper constriction on it for good compression.
And leave the constriction without removing it for a few days; then gradually remove it and repeat with another one until the gangrene recedes. Or weigh over that piece of lead descending, as lead has the property to reduce whatever inflates in limbs.
If the gangrene has already turned hard and been removed, then if necessary make a small incision in it from above, and remove the excess or pus inside. Or fill that with some herbs until it recedes; and treat it until it heals.
Chapter 21.
Regarding the restoration of fractures when it is restored, and here we discuss about adjusting the limb subtly rather than according to its natural state.
When a bone fracture is restored, and here we adjust the subtle limb and its tension not according to their natural state, these are only reasons for doing so: from which one is an abundance of joint fluid and ligament adjustment made not as it should be. Or due to excess constriction within the ligaments where nutrition can no longer flow in the limb; or due to an abundance of superfluous ointment; or due to excessive unnecessary movement; or due to weakness in the patient's body and debility from it.
And the treatment for this is to give nourishment to the patient and make their blood flow inside where their strength is multiplied in them; and take baths; and apply warmth and joy upon them.
And place wax over the limb, because the wax draws nutrients to it or continues ointment of your oil with hot water, so that nutrition flows and returns to its natural shape.
Chapter 22.
Regarding the treatment of cracked bones when they are restored in a twisted manner and you prohibit their operation based on what is observed.
When it happens that the limb has been restored around its healing of tortuosity and swelling in the cracked bone with gangrene, indeed so that the shape of the limb is fed, however, nonetheless the limb does not prohibit its natural operation. Therefore, you must accept the word of him who says that this limb was newly broken.
Just as there are many old medical and restorative practices which have done this in our land, and this operation is highly criticized leading to great fear of its sign which indicates death.
And if limpness and gangrene are recent, then it must be treated with hot water in which are boiled soothing herbs such as vervains and grasses of the mountain, or wild thyme, and similar; this is done by applying a poultice soaked in a mollifying preparation like almond milk; or it can be treated with mucilage from the roots of the mountain and wrapped with gauze or oil from camphor, and then covered with that; or figs can be pressed and tied with colom's dung, and similar to those named consolidating medicines.
And some times they are dissolved with gentle continuous rubbing on the wettest parts, and movements of the limb are administered throughout its entire body at all hours.
And if tortuosity has already advanced and is forcibly hardened turning into hard parts, causing there to be the necessity for treatment with iron, then it must be that pus above is drained and the continuity of the bone is dissolved, and that is done by removing excess gangrene from that metal using fine incisions, and administration is made easier in this situation with diligence and study.
Chapter 23.
When joint pain occurs due to cold fluids penetrating each part of the body, especially when it manifests in the feet, doctors typically refer to this condition as gout.
Dislocation is the displacement of some joints in their place, making movement impossible and causing the limb's figure to deform. This results in pain and significant injuries for the patient.
So when a dislocation occurs, you must immediately puncture and reduce it as quickly as possible. If the reduction is delayed, the location gets stuck, making it difficult to perform the reduction of dislocation.
And when dealing with it, ensure that neither the patient is in pain nor stretched during the immobilization process, as forced movements can cause cramps and severe pain.
When this happens, you should take care to apply the flambouyant (a method of treatment) on the patient's leg and ensure that it is left in place to allow the abscess to rest; then, the limb should be bandaged with cold water and oil, and quickly reduced for ease.
And the entire limb is treated according to what was recalled about it in its original place.
And I have already arranged the chapters on dislocation according to how they are preceded by fractures; from the upper part of the body up to the lower part.
Chapter XXIV.
On the treatment of dislocation of the jaw, here it goes.
So when the two jaws are dislocated and if there is a twist; and treatment of both occurs according to one of two methods: either they are partially reduced back to their places with minor movement, made soft somewhat; or they are completely dislocated and fully so, within which they become soft in the joint part where saliva from the patient flows out and cannot have that nor can close their mouth, and the tongue of them is enveloped by its own saliva.
When the dislocation is minor, then within major positions it returns by itself with little cause.
When the dislocation is complete and full, then it must be administered a gentle reduction for that, and not delayed entirely.
And let the attendant hold the head of the patient, and have the doctor place his hand on the side of one of their joints in the direction of the jaw dislocation within the mouth, if the dislocation is from one part; or insert both hands at once, if the dislocation is from two parts, and the rest of their instructions be outside those among which are equal; and command the patient to cease moving their jaws and let them go towards every part; and the doctor equalizes the jaw and places it back into its place.
And if the reduction is difficult, especially when both jaws are always dislocated, then administer diaphoresis with cold water and oil, so a slight reduction of both takes place and do not delay the total reduction of both, as we have said.
And once they return and are equalized, when the mouth of the patient is closed and it isn't softened, then place over those powders of lard on a cloth, and let it be made with wax and oil rubbed; then have them treated with soft massages.
And let the patient sleep on their back, with their head between two pillows, so as not to bend it towards either side; do not force them to eat anything forcefully for any reason; have their food be forbidden meat until such time that their pains are softened and their jaws are no longer tender; then allow them to eat whatever they desire.
And let this be administered with ease, and do not exert yourself about the opening of the mouth for eating, drinking, and rest, until the jaw is relieved and healed.
And if the reduction of two jaws when they are dislocated in some time and have not been converted to their original places is difficult, then convulsions and frequent heat occur, and forcefully you make the stomach of the patient upset, and forcefully there arises a colic vomiting.
And when you do this, know that it is disastrous; and convulsions cause death in the person who experiences this within three days.
Chapter XXV.
On the treatment of dislocation of the sternum and extremity of the muscle, here it goes.
The sternum is not dislocated within the chest due to its continuation with the bones; and sometimes it gets dislocated outward from its place, which is acknowledged by feeling.
And restoring it is that the patient lie on their back and extend their arms. And apply your palm to the spot with firm pressure, which will cause it to return.
And place an ointment and powder on that area, and strengthen it there.
And the extremity that touches it and is continuous with it, isn't dislocated in any day; then you should reduce and equalize it according to what we have said and according to your equipment.
And place an ointment and powder on that area, and apply a bandage, and have the patient remain in bed with rest until it heals.
And with this treatment, reduce the extremity of the muscle when it is separated from its place.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
From the reduction of the dislocation of the muscle.
Know that the muscle is not dislocated in only three ways, of which one is when it is dislocated at the insertion of the tendons to the insertion on them.
And the second is when it is dislocated at the top of the muscle, and this is done with traction; and it is not dislocated at the rear parts by the shoulder; and it is not dislocated at the front parts by nerves.
And mostly it is dislocated and sticks out from the bottom parts of the insertion on the tendons, and mostly in those with few muscles, slightly it's dislocated; more in those with many muscles, they stick out out with difficulty.
And often such injuries occur due to blows or impacts, and the muscle of him has a boil caused by heat from the cautery, and it is freed because already being dislocated.
Then know that you should work on this while he is over-heated, and then proceed in the treatment of him.
And it is known that the dislocation is when it's at the bottom parts of the insertion on the tendons; thus you distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the intact muscle, which you find among those with obvious differences; you find in the tip of the muscle a concavity and place the tendon on the top surface of the muscle as in one's hand, and for him under no circumstance can his hand reach its armpit, nor can it be moved further by all sorts of movements.
If it's dislocated from the foot or near it, then you immediately find a clear indication of touch, and it is not hidden.
And for this dislocation, a slight reduction is done when it's cool and the patient is young.
And the reduction of him is that the minister raises his hand to the top parts on him; and place your feet under the tendon of him, and lift the joint with strength at its own place, and the minister raises his hand of him, and extends that towards it; and place that there so that it returns slightly.
And if by what we have said it doesn't return, and it's due to the beginning of the dislocation, several days later, know that the patient should be immersed in hot water, and an application of soothing and softening ingredients like rosemary, fennel, and caraway in water is given, and this should be administered.
And the patient should be laid down on his back and placed under the tendon of him, wait for a blanket that is equal in lightness and tightness, and place the doctor's arm over the head, lift the muscle tip with strength, and pull the hand of the patient so it doesn't hurt at the bottom parts on him; another servant holds the head of the patient, so it doesn't hurt at the bottom parts on him, which is when that immediately returns to its place.
And if you wish, reduce that second according to this manner: and what you should do is present a man who is much longer than the patient, and he stands on the side of that left, and inserts his muscle under the tendon of the patient, and lift the tendon of him above the parts on him while the patient hangs in air, and another servant pulls the hand of the patient from the bottom parts on his belly. And if the patient is slight, then know that there's some other cause that needs to be suspended, because due to its weight, it causes a return of the dislocation immediately.
And it's reduced easily according to another manner: and you place in the ground a long stick whose head is round like a mortar's handle, not thick nor thin, and have him placed under the patient; then put on his head a sheet as long as the length of the stick, and the patient stands according to the length of the stick, and extend his hand at the bottom parts on the other side; and stretch your body from the other side with strength, so that the joint returns to its place quickly.
And if the reduction of him is difficult due to all the causes we have said, then use this cure: and you should take a stick whose length is that of two arms, its width should be four digits, and its thickness should resemble the size of the tendon according to this shape:
And place sheets on his round head so that the stick doesn't make the patient fall.
And place the patient's tendon under him, and extend his hand or arm over the stick between the bottom parts on him, and hold the stick against the support and the arm and the end of his hand.
And place his arm on a step ladder according to its width, and his hand extended at the bottom parts, and the other side hangs from the other side, so that the joint returns immediately.
And as the treatment of him is completed according to any manner possible, then know that you should place under his tendon a pad made from equal quantity of wool; and prepare plaster with powdered moli ashes and fennel's egg white on all parts of the muscle, so that it's mixed above them; and strengthen your tendon against tightness in decent amount; and let the mixture be applied over the plaster, and the hand of him is attached to his neck, and it's left alone, and the hand of him isn't hurt for seven days.
And when food is digested properly, within which the member is relieved, it becomes much easier for his recovery.
And then the food should be given closer to seven or five times and an exercise is performed; and thus if it is closed without being softened, then already he is healed.
If the joint is dislocated due to dampness that affects it or for some other reason, then when this happens, you should administer three burns on that area, according to what was said in the chapter of cautery.
And if all this has been done and around seven days later the ligament and joint are freed, but the joint is not closed, and the plaster and the tightness have been reduced on his several times, but it cannot raise that arm to its upper parts, then you should know that these nerves of him, which are at the head of the muscle, are already cut or extended or softened, and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
From the dislocation of that which is made on the foot or the calf or behind parts, the reduction is done with pressing and extension to the chest, within which it returns.
And administer the other tightness on that side, and cure it while it is being healed.
And if the recovery is heavily affecting in the limb and delaying his movements, then the patient should use hot baths while that heaviness is relieved and returns to its natural state of the first.
Chapter XXVII.
Regarding the treatment of a dislocated shoulder.
Know that the shoulder joint is dislocated with difficulty and similarly returns with difficulty; it is dislocated in all directions, especially towards the front and rear sides. The dislocation of it is not hidden from you when you feel its vibration or touch it according to whatever figure it has been dislocated, and when adjusting the dislocated shoulder at its place, this is clearly stated to you, that the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm, nor can it touch upon his own muscle.
And put the shoulders (should it mean "cotyl" or "shoulder joint"), and as soon as you reach to its hollow of cautery, know that if it reaches to its hollow of cautery, reducing it becomes difficult, and without strength he is not cured completely; especially when it's at the rear parts, which is worse than all other types of dislocation, and with more pain, hot baths cause death on this.
And the restoration of him, which is that which can be reduced, it is when his hand should be stretched towards two breasts, and his arm should be spread out, and the doctor's hands are on his shoulder and him, and you push the joint with the heels of his teacher's hands or within his palm's edge as he returns to its place.
If the dislocation is in the front parts, then it returns like this that bends his hand towards his own hand, within which he hits the shoulder at the edge of his palm.
And if the dislocation does not obey to reduction, then administer vigorous extension and strong force.
And that two ministers should stretch the arm, and they keep this vibration of two ministers so as not to be hindered by the extension.
And then you should turn his arm around completely as it is wrapped in a long folded cloth or ligament.
And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, grease that with some oil so that this helps in the lubrication of the joint which facilitates it; and then you should push the joint with vigorous pressure as it returns.
And then the reduction of him is known that he should be laid on that plaster where there's stiffness and flexibility with beef albumin, and it should be stretched in tightness descent; his arm should be suspended from the neck, and it should be left for some days.
And then he should be freed; and thus if the joint is formed in its place, then you should free the ligament of him and leave it.
And if you see the joint is not strengthened, then you should repeat the plaster and the ligament, and leave it for some days until it gets stretched; and then you should free that.
And if there is heaviness near the reduction of the joint for him and his position is in movement, then administer hydration in bath and subtle friction, and compression, as he feels relieved; or place yourself over the joint alone, on that part of motion fatness; and then you should bind it, and leave it on the bone during day and night. And then support that and place him in the bath; and when he gets wet, then you should rub the joint with an early friction, and then repeatedly apply this over it alone, on that part of motion fatness, once, and the second, and the third., Corruption has already spread within the liver's interior, having reached its limit.
And if you wish, place yourself over that wet and scalded crack of cow's body and strengthen on it; and do this several times, which gets wet and returns to its position.
Chapter XXVIII.
Regarding the treatment of a dislocation of malassen, which is of the joint that exists between the arm and the hand.
Malassen of the hand for a few times is dislocated, and the reduction of this dislocation is easy, however it's opposite for other joints; yet you should perform the reduction quickly with him when he is dislocated before his place gets wet or when there appears the hollow of cautery.
And the reduction of the dislocation is that you place the wrist joint of the patient on a table and have him extend his hand, and the doctor places his hand or palm over the verge of the joint, and pushes that in such a way that it returns to its place.
However, it may be considered whether the palm has already reached in the belly of the hand. In that case, the patient should place both hands on a table for you to extend and reduce; and if the dislocation is previous, then both hands belong inherently above the table, so that the doctor's hand falls upon that verge of the joint.
And so if it returns at once, well done; and otherwise, then strengthen that as you apply heat to the point of puncture and let him be; and do not go on with this, for otherwise you neither bear nor are able to reduce his, since they pass through him days.
And so the joint should be manipulated according to its degree of curvature; and do not blame the patient for any cause, since his hand is softened and cannot support any cause; then you understand that the nerves are crushed or torn, and hence it lies within him instead of being strengthened with a cautery near the edge of it, making it stronger in that way as to give him some cause.
And when the malaise has returned, then place on him the plaster which we have reconstituted, and let it be laid and strengthened for three days; and afterwards gently move it and leave it, and exercise his hand.
And if the movement of him is continued and occurs in him with some gravity, then apply that with hot water and with rubbing for a while, until he feels relieved.
Chapter XXIX
Regarding the treatment of dislocation of fingers.
Some remedies cause dislocation of fingers in every direction.
And when one finger of those is dislocated towards the back or inside of it, then stabilize the finger and push the dislocation out with your fingers until it returns.
And support the tip of the finger, and suspend him from the part where he is dislocated, and let him be for two days.
And suspend that and extend it until he feels equal in that his day.
And when she wakes at night, let him do as that narrative dictates, and do not cease moving it during the day and exercise with movements, and let him rest at night; and do this for a few days until he is straightened.
And pretend this if it is dislocated in the belly of the hand, let him lie towards that part and do this for your first operation, until he is healed.
And similarly do this when it is dislocated in other parts.
Chapter XXX
Regarding the treatment of dislocation of the shoulder blades (glenoid fossae) of both sides.
When it happens to any of the shoulder blades or collarbone in a complete dislocation, and so you reinforce them with hot ointments on those places, then there is no cure, for death stalks the patient.
And the sign of this is that the elimination from the patient goes beyond his will and he cannot hold it; or hot baths soften some parts of him, or his legs, or his arms, or one of them; or heat softens a shoulder blade in its place, where heat softens and hot baths are given to remove those to four quarters.
And that has already been heated behind and is called glibozitat.
The treatment of him is that then you consider if the glibozitat happens in childhood, for then there is no cure and no healing from it.
As for those that occur through impact or through percussion or through similar actions, the ancients have said that they have lengthy treatments on how to treat them. However, I have abbreviated the one from which you can excuse much of him due to its proximity to my understanding and explanation, with which I have presented this and detailed it using various instruments of the latter.
And only those are cured that happen directly where I recommend them, among those.
And that the patient should be extended over his face on a pillow quite close to the wall, and should have his limbs stretched out so that he does not wrinkle his feet.
And put a straight stick down, planted in the earth at the end of the pillow around his head, and another stick in advance of his feet at the other end of the pillow.
And let the minister hold the stick, and do not fix it in a hole; and another minister holds the other according to that form.
And cover over the head of the patient and leave the small hair on his beard firm; extend the tip of the beard to the stick which should be at his head, let him lie in it; and tighten the other bandage over his hips with his knees, make sure they are straight; and adjust all the bands and let those lie on the other stick which should be under his feet.
And then the surgeon extends the skin at the thigh joint, and does not cut both limbs and the muscles in his places where they are fixed, but rather do not make them as tight as we have said.
And the surgeon places his palms on the spine with strength until it returns, or places one on that spot and supports it with a table, and adjusts his feet under the table as he returns.
If it does not return in this way, then take a table whose height or length is about three spans, and excavate on the wall which we said is near to the patient's side where it intersects with the end of the table. And then place the top of the table on the spine, and the surgeon places his feet at the other end, and straining so that the spine is compressed and returns to its place.
And if you wish, open both sides that are twisted by the hand; and when you have to dig in the earth, you must place the head of the patient at the rear end of each limb, whose length is one span. You must also place their head at the rear end of each limb. The distance between any two limbs should be a span, and this has been done in every limb, and all are firmly fixed on the ground so that they cannot move.
And add one more limb to which is attached each thigh, and it twists in the two grooves of both limbs.
And at the end of it is a groove in which the limb forms, whose length is about one span in this where it twists. And in the two other limbs it resembles that one.
And then strengthen the muscles you've stretched on the feet of the patient in the groove where you have to place its head, and the muscles that you've stretched on its thighs in the groove which is where you should put his legs.
And you must place each groove and have a surgeon twist the grooves with his hand, and the surgeon adjusts the spine as we said.
And once the spine has returned and the area is adjusted, then cover it with a powder plaster applied to flour, and cover; and then place on top of the plaster an area of table whose width measures three digits or approximately those, and the length equals the size of the yellow substance where it is located, and over the joint part of the spine.
And then apply on the muscle as we said, and use the patient to absorb subtle nourishment so that it heals.
And if there is any concern remaining in the area at the end of recovery, then cover that medications that soften and cleanse are administered during the long period before starting the table, which we recommended; and this lead sheet has been administered in that area.
And some injuries occur at the back of the spine on both sides, and it is twisted by that dislocation; and this is the bone that has already injured so that you must not take precautions against this medicine which would cause your death to occur.
Chapter XXXI.
Regarding the treatment of a dislocated hip.
Understand that only dislocation affects the joint of the hip and the joint of the muscle, not to those what happens to other joints with small movement and curvature.
And the joint of the hip is dislocated in four ways: it can be dislocated internally towards the parts inside, or externally towards the parts outside, or forwards towards the parts ahead, or backwards towards the parts behind.
And mostly it is dislocated internally, and slightly externally or backwards.
And the sign of dislocation towards the inside parts is that when you adjust the healthy hip to the body, it becomes longer and the waist is more prominent than the healthy one; the body cannot bend its leg, forcing him to straighten his back. This is how he forces his waist to be bent at this point, because his thigh has already reached this far here.
And the sign of what happens to someone who suffers from dislocation is towards the outside parts, it's that his injuries are against this incident.
And the sign of what happens to someone who suffers from dislocation towards the ahead parts is that he extends his healthy leg according to a compliment, however it doesn't bend that knee pain which exists in the backside. If one forces this condition further and cannot proceed towards the ahead; and his urine retention occurs along with his inability to walk; you should support him on his heel.
And the sign of what happens to someone who suffers from dislocation towards the back parts is that he doesn't extend his backside, nor can he bend it forward that bends his inability. His leg becomes shorter than the other one, and his back straightens up; you should support his thigh on this area.
The treatment for these types of dislocation involves considering the situation. If the dislocation is old or ancient, and it has already been treated to this extent with your approach, then in that recovery process you should not take precautions; therefore, there mustn't be any anticipation made during that treatment.
In the case where dislocation is recent and it's one of the four types of dislocation, you should aim for returning to that position where you'll move the joint outwards towards the inside parts and then towards the outside parts. Move it forward and backward, making him return this way without needing any other treatment.
If it does not return in this manner, then you should prepare to use force and extend the space under him, or around his hands, or whatever is lying over the space above the pelvis; and another should extend their hand above against where his hands are, so that they rest on the patient's fingers. Moreover, firmly press against the side of the thigh, and have another hold the end of the ligament gently.
And if it's an extension of him or inside the space up to the bend in the part of the sternum, or behind the part towards the back,
And if it's the extension of all those in one place within which, the patient is raised from his earth-bed and hangs down.
And this type of extension is common to all four.
And so if the dislocation returns to what we have said, it's good; and otherwise, then fully any method that speaks of its own treatment is necessary.
In the reduction of your own, when dislocated, and the dislocation is inside the parts, have the patient recline on his side there; then place the ligaments over the side of the thigh at that spot which between the head of the thigh bone and the spot left by the bending. Moreover, extend the ligament from the side of the bend in the part towards the other part of the sternum.
And then another should firmly grasp the patient's arms, and flatten the large area of the thigh bone on the malunhonest leg and extend the parts outward through strong extension; when that returns to its place.
And this kind is of more minor treatment for which this member is reduced compared to the other kinds.
And if you excuse yourself and do not comply with this kind of treatment for all, then you should have both feet of the malnourished person ready at once, moderately forcefully, over both heels and both pelvises.
And if the length of each by quantity of four is spoken about, and the abdominal wall extends more than the other by quantity of two.
And so the malnourished person should be suspended over the head of the pole, and in the standing position; and if the length of the earth is quantity of two arms.
And so instruct a strong young man to decrease the head of the thigh bone; have him suspended with another malnourished youth, and let the other young man exert strength on the thing, when the joint returns to its place quickly.
And in the self-reduction, when dislocation is to the part outside, have the malnourished person juggle according to what we recommended in the golden age; strengthen the ligament over the abdominal wall properly and over his feet.
And two poles should be placed, one under the foot of him, and the other on the head; moreover, place two adjusted poles under the middle of his buttocks where wet cloths are wrapped, so that the malnourished person is not dampened because the pole is between his thighs, so that you ensure that the extension to the parts left does not pull away.
And each should extend in his part, and the doctor with his hand encircles the reduction according to art.
And when the dislocation is in the parts frontward, then you should have the abdominal wall extended moderately; and according to this midwifery narrative about the body; and the doctor holds his right palm on the malnourished thigh bone, and coaxes that with his left hand, and by that coercion pauses that extension to the parts left towards the part of the pelvis.
And when the dislocation is in the parts back, then you do not have to extend the malnourished person over the parts left, and he's elevated on the ground; instead, you place him over a hard cause, as if you were doing massage if his width is dislocated outward, according to what we said about lying down on two widths; and it's over his face and the ligaments are extended, as we have said, almost entirely.
And let compression be administered on the table at the spot where one finds the joint.
So when the reduction is completed according to what we've done - and the sign of your own reduction for you isn't hidden, that is, extend from the malnourished person two parts, and when you adjust these equal signs and the malnourished person extends his own part and expands this excess, then you know that the member has returned according to what we've done - then you adjust both things and stop with the dressing and pull inwards so that width isn't exceeded in any of the parts; and keep the malnourished person at rest for three or four days.
And then, untie the ligament and dressing, and compare one part with the other.
And then, if you see these equalities in continuity, you will know that the dislocation is already closed, and thus let the malnourished person go.
And if you see any signs of softening, then you should return and dress that again, and extend it according to your first construction, and let him rest for three days.
And then release that one, making it take a walking break in any place for several days, until it is comforted.
Chapter xxxii.
On the treatment of dislocation of the humerus.
The humerus is dislocated in three ways: it is dislocated outwardly, inwardly, and more to the left than to the right. And it is not dislocated at the front.
And the sign of dislocation is that you command the patient to press their knee against their thigh; then you will know that the humerus is dislocated.
And the restoration of all its ways is that you straighten the patient's body while making them extend their knee if they can do so; hold your hands on their face and place their foot between your feet. Then, have them press their elbow against your palms, holding it firmly by your thumbs over their dislocated humerus with strength, and another should extend their knee until the dislocated humerus returns to its position.
And the sign of restoration is that their knee adheres to their thigh with ease, without strain.
And then plaster that area and have them press their knee against their thigh. Afterward, apply the plaster for one bandage period of three or four days, and then remove it again.
And do not let the patient walk around for a few days until they are healed and comforted.
May it be if the restoration of your knee is excused, then administer forceful extension to the tendons as was detailed in the previous narrative for the hip's treatment.
Chapter xxxiii.
On the treatment of dislocation of the tibia.
The tibia is sometimes slightly displaced due to minor injuries, and at other times it can be dislocated by force, and the displacement of the tibia occurs either inward or outward.
And the sign of the dislocation is that you will notice the swollen ankle moving towards the part where it is dislocated.
The treatment for the displacement of your leg is a slight restoration; you should extend it with ease on your hands and keep them equal until it returns.
And in the treatment of you when it is dislocated by force, you should have the patient lie straight and place a strong and valiant assistant behind their knee at the middle point of that area.
And then place your right hand under the upper part of their foot and your left hand on the lower part of their knee in the area where the cleft is.
And then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, and by two sides on the left side, and extend the left side; press the toes of the foot from the right to make their knee bend.
And perform these two ways as we have discussed.
And then press the toes of the foot towards their knee in the third way, and you are at the cleft.
So if it returns in one or two ways according to this manner, and if you find their foot even, it's good; and otherwise, then on them perform the operation again, that is which returns.
May it be if you are forbidden to restore your knee as we have recommended, then have the patient lie on their knees on the ground, and stretch a blanket firmly on solid ground under them, place their thighs between his legs, and you already wrap a cloth around them so that they don't slip.
And then the assistant should hold their knees, and have another assistant extend their foot towards their hands or against the tendon that lies over their elbow; and have each assistant extend every hand against the extension of their own side, and the blanket is between the thighs of the patient holds him, so that his body is not pulled to the sides opposite his extension.
And then the doctor evenly restores the displacement with his hands, and another assistant holds the healthy knee at the sides where the displacement returns easily.
And when the displacement returns and you are declared the health of the restoration, then pause the plastering and strengthen it firmly on those tendons, and join their foot to the knee.
And be careful or guard against the nerves which are behind over the tibia, so that the tendon above it is not overly vigorous and injures him severely.
And then let him rest for two or three days; and if the tendon has softened, stretch it again.
And then release him on the third day or fourth; and prohibit the patient from walking for forty days. May it be if he is forced to go before that space, no assurance is given that the displacement will not dissolve and corrupt him again; therefore, this does not accept treatment.
And if it happens to him that he develops an abscess, then be careful that you administer in the cure of him what we preceded with our narrative, in another location for treatment and ointment until it is healed.
Chapter xxxiv.
On the treatment of dislocation of the toes of the feet.
And let the one that is dislocated be equal to a slight extension of its joints; and what is not difficult, in advance it is easier.
And if the dislocation is in some joints of his foot, then be careful that you have the patient stand on a level spot or table over their feet as though they were walking.
And then you stand on the foot, place your hand over where it hurts at the joints, and apply pressure while pushing with your foot in such a way that it returns to its original position, and you see that it has already equalized and does not appear again at the same location.
And then place your hand under the patient's chest with a board that supports all of their body, on which there are two points, and strengthen it with firmness for three days; then release this tension and have them rest from walking for several more days, until they are strengthened and recovery is assured.
Capitol: Chapter XXXV
Of the species of dislocation that occur in disease or in fracture, or at any time.
When any cause of those occurs and you handle the treatment and restoration in that manner, it often results in death.
And because of this, do not judge the treatment of the patient based on it alone, but rather by someone who is wise in the art, with long experience, merciful and compassionate; slow, not eager nor presumptuous; they should use medicines that are purgative only for such purposes, leaving judgment to divine decision, not to themselves, but to whom you expect salvation from loss, in alleviating sickness, and in which you show some hope. And then it is necessary to quickly make the reduction while the cause is still at work, before a purging occurs with the cautery.
And then, if the limb returns as we wish, then administer the regimen which purges with the cautery and treats the disease according to what suits the patient from dried ointments.
And if dislocation occurs with fracture and happens in the separate joints, then you force their articulation, and do it as we have said about simple diseases of that which was discussed about those locations.
And according to your skill, avoid the one who manipulates you in the paths of fear as my teaching precedes you; that is better for you from God, more permanent to your glory, and more health for your true self, which you will see at your time. So end the words of Al-Bucasis perfectly from which God be praised. Amen.
