Oh children, I fulfill this book for you, which is the last part of medical science, by adding it to your knowledge, and through its explanations, and through your declarations, it appears to me that I should complete this treatise for you, which is a segment of my operation in my own person, which is surgery.
The operation on oneself is confined to our region and our time, which has left this science in jeopardy, and its traces have remained; and without it there would not be much knowledge of surgery from the ancient books, which correct these errors and exaggerations within those passages where the interpretations of the science are closed, and prolonging the force of one's body and art.
And it seems to me that I should revive this order of the treatise in this manner according to exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and for compatibility with the forms of the tools such as cauterys and other work instruments, a declaration addition is necessary, and for preparation which is required.
The reason why there is no great surgeon in one's own hand in this our time could be due to the length of medical art and the need for experience before being trained in the science of anatomy as taught by Gualia, where they knew about joints, their forms, connections and separations; had knowledge of bones, nerves and lymph nodes, their numbers, and how they were arranged; and about pulsating veins and quiet ones, and about the places of their emission.
And this is why Hippocrates said that in his name, there is truth, but mainly in the work of small things and notably in the art of one's own hand.
We have already mentioned this in the introduction of this book; whoever does not understand what we have said about anatomy, should beware of falling into an error that could lead to the death of people, just as I have seen too many cases where some are formed in this science and abandon it for its own science and experiments.
I have seen a doctor who fell into a scrophulous abscess under the chin of a woman and had to incise some neck arteries because so much blood flowed that the woman died among his patients.
And I saw another doctor who was about to remove a stone from a man who had been suffering for some time with this condition. The stone was large and it was removed by him using a piece of the bladder; that man died on the third day.
And I already attempted to remove it, and saw that due to the size of the stone and the location under his hip, he would die.
And I saw another doctor who was paid by the Duke of our land for surgery, and was treating a black slave who had sustained a fracture on his leg; taking advantage of his lack of knowledge, he removed the fracture from the wound, covering it with powders and stitches on a hard structure, not allowing air to enter the wound.
And after that, he removed it according to his wishes, then he bandaged and left it to dry for several days, and I instructed him to remove the stitches; this also happened when the leg and foot swelled with an abscess, leading to loss.
And I attempted this for him, and prepared to remove the stitches, achieving calmness and alleviation of his pains.
However, the corruption was confirmed in the member, so I could not control it, and the corruption would continue to spread within the body of the patient.
And I saw another doctor who pierced an abscess of cancer and was inflamed for several days, causing great suffering to his lord.
This is why the cancerous ulcer is pure of melancholic humor, so it doesn't spread throughout the body, but rather that there's a member suffering from which all is affected.
And for this reason, children, it is necessary for you that the operation on oneself be divided into two ways: one where healing is associated with it, and in work where there are major dangers.
And I have already mentioned this in all parts of this book where there is operation with error and fear; it is necessary for you to keep this in mind and be cautious about it, so that the pages do not accuse you or wrong you.
And therefore take your weapons for solicitude and protection of God, and your patients for happiness and strength.
And use the best path by God's grace for the sake of salvation and possible success, beware of the terrible diseases with difficult treatment, keep your weapons away from what makes you afraid; because recovery in your faith and your name will not desert you: it is what remains for your glory, more even in this world and later on in your sanctity.
Gualia already said in some of his monikers: "Don't treat terrible diseases with bad doctors, for it is better to not have heard their names."
And I have completed this book according to three chapters.
The division of the book begins, and the first part of the first section starts. The first ordered chapter within the section on the feet, about the forms of tools and the instruments of cauterys, and what is necessary in an operation.
The division of the second part. The second chapter, concerning dryness and puncturing, as well as blisters, and plagues, and the extraction of arrows and resemblance to those; a complete chapter organized on the forms of the tools.
The third chapter, concerning restoration and dislocation, as well as the treatment of twists and resemblance to those; an organized chapter within the feet, on the forms of the tools.
I will tell you about the quality of those affected by this cautery and its aftereffects, and when it is forbidden to apply cautery.
So I say that the discussion on the effect of cautery and its aftereffects is long and tedious, subtle in knowledge, and secretly concealed; many wise men have spoken about it, and they disagree with each other, and I am afraid of going too far even by mentioning a little from their discourses.
And thus I say that cautery affects all components universally in terms of matter or sex matter, except for two components, which are the tail components.
In the tail and in the dry condition there is matter that gets dried out; some argue that cautery benefits this area, while others argue against this, stating that it's not convenient for a patient with a quality or dryness condition, as fire has qualities and dryness. It would be inconvenient to use cautery on a tail and dry matter when you want the disease to be cured, since fire is associated with qualities and dryness, and it goes against treating a condition where the body needs moisture and warmth instead of drying out.
And he who says the opposite of this argues that with cautery, youth is achieved in all tail and dry diseases that come to humans. When you compare the human body and its moisture content to the condition of fire, you find that the human body gets rid of it.
And I say based on the discussion of this, something that I have experimented with for several times myself.
However, I must not touch on this topic that has already been thoroughly discussed in the chapter about cautery for later use, and I have come to understand the variety of human body components and the disposition of diseases among their members, as well as the causes of those diseases, their accidents, and the duration of those conditions.
In the other components, there is no reason for fear, especially in diseases that are damp or wet; all doctors have agreed on these issues, and they are not divided about the use of cautery for youth in such conditions.
And know, children, about the secret of healing through fire and its goodness, concerning cautery with burning medicine; because fire is simple, its action affects only the member that is being cauterized and does not spread to other members in such a way as to cause minor harm.
And the action of burning medicine extends to that in members where it's applied, and it strongly brings about a difficult healing process and a strong weakening.
And fire, through its superiority and the goodness of its substance, does nothing other than excess. We have come to know this through experience and years of service in studying the art, based on the truth about causes; thus, I justify the length of my discussion because if it were not for the fact that there is no freedom to read such secrets about fire, as well as the quality of its operation within bodies and the elimination you perform which expels diseases through a philosophical demonstration which would clarify things in your minds.
And know, children, that they disagree about the time when it is best to perform cautery and favor the best time of spring.
And I say that cautery is convenient at all times; for the inconvenience due to time accidents are submerged in the youth of what comes from this, and especially if cautery is for pain or necessary pains, strong ones with pus, which do not suffer delay since they fear those which come with malice, which outweigh minor harm entering through time.
And let this not worry you, or children, those who only value common folk and simple doctors are saying that it is not advisable to apply cautery at all times for the healing of such diseases; they fear certain consequences.
And the reason is not so much due to their concern about this, because cautery is merely a form of medicine that alters components and dries out the moisture which causes pain.
However, unnecessary cautery over medicine due to its utility and the virtue of its operation and greatness of its master.
And it is possible that the disease may return at some point in time depending on the nature of the body and the location of its disease, as well as its virtue, and what is prepared in the patient's body from accumulating superfluities within it, as well as what has been introduced to it through food or resemblance of those causes; so that if cautery was administered for a subtle disease with few superfluities and moisture, even if cautery is done on teeth due to pain and resemblance to that, it may not return the same pain in this patient, rather this can be done for smaller cases.
And the common term is that cautery is the last resort of medicine, and this is the professional language, not what I understand from it, for they believe that neither this nor any other cause leading to cautery is a cure.
And the reason is opposite to this; and I understand that cautery is the last resort of medicine not simply when administering the methods of treatment in some illnesses, and those medicines do not provide relief. Instead, towards the end of the cause, one administers a cautery, leading to this outcome. And from here onwards, it is understood that cautery is the last resort of medicine, not according to my understanding which is shared by many common people and doctors.
And they used to say that a cautery made of gold is better than one made of iron, and they did not say this in any other sense but due to the equality of gold and its limited nature compared to its substance.
And they used to say that the location of a cautery does not cause scarring, but this is not absolutely true, for I have already experienced this and found out that it only causes this in some types of skin, and a gold cautery is good and better than an iron one; however, when you make a gold cautery on fire, you do not specify this, as the heat depends on the quantity you want for the hardness of the gold, and to receive fumes; and if you place the flame over it, the gold melts due to the heat. And in case of heat, several sheets are produced so that the craftsman can work according to the occupation of that one.
And for this reason, when making a cautery from iron, you should do it more lightly and more precisely towards the accuracy of the operation.
And I have already organized this chapter on cautery according to sections, and I have arranged those of the section inside the feet for you to ask what you want from them.
The first section.
This cautery brings moisture and coldness to the unfortunate event of which there are two causes, they are the cause of swelling and inflammation, called corissa, from the head to the parts of the ears and behind the ears, as well as sleeping, tooth pain, and the stomach area, and universally for all illnesses that come from coldness, such as paralysis, spondylitis, and stroke, and similar in those illnesses.
The method of this cautery is as follows, first command the patient to be treated with a laxative medicine on the head for three or four nights, according to what suits the patient and their age and their custom.
And then command the patient to clean their head with a razor, and then proceed to shave them between their hands on a fallen bench, making them lie down on their feet.
And place your palm's edge near the nose's tip between their ears. However, when your designated area is reached, mark that spot with a trial, and then ignite the olive cautery of which this is the form:
And place that over the marked spot on trial, in such a way that it descends, while your hand is gradually forced inward, and you rotate that.
And lift your hand slightly and observe the area, and if you see that any quantity of the head is already exposed to the air, like the quantity of fat, then lift your hand. And if your hand does not return to that iron, in another one, if it is cooled down, so that what I have told you can be seen from the air.
And then take a small amount of salt and dissolve it on the area, let that rest for three days.
And place it on the scorched spot in the air and let it rest until the skin burned by fire is destroyed. And then cure the area with turpentine ointment until it heals.
And they used to say that when the wound opens up, so much better the scar gets, for it is better and more rejuvenating.
And they used to say that the canal is cauterized inside the mouth, and that the cautery remains until a part of the characteristic of the bone becomes attached.
And then let this part stick to the bone like this, and then let it heal.
And they used to say that when the cautery reaches the bottom, it strengthens the bone until it falls into the bone, and this is the form of a small aphecati: And estimate from that place the fumes of the head expire.
And let the wound be open for a long time, and then be cured until it is consolidated.
May be that these two types of cautery are not exactly as you see them in all, but only in some people according to their fear; let this rest, for what is best for your health, when it happens; so the head is cleansed by means of continuous application of salve like we have testified on other parts, and especially when the head of the patient has a hot nature.
And the first type of cautery is better and more for your sake, so I advise you to use that one with health.
The second section.
Regarding head cautery.
When throughout the entire head chronic and prolonged pain occurs, which is long-lasting in the patient's body, using headrests, pillows, cap cushions, plasters, hats, collars, caps, and other similar items, especially if it has already been cauterized with a cautery that relieves without exacerbating its symptoms; then consider that if the head of the patient has robust creation in its nature; it does not endure much heat or takes a large amount of fire, then this head is cauterized by another cautery; leave him only one. And then apply a cautery on that above his forehead in the region where the vein splits. Incise the vein and expose the amount which we have measured; apply a cautery on that behind the head in the place where it is called the "vessel," - and that is the place where suction is applied, - And hold your hand in this way, do not expose the mouth, for when done like this, the patient experiences a great different kind of pain compared to all other head cautery pains.
And I advise to perform this cautery in its place, for it is said that this type of cautery which involves burning the ears and the back of the head as well as the occipital region is more subtle than when the middle part of the head is burnt; this is how it should be done.
Head high.
Regarding the non-traditional application of cautery for migraines.
When the pain is localized in the head, or when it's confined within the skull, medicines to relieve the pain should be applied to the head. Then follow another treatment method, which I have mentioned earlier for various illnesses; and if all else fails, then using cautery becomes two-fold: either with acute burning medicine, or with iron.
The medicine for burning cautery involves taking a small amount of sulfur, heating it until it starts to smoke, and then using the hot ends of two heated pieces of copper as the cautery tool. And then pierce the area of pain in the temple with a small sharp knife, just before doing so make sure to locate the vein and hide it inside.
And apply strength to it until the descent is stopped by constraint, and then let it rest in that area for three hours; and cleanse and wash with sulfur, letting the wound heal for two or three days, and place a compress dipped in oil over the affected part, allowing it to cool.
And then treat it with ointment until it is healed.
And if you observe, do this using some burning medicines that I have written about in my treatise on burning medicines.
The cautery using iron follows this manner: heat it until you can create this form for the cautery:
It is called the key of the lock, where the head of it is thus shaped like a clove, and in the middle part of it there is a small protuberance.
And then place your hand on the area of pain, hold - to prevent the heat from damaging the skin which is exposed - and move the small iron piece back and forth gradually at a speed.
And if the amount that gets heated due to the specificity of the vein like most parts do, raise your hand so that the artery does not get heated as well, in order to prevent bleeding.
And then soak the compress in salt water and place it on the affected area, let it stay for three days; and after that, apply the oil-soaked compress over butter, then treat with ointment until it heals.
And when you see that it's necessary, apply the cautery at the tip of the knife following the usual procedure. Be careful not to cut into an artery in this non-traditional migraine treatment.
Head quarter.
Regarding the application of cautery for traditional migraines.
When you treat migraines as we have described for previous treatments and as detailed in the divisions of illnesses, if those methods do not provide sufficient relief, due to issues with the illness itself, then consider this: heat the knife cautery until it glows white hot, meaning place your hand over the area of pain along a line that's most affected by what we've discussed earlier, or right there; pause for a moment and apply strength there before piercing the skin and entering into the skull.
However, it is essential that you guard against the continuous jaw movement, which can harm your ability to chew, and ensure that the tongue does not get burned along with the nerves that control it, as well as prevent muscle spasms.
And if it's concerning the risk of bleeding from an artery which gets cut during the procedure, there is fear in this operation, especially for those who don't know what they are doing and lack experience; leave the operation as started.
And I will remind you of the order for dealing with bleeding incidents due to vessel rupture according to this method in this article.
And if you see that this method of cautery does not provide enough relief for the illness and finds the patient tolerable, apply the cautery in the middle of the head as we have counted, and treat the wound until it heals.
And if you see fit, administer the cautery that we have described for the treatment of arterial constriction on the part of iron, using two knives for the cautery. This method is better and more effective compared to others.
Head .vi.
Regarding the application of cautery for earaches.
When there's pain in the ear due to infection and it is treated with antiseptics and another treatment which I've mentioned in the division, if the pain isn't alleviated, then heat up the cautery; this one is called the 'puncta' type, having this form:
And if it is necessary to make points near the kidney, then guide them around the entire area of the ear as if rolling a wheel, or in the circuit of any times where pain occurs. Continue with the use of the ear's tip cautery little by little until you find where it hurts and try to test.
And if the cautery hits all points in the ear, and you find that way, then properly treat the areas inside where they heal.
End of part I.
Regarding the cautery treatment.
Turtura that is cured and treated with cautery is merely of the species which come through phlegm, as we have said in our sections on illnesses.
Avoid cautery for the species that cause it due to drying out or muscle spasms of nerves.
When you treat that species of turtura using jerry-cabbage soup and headache remedies, and do not confirm your treatment, then when you cauterize the patient with three cauteries: the first being the tip of the ear, the second a small spot on their temple, and the third is the junction of two lips.
And pause your cautery at the opposite side of the afflicted part, which healing does not manifest in the healthy portion.
And the method of cautery is to apply it at the tip on the right side of the ear somewhat above the root of the head, and on their temple elsewhere, whose length should be according to the length of that spot. Then place your hand with the cautery until the quantity of the mass of the disease is burned.
And this is how it should be done with the cautery, which is a specialty of surgeons, and its form is in front of the table. However, it's rather subtle that you should do this with a little bit of caution; and when dealing with excess fatness for a little while.
And then treat the area where it is ahead in the process until it heals.
End of part VII.
Regarding the treatment with cautery for old apoplexy (stroke).
When apoplexy is old and you treat it as we've said but do not confirm your treatment, if the patient does not have a fever, then cauterize that area with four cauteries: over all their head's roots; and with the cautery at the midpoint of their forehead, as we've said; and apply the cautery on the tongue. And the method of applying the cautery is done according to what was discussed above.
And when it has been cauterized over the mouth of the stomach; and more towards the back; and then treat that which progresses.
End of part VIII.
Regarding the treatment with cautery for forgetfulness caused by phlegm.
And if given to the patient at mealtime large jerry beans and pills that help digestion.
And then shave the entire head of the patient and place a center-applied plaster as described in the treatise on plasters.
And leave it for several weeks, which is the method of applying cautery. And do this according to that method order which I have already described.
And if they are already cured well; otherwise, then do this for the patient three times on the last part of their head, which should descend from the more prominent part of the head to the lower part of the neck. And pause between each cautery for as long as the process dictates, and then treat the cautery according to what has been done.
If you are added to and the patient tolerates it, then apply cautery in the middle part; and if your addition is greater, then apply the cautery over both roots.
And treat that area until it heals; and let the olive oil be like the one described beforehand in form.
End of part IX.
Regarding treatment with cautery and general alleviation of the entire body.
And when you are in the process of digestion for the head with jerry beans and what we have said; then shave the patient's head, and then apply cautery in the middle of their head, and apply the cautery over all their roots, and apply the cautery on the last part of their body, and do three applications of cautery over their neck spines.
And if it is necessary for the illness of body alleviation in many patients and the patient tolerates it, and the illness is strong, then apply cautery with four applications on both neck spines, afterwards applying the cautery until the disease matter of them is burned out, and lift your hand. And then treat that area until it heals, and this should be olive oil cautery.
End of part X.
Regarding treatment with cautery for epilepsy.
It should not be treated with cautery if the epilepsy is due to phlegm.
And when you digest the patient's brain at mealtime with jerry beans and the other treatment which we have described in the section where the patient is large and tolerates medicine rejection, then proceed.
And if it's a child who doesn't tolerate the medicines, then administer headache remedies and chewers for digestion improvement, before that for several days, to improve food assimilation.
And then shave the patient's head, and apply a cautery in the middle of the head in its correct location according to the previous method, and use another cautery on the back of the head, and on every haircorn of their head, he applies a cautery. And if the patient is strong and tolerates well, then apply the cauteries I mentioned, while having paralysis-inducing and calming effects on the vertebrae of the neck and the vertebrae of the back.
And use an olive oil cautery as previously described.
If the patient is a child, then apply a subtle cautery according to this method.
Chapter XI.
On the treatment of melancholy with cauteries.
When the causes of melancholy are corrupted wetness and weak, fatty tissue, then apply the cauteries we have mentioned in the region where paralysis occurs.
And if the cause of melancholy is excess declining to melancholy, and the patient's body is wet, then give them to drink what purifies the brain as described in the previous section of this division.
And then shave the head of the patient, and make a reasonable loop from it around the circle, and place that loop in the middle of the head.
And if the patient is sixty years old, and has been treated everywhere.
And then apply an ointment; it's as good as an old sheep's wool remedy. And warm that over the fire for a mild heat measurement, which it says to endure when increased in him. And then place that at the middle of the head on the circle, and let it sit until it cools.
And do this to the patient once a week for an entire week, or within his other regimen of taking medicine until he is healed; or if you want, apply a cautery on it and make small punctures according to what pleases him, otherwise have your hand with a heated cautery in order like that: this is the type of cautery that moistens the brain equally.
And place that buttered slice on it, either hot or greasy from fat.
Chapter XII.
On the treatment of descending water with cauteries.
When you are informed about the beginning of water in the lungs based on the symptoms I described in this division, then start and give the patient to drink what purifies his head, and protect him from all moisture.
And make that sugar dissolve in water until it is sweetened for a few days.
And then instruct the patient to raise their head, and apply a cautery on it using a cautery in the middle of the head; and apply another two cauteries on both temples if this is the beginning of water accumulation in both lungs, or one if it's the beginning of water in just one lung.
Let the cautery touch all veins and arteries that are left from the series; and place those cauteries in that length around the temples.
And watch out for bleeding when it's being treated with cautery; and if you see the patient's bleeding, stop and give them some medicine that is available to you.
And I will come with knowledge about the extraction of arteries and removal of those, as well as caution against bleeding.
And some days are when it's treated on the neck between the two bones with two heated cauteries placed one after another.
Chapter XIII.
On the treatment of old tears.
When tears from the lungs are old and originate through veins and arteries located on the outward face of the head, when it's confirmed that excess phlegm is present, then apply a cautery using the one we've mentioned in the chapter about the beginning of water accumulation affecting the lungs. Apply a cautery at the middle of the head and two cauteries at each temple area. Also apply two cauteries on each neck bone area around the temples. And if you experience weakness, then apply a cautery over the entire length of the ribcage at the end of the eyebrow with small cauteries.
Chapter XIV.
On the treatment of nasal odor.
When you are treating the patient with what we have prescribed in this division and if your treatment isn't improving, then prepare and give them to drink three cups of broth for three nights; and then shave the head of the patient, and apply an olive oil cautery on it. And then apply a cautery using thorn apple on each eyebrow area, with small cauteries left above the eyebrows.
And watch out not to burn that artery when doing this.
And this is the method of using the thorn apple cautery.
Chapter XV.
On the treatment of lung eyelid softening with cauteries.
When the lung eyelid becomes softened due to illness or wetness, then apply a cautery on that eyelid with this moon-like cautery. Here is how you should do it:
And if you do this treatment, apply the cautery over both eyebrows slightly with two smaller cauteries covering the entire area, and they should extend to the temples. And let the length of each cautery be according to the size of the overhang.
And do not press your hand too much on the cautery, but rather according to how much the fleshy part of the eyelid gets heated.
Chapter XVI.
On the cautery of the eyelid when the skin turns into the parts inside and at the palm of the hand.
When the skin of the hand turns into the parts inside so that I prick the hand, there are two ways to do a cautery, whether it is by fire or with burning medicine.
If it's a cautery with fire, instruct the patient in front of this so that they shave their skin like those who are circumcised, until they are extended and equalized; and if you prick that part, then at its origin, then strengthen the hands of your patients so that they do not become infected as long as the skin is being made.
So when they are extended and equalized, then rest the head of the patient in your place, and move towards the eyelid of their hands, with a mark where it resembles the shape of a hawthorn leaf, and make the starting point of the mark near the skin.
And move towards a little cut in the pus of a hen or in the pustule on the hand.
And move to apply the cautery with which this is its form.
And move to cauterize over the figure that was marked, little by little in spots seen, while burning the surface of the cord which is like a hawthorn leaf, entirely seemingly so.
And a sign of the health of your work is that you see the eyelid of the hand already contracted and the skin of it elevated above the prick on the hand.
And lift your hand and leave that for three days, then move to place on it a small cut in the middle while the scab is raised. And move to treat that with ointment until it heals.
And if there is some cause that returns towards their origin and the eyelid becomes softened, then do another time the cautery on that whole area as you did at first.
And if the skin remains in the eyelid, then cauterize that until it rises to its natural place and becomes equal, so that the skin does not hurt the hand.
And the cautery with burning medicine is like this: command the patient to shave their skin until they are extended and equalized, then move to make the shape of a hawthorn leaf out of a piece of cloth.
And take known soap and live ash with it. 1. Take this mixture, then mix those ashes well with water, do it quickly so that it doesn't cool down; spread this mixture over the cloth which is made like a hawthorn leaf shape, place that on one hand or both; apply to each hand a small cut in the pus of a hen, and the head of the patient shall be in your place.
And place that over the medicine and press it slightly but don't let it burn; within which the patient feels the bite of the medicine, which bite is like being bitten by fire in them.
And when the medicine's bite continues, then shave off this medicine and apply it to your designated place; once the bite stops, then reapply the medicine with water; then consider whether the eyelid has been lifted as it would be after washing away from the scab by fire or incision, which happens now; if it does not return again over that area of the medicine on the spot where it did not take hold and does not deteriorate, then consider your operation completed and ensure the hand is contracted.
And move to place on it a small cut in the middle until the scab of the adjustment is eradicated, then treat that with definitive oil or another until it heals.
And this is necessary for you, you must guard your operation with diligence so that medicine doesn't fall off the hand, and if the eyelid becomes softened after a few days and some cause of skin pricks on the hand, then apply your medicine to that area from which the eyelid is softened, precisely like you did at first, and move around it until it heals.
And this is the shape of a hawthorn leaf.
And know that the hands of men are diverse according to their size and smallness, so according to this is your contraction done.
And let there be no concealment of the path to rectitude towards that which is studied in this art.
Chapter XVII.
On the cautery of a fistula that is in the tear duct of the hand.
When you treat fistula with what we have said in the divisions of male diseases and do not give your treatment, then this is how you should cauterize that: command the patient to place their head in your place, and have someone's head between your hands as if it were their own without being hurt or disturbed by their head.
And move towards making a small cut in the pus of a hen or in the pustule on the hand.
And using the cautery tool of which this is the form:
Which is curved, like the shape of a reed or a bird's quill, from one end where the cautery is applied.
And if you see, it goes penetrating into the other end. And if you want to remove it, do so as if trying to pull it out.
But whoever is curved is better for your work.
And press the fistula if it has opened, then treat and dry that area of the patient. And if it hasn't opened, then open it and remove the pus from him.
And press with the hot cautery that is well lit; hold it as close to your hand as possible but slightly beyond the nostril opening, so that your hand does not move or disturb the patient. Then pause the cautery on the base of the nose and let the pus come out and then clean that area.
And indeed, if during the beginning of your cautery it enters the mouth, that is good; otherwise, then apply the cautery once or twice, as required; and leave him thus for three days. Then press onto that place with a bandage and in its vicinity you should apply dry antiseptic, so he may heal.
But if more than ten days have passed and he is not healed, then press onto him with the corrosive acid medicine when the hole has been revealed, and scrape as necessary in accordance with his head doctor.
And another way of using the cautery on a fistula which some earlier doctors said: place yourself at the site of the fistula and perform it there, then press onto that fissure with a thin metal rod that has the shape of this: And place in that spot an amount the size of one's fingernail of melted lead; hold your hand in good position so that you do not disturb the patient as long as the molten lead does not reach his nose; and then when pressing onto the patient's nose with a cloth or water, let the lead cover the site of the fistula and heal it through marvelous healing.
And if the fistula is healed with what we've said about the cautery and treatment, that's good; otherwise, then it's necessary to administer nostril surgery and reduce the fistula to inside the nose according to where it naturally resides.
Chapter XVIII.
Regarding cautery treatment for a cut on the foot.
Wounds often occur in tears, especially in children's labia.
Then in treating those tears as we've discussed with you regarding sections and avoiding excess treatment, then use this small surgical knife according to this form that I describe:
And make the size of the incision according to the thinness of the blade.
And press that initial cut into those tears so that the cautery reaches inside the opening of the tears.
And continue treating it with ointment until it heals.
Chapter XIX.
Regarding cautery treatment for a fistula in the mouth.
When there is an abscess in the uvula or on the palate or in the teeth, and if it bursts, heals, ages, and the vein is disrupted, causing a fistula, then you treat that without excessively healing. Instead, use the cautery according to the quantity received inside the fistula, place that ignited into the hole of the fistula, keep your hand so that the flame reaches the opening of it, and do this once or twice at the end; then continue treating it as we've discussed about treatment until it heals.
And indeed if the healing has been removed and it's healed, that is good; otherwise, then it's necessary to discover the location and clean out the rotten tissue according to what comes in his head doctor.
Chapter XX.
Regarding tooth cautery and gum soothing.
When the gums are softened by moisture and teeth are swollen, and you treat those with medicines but don't consult further, then place the patient's head in its usual position, and press the cautery using this form which will come close to doing so. And when you hold the thumb on the tooth and quickly introduce the lit cautery into that spot, keep your hand a little inside as long as the heat of the fire reaches the base of the tooth.
And then remove your hand, and press the cautery several times as you wish according to what you want.
And let the patient rinse his mouth with salt water and keep that in it for an hour, then wash out that area, so that the swollen tooth is reduced and the soft gum is hardened and the moisture is dried.
Chapter XXI.
Regarding tooth cautery for toothache.
When toothache is due to coldness, or if there's pus or worms involved, or you don't treat it with medicine, then perform cautery on that in two ways: either by applying the cautery to the surface of cattle, or by using fire for cautery.
Cautery on the surface involves taking cow dung and boiling it in iron. Then take that into your hand and wrap it around the tip of the instrument, then immerse that into hot dung, and place it over the painful tooth quickly while it's cooled down.
And then, apply some heat in those places so that the power of fire reaches the root of the teeth.
And if you see, immerse wool or cotton in the substance above it, place that over the painful tooth, and place the burning iron over it until the heat reaches to the tip of the tooth's root.
However, when using the iron or fire for cauterization with heat, you must wait until there is a crack in the metal or iron itself, and should it cause any injury to the patient's body, the heat of the fire must not reach into their mouth.
And then heat the cautery to its desired shape, place it over the tooth and hold your hand beneath the heat so that it is cooled; do this several times until the pain increases or in the next day or the following day.
And you should let the patient's mouth fill with good substance due to that heat and keep it for one hour, then have them rinse; this is how the cautery is used.
And apply the cautery wherever you see fit as long as it's within your capability.
And this is how an application should be made with the tube:
Chapter XXII.
On the treatment of hernia through cautery.
When hernias are due to phlegm and impure fluids that do not respond to medicine, and you observe a slight digestion in those cases, then heat the cautery to its desired shape following this method. It should have two straight ends so that the smoke from one end causes the cautery to burn towards the other end, place the lit part of the cautery over the abscess once, and if necessary repeat with another application until it reaches the root of the abscess.
And if the abscess is small, then place the cautery according to the size of the abscess, and let it sit for three days, placing a damp cloth on it in a container until what has burned by the fire becomes swollen.
And after that, treat with ointment and bandages until it is healed.
Chapter XXIII.
On the treatment of ulcerous wounds and constriction of bile.
When moisture enters the pulmonary channel, especially when it is due to cold body constitution, you should have the patient begin treatment with laxative medicines and heat. Then, apply cautery to where the gallbladder is located in the area of swelling.
And be careful not to let the cautery reach the gallbladder, nor burn until it is too late for your patient, rather just a little.
And apply the cautery with another instrument to the joint of the throat at the lower end of the spine. And treat your patient's elbow in the same manner as before.
And after that, treat it with what was mentioned until it heals.
Chapter XIV.
On the treatment of lung disease and cough.
When cough and lung disease are due to moisture, the patient's lung does not have fever or rash, it is an old cough, then apply cautery with two instruments on the sternum in the areas of swelling on the neck and chest; and with another instrument in the middle of the chest between the breasts; and treat elbow as previously mentioned.
And if you wish, let your treatment consist of pricking with the cauterizing instrument that is called a point; its form should be known from the section on piercing ear pain.
And make points in these areas; and treat it with what was mentioned previously until it heals.
And the cautery has three steps for this treatment: you can do three cauterizations in this manner with each application.
Chapter XXV.
On the treatment of a condition located at the head, specifically related to the pineal gland or third eye.
When the head of the helper is dislocated due to lubricating moisture and does not return in time you should place its dislocation until your patient returns to their usual self, and by making a slight movement it also gets back into position as we have demonstrated. Then proceed as previously mentioned first reduce the dislocation, then let the patient lie on their head or on their side; next raise the spine which is located in the part of the skull opposite the tips of your left hand, if the joint is dislocated towards that inward direction.
And then heat two points with the cautery; this is how it should be:
And then heat the spine so that it penetrates into the other side; and here, the figure of cautery treatment will be as follows with four cauterizations.
And some applications are adjusted according to this count, and for these cauteries they are numbered VIII.
And then place it on the salted iron of the cautery, and have your patient lie down comfortably, ensuring that their body is not strained for any time until they are relieved.
And if the dislocation is above and towards the inside and it happens like this, then apply a cautery on the muscle with a needle-shaped or moxa points cauterization, which confirms the joint and increases dryness and heals the patient.
Chapter XXVI.
On the use of cautery for the stomach.
When there is an inflammation and moisture in the stomach that exceeds its normal capacity and increases in quantity for the patient, and if you continue with these methods of treatment without considering it, then you will find that the patient is over their diaphragm, extending their limbs and belongings, and apply a cautery three times: first leave the foot for the amount of one digit's width on a needle-shaped cauterization, and at two cauterizations leave from both sides of the cauterization, forming a triangular figure; and extend those that are not properly fitting so they will not leak.
And if the depth of the cauterization is equivalent to the thickness of two thirds of the diameter of the chain's groove.
And if you follow this shape for the form of the cauterization, and if you wish, cauterize with a large cauterizer in the middle of the stomach according to this shape; this is a cauterization according to the circular form like this:
And when the stomach is cauterized at the point that is frightened by this cauterization: and you touch the stomach with the point according to the quantity you want on the attempt, then apply a cauterization at that point; and then treat it with treatment until it heals.
Chapter XXVII.
On the use of cautery for the rectum.
When there is pain in the rectum due to coldness or moisture or excessive strong wind that exceeds its normal capacity causing overflow, and if the patient heals with what we have said without considering it, then you will find that the patient is lying on their back, touching the rectum with three cauterizations according to this shape, spreading this half-width around the rectum below the iliac crests, and observe when they are in the supine position.
And let the space between each cauterization be according to the thickness of a finger, and make the cauterizations according to the length of the body right.
And don't hesitate with your hand on the cauterizations.
And if the amount of water that sticks is equal to the thickness of the diameter of the chain's groove, and it isn't properly adjusted; and if the patient stands on their feet; and if not standing, then they should lie down, which has already extended their belongings, and lift their arms.
And it is possible for you to cauterize these cauterizations with a surgical knife, when you have subtlety and prudence in the art.
And remember not to overdo the cauterization process, and ensure that the groove of the entire chain adheres so that it adheres to all parts of the body, reaching into the intestines, where the chain is delicate. Know this.
Chapter XXVIII.
On perforating an abscess in the rectum with a cauterization.
When there is inflammation or an abscess in the rectum and you want to know if that abscess is inside the rectal flesh or within its covering, then if it's inside the rectal flesh, the patient experiences increasing weight and pain.
And if it's within the rectal covering, then the pain is intense and sometimes that has already exhausted the doctors in treating him.
And let the patient lie against their chest; then touch the location of the abscess with your hand; and heat the cauterization which resembles a rod, whose shape was described in the previous page. And cauterize at that point and within the cauterization where the entire chain is charred, where it reaches up to the appendix, where it heals.
And treat that through treatment of other abscesses until it heals.
And do not use this form of cauterization except for the one that extends from what you study in the art of medicine, and from which most patient discomforts are known; but there are some occurrences where you may apply heat on this operation, but otherwise follow mine, as it is better.
Chapter XXIX.
On the use of cauterization for burns.
The ancient cauterizations for burns using the aristocratic rods should be made according to this method, and you should take a long, dry rod that is found from the aristocratic rods, which has the length of a finger.
And then immerse that in oil and set it on fire, and apply a cauterization with that rod at the location between the continuation of the sternal notch and the neck; and make two small cauterizations at this point, one slightly descending to the side where there is beard, and at another cauterization at the point where it descends between the fifth rib and the sternum, descending a little towards the back; and make another cauterization in the middle of the chest; and apply another cauterization on the stomach, and three cauterizations from the back parts; and make one cauterization at that location which is between the two shoulders, and make two cauterizations from both sides of the chest, leaving a cauterization between the two shoulders.
And do not think that you are burning with your hand on the cautery, but rather in the midst of suffering's manifestation it is at work.
And it was said by some old men that among the men who use iron cautery resembling rays and fire, they insert that into a location between the backbones, where it reaches from there to there through the wound, as we have mentioned in the case of the wound on the leg.
In this puncture with cautery there is no fear of death, yet it happens that you die suddenly in the place of the fistula where healing does not occur.
Chapter XXX.
On the cautery of the gums.
When you treat gum disease as we have said about treatment in the division and do not apply your treatment, then if you need to use cautery on them, there are three ways to do it, all of which involve lines. The first method is to make three or four lines along the length of the gums according to the figure of the gum cauteries, which I have already shown.
And between each cautery, the width is about one finger or slightly less, and the method of the cautery is the same method that we have described in the cautery for the leg equally.
And do not move your hand on the cautery; and let the patient lie on their back.
And there is another way to cautery, namely that you light the cautery with two streams of fire, a technique we have described in the chapter on muscle dislocation, and raise the patient's body so they can extend their left leg without pain.
And make your elevation such that you raise the body according to the length of the person, so that cauteries are made according to the width of the body.
And move both streams inward, ignite the fire, in that place where those penetrate the body from the other side.
And remove the cautery; and thus you perform four cauteries.
And if you see fit, use three streams of fire for cautery.
And then you treat the aftermath of the cautery when it has not been able to heal after too many days; for this is as important as the previous causes in treatment.
Chapter XXXI.
On cautery of dropsy.
Apply cautery not in cats but properly in dropsy.
When you treat dropsy with the methods of treatment that we have described in the division and do not apply your treatment, then you should use four cauteries around the umbilicus and one on the stomach, and another on the leg, and another on the gums, and two cauteries between the ribs of each side, and a cautery on the right side of the thigh, and another on the stomach. And the depth of the cautery should be proportional to the length of the body.
And then soften the cautery until it can heal for a long time.
And don't remove the patient from treatment near the cautery as this can cause two misunderstandings, and it should be accompanied by supportive healing measures.
The shape of the cautery where it is applied to the abdomen should be a cross, according to its previous form, and when it is applied to the leg it should be in the shape of an olive as it was before.
Chapter XXXII.
On cautery of the limbs and thighs.
When the limbs swell with excess water and are filled with salty fluid, it is that you apply cautery to the limbs on top of the leg up until the area between the wrist and the elbow, and hold your hand above the cautery and do not twist it; and then raise your hand, and do not turn it completely as the salty water drains.
This is the shape of the cautery: and then make two cauteries on each thigh, and for every item, make a cautery at the end of the blade. And make the cauteries according to the length of the thigh: lay one end on your knee and the other towards the middle of the thigh; and for each thigh, two cauteries.
And leave the opened wound open for a long time for its own sake that some water may drain from it.
And then treat those causes as we have described them.
Chapter XXXIII.
On cautery of the abdominal region.
When the abdominal region is affected by friction and moisture causing swelling, it disturbs digestion and retention, which are in the stomach and intestines. It is treated with the methods of treatment and not applied, and sometimes when the patient feels a disturbance due to an excess of water, then you should apply cautery on large areas over their stomach according to what was previously described for stomach cautery, around the belly button circle and four small cauteries in the subtle umbilical area, with a cross-shaped subtle cautery; and another one over the navel, or with two cauteries.
And if there are excessive wetness and the patient tolerates it, then apply cautery on the navel and over the intestines, and strengthen your adjustments with two cauteries on the stomach and near the groin area, which is a complete cure for young people where you will not be mistaken.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
Concerning the cautery treatment for old boils.
When they occur naturally causing old boils or ones filled with thick humors or corrupted moisture, and they are treated as we have said in the division and do not provide your cure, then apply a cautery to three spots over the pus you leave behind on either side of the two small and triangular points, and perform the cautery above the belly button for another two times.
And if you find that the stomach of the patient needs warming and their food is not digested, and their face has become flushed, then apply a large cautery on the stomach according to what precedes; and do one cautery on the back of the neck, and another on the chest area with the handle of the cautery, leave the cautery open for some time and let it heal naturally until they are cured.
Section 35.
Concerning the cautery treatment for abscesses near the anus.
When you remove the anal tissue, then use the assembled cautery that resembles rays. Place the ignited cautery inside the anal abscess, and continue applying your hand until the heat of the cautery reaches the outlet of the vein through which the infection travels.
Do this once or twice; if abscesses are too many, then apply the cautery to each one as we have recounted earlier, and after that, treat those with the ointment you provide until they heal.
And if you apply a large cautery on the buttocks, it heals faster in youth.
Section 36.
Concerning the cautery treatment for fistulas that occur naturally in various parts of the patient.
If nature does not comply with the procedure we have recommended in its place, and the patient is scared by this, they will be cured with cautery.
So when any patient has a natural fistula that is old and filled with healthy tissue or corrupted moisture, then the pus you need to let out should be drained with care using a subtle method. Therefore, determine the depth of the fistula from the mentioned method beforehand.
Place the cautery that resembles rays and ignite it. And then place the ignited cautery in this fistula, according to the depth of the method you've determined.
Continue applying the cautery until those rotten bodies are burned out, whether it's once, twice, or three times, according to your need.
And be careful not to burn the nerves and veins; or if the fistula goes towards the bladder's body or towards the intestine, then avoid all those areas; and do this only when the fistula is in a meaty location and you think it doesn't penetrate deeply.
And treat the area until they heal.
And if the area is sealed off, and all the materials have been removed from him/her, but still remains for a long time, then know that it has been completely healed.
And if the materials are not completely removed from their body, then know that it is penetrating or within their organs, or falls due to those causes for which memory will come back in their location.
Section 37.
Concerning the cautery treatment of ulcers.
When in ulcers there is pain due to cold or due to thick wind, and the thigh of the patient becomes hardened, then you should drain that ulcer with cautery on each ulcer and apply a cautery near the handle which recalls memory for the treatment.
And strengthen lightly with cautery at the second small one, so that three linear cauteries will come, and thus they heal faster in youth.
Section 38.
Concerning the cautery treatment of the bladder.
When you encounter a bladder that is weakened and softened by cold and moisture to the extent that the patient does not retain urine, then apply cautery in the area where there's pus left behind on the bladder, starting from the skin of the buttocks. Apply one cautery on the right side, and another on the left side of the patient.
And let the length of each cautery according to the amount of pus; apply a cautery on that in the lowest part of both sides, or do two if it's necessary.
And use handle-like cauteries as instructed.
Section 39.
Concerning the cautery treatment of the womb.
When there is cold and moisture in the womb, and thus pregnancy is prohibited, and the menstrual periods of the patient are corrupted, and their induction is delayed, and abdominal pain occurs, then you should know that this area should be treated with three cauteries around the navel, as we have said for bladder cautery; and apply one or two cauteries in the area where there's pus left behind on both sides, and use handle-like cauteries.
Section 40.
Concerning the cautery treatment for the dislocation of the hip joint.
When moisture accumulates in the area of the hip joint and causes disturbances in its location, and a sign is that the thigh extends over the other when compared between them. The location of the dislocation is found in the patient's thigh bone.
Then you heat the patient's leg at the junction of the water pathway with a point-like cautery, as when testing in the circuit around this point, and because you will try it in the circuit itself just like that, and so that the joint falls to the middle location of the circle.
And regarding the cautery mentioned earlier, its form is applied in the process of cauterizing the stomach.
And if this cautery is not at your disposal, then cauterize it with three other large olive wood cauteries.
And apply the cautery according to the intensity of the pain in the entire chain; then treat that part where it has been healed.
Chapter 41.
On the cauterization of the sciatic vein.
When pain occurs at the junction of water, and it is caused by friction and moisture, healing the leg with what we have said is sufficient, without adding anything else. If there are large humors, then heat the leg with pillules made or artificial ones; then cauterize that area.
And the method of cauterization in this case follows two methods: one with burning medicines, or cauterization with fire.
There are two known methods, of which one involves cauterizing the area at the junction of the width with three triangular cauteries according to this form; and make those well deep. The space between each cautery is the size of the said intensity, and whether it's an olive or large cautery.
May some flames heat the middle spot on the head of the spinal cord where there are four cauteries.
And if you wish, cauterize with the circle as described in the treatment of dislocation of the water canal, that being a circle which encompasses and burns the pain throughout the entire chain.
And this is the method of cauterization for a wet heat when pain adheres to the water and does not extend within the thigh.
And if it extends within the thigh, then cauterize that with two cauteries on the thigh at the place where you will turn the leg which causes pain; and with one cautery over the cleft for four fingers slightly to the part above.
And if it's a knife-like cautery, then the depth of the cautery follows the intensity of the pain in the chain.
And if the leg turns such that the pain is spread between the areas close to the knees, then cauterize there where you turn it with a cautery through three points or four or more if needed.
And if the leg turns such that pain is left in the knee region of the thigh, then cauterize there with a knife-like cautery.
And when performing any cauterization, be careful not to end the cautery point where it burns nerves or major vessels, because thus you may injure or constrict the leg.
And I have seen several of those who will cauterize over the cleft and finally in the cauterization process, with the fire-filled bed that allows the tumor to achieve the foot, and burns through thoroughly destroying all of the foot. And soon an intense abdominal solution occurs, and thus death follows.
And if the pain is in two parts at once, cauterize each according to this method.
And several wise people say about the cauterization of water, this is how it should be done: make a circular shape like a piece of iron where its circumference is as big as one palm; and make its opening according to the thickness of a finger bone or perhaps slightly more.
And inside that circle place another iron; and the spaces between them are the size of a small coin or slightly more; make those circles open in two parts, and the length of these nails is one coin or two coins; and on these make marks with iron to fit inside the circles; this is how it looks:
And place it in the fire until it heats up and emits sparks, then place it on the junction of water, having the leg against the side. And thus cauterize that with three round cauteries in one area.
And then let that heal for three days; and cover it with ointment, letting the opened wound heal for too many days; and treat it with ointments until it is healed.
Albucasis: oh children, of this kind of cauterization we have used some for the fear of examining it, and because of that, we have found those who examine it.
Of those who undergo large cauteries to you, find the place for you.
Cauterize with medicines that stick, you should make two circles each with a perforated arm where the smell of iron's door comes out; let the length of the walls be as long as two nuts or so in their naturalness.
And if the spaces between each are the size of the said intensity; make them below and above, so that they contain themselves among each other according to this form:
And then press on the part of the bladder where the patient is lying, and place your hand on the part of the bladder; and then take some urine and heat it between two circles, and the quality of that should be to a small fire little by little, and keep that for an hour's quantity, and let the patient endure the biting sensation and the adjustment - as if the biting sensation was like from a fire - until the biting sensation ceases.
And then raise your hand to the instrument and remove all the heated water from the bladder with two-fold water.
And then let that (the treatment) last for three days and press on that lump until the color of the adjustment improves, and let that continue for some more days, and speed up their recovery; this is the final stage in young age.
And then cure that with ointment until it's healed.
And if the pain is spread within the thigh or chest, have them lie in the position containing water as it's done in the bladder operation.
And this is how to do urine cautery, and I have written about that in the treatise on correcting medicines. Recipe for the ash from both lime and charcoal is half of each, mix these and pause in a new wave where the part you leave should be pierced by a small rod according to the quantity that fits into their fire.
And then pause by pouring another wave over it, pour live alkali and charcoal into the doubled water which captures those to the size of your finger, and once you understand them under your hand for good compression, let the heat that emerges from the sharp water in the left part of what you've left into the overturned wave.
And then adjust all that water, pour it over live charcoal and new alkali, where this later will have a strong acuity, which is administered in surgical operations of medicine and in cautery of other limbs, where this operation uses fire.
And some of the medicines for which are used to be cauterized broadly, such as thyme and honey, wax in water that have been boiled together.
And Gaulia recounts a procedure and treatment of an ancient operation and treatment for bladder pain and sciatic vein pain, and it is so beautiful that one can see its benefits, and says that no other treatment is needed, and that it is healed in this manner as was recommended, and it strengthens the intestines already within that.
And it should be near a vertigo cure, and if there is no vertigo cure, take fresh fig leaves; then mix this with just a little of oil and place it on the water where the pain is, or on the thigh, or chest, and tie it.
And let it stay for a quantity of three hours or until the patient feels relief from adjustment.
And then put this in a bath and when the body feels reddened, put this on fire, where the pain ceases and they are healed.
And know that one should not use cautery with these medicines but rather facilitate the body's evacuation.
Mays Escorches states that when there is a wound from a goat and the veins are constricted, it quickens their movement; and if you use cautery for them in this way: take wool and heat it with ancient oil, and place it between the elbows and the armpit.
And then take a dried goat wound and apply heat from fire inside which charcoal is made; and then place the patient on wool until it expands. And repeat this process, and do not stop doing this until the tingling sensation from the biting reaches into the water and rests the pain.
This method of cautery is called cow's tail cautery.
Chapter 42.
On the treatment for pain in two [limbs or areas].
Some pains are in two places due to various causes such as impact or striking, or overexertion of evacuation, and by causes similar to those, through the infusion of wet material causing pain.
And cautery is not for all cases but only in this singular type which is done through the effusion of abrasive material.
So understand, facilitate the patient's evacuation with pill forms that resemble them, which are made over two areas where there is pain for three lines according to the length of their body. Because tests in each line require one or more cauteries depending on the tolerance and effectiveness of the patient.
And do the cautery treatment with point cautery.
And if you want, perform three or four point cauteries along the medial clavicular line according to this method:
Chapter 43.
On the treatment for bleeding with cautery at the onset of jaundice.
Several symptoms occur in this illness in infants, and the sign of its onset is that it affects their structure under the skin causing swelling and elevation along with movement.
And you find that in the lower part of the back and the nape area where it begins to rise above other vertebrae.
And when you do this and want to stop it, then apply cautery on the point in a circular manner as follows: Let the cautery be applied over all parts of the spinal column equally.
And if you wish, apply the point of a small or large cautery to the circuit of the spinal column. And let the points be evenly distributed among them.
And then cure the area inside so that it is healed with what we have said.
Make sure that the cautery is not applied to yellowness caused by nerve spasm.
Chapter XLIV.
On gout and joint pain cautery treatments.
When joint pain is caused by cold fluids that permeate every part of the body, and when pain occurs in the feet, it is commonly called gout by doctors.
And thus, how gout caused by friction is cured using the method of treatment and not with remedies for pain, it is then treated with cautery.
And you should apply the cautery near the site of evacuation in the foot's joint circuit using pointed cautery.
And use an olive oil-based cautery, which is its form:
If it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. If the pains ascend within the veins or to other joints, and these points are detected, then apply the olive oil cautery over each vein or three or four times across the entire part of this olive oil cautery.
If these cauteries are necessary for you, then apply the cautery and do not press your hand too much on the cautery before, simply around the size of the cord.
If the pains are in the tendon or both, then apply the cautery that we have mentioned in its chapter.
If the pains are only in the chest and it is called gout, then puncture along the muscle circuit as they move, puncture on those two lines.
If the pains remain in the wrists, then puncture along the muscle circuit on each wrist and over the pulse of the hand.
If the pains occur close to several days or in the arms or muscles, then apply the points of all parts of the aids.
And do not allow the patient to recover well and receive medicines, for if good treatment and perspiration is removed with this cautery, it will lead to healing, God help us.
Chapter XLV.
On gout and joint pain cautery treatments.
When you detect rupture in the lungs and saying that the intestines are coming out before the belly, and this is how they start to happen nearby, then command that the patient leave his food for the day and use mild remedies so that the opening of his stomach can decrease.
And then have the patient follow between your hands on his back, and command him to keep his arms so that there is no more opening or appears of the intestines or hernia.
And then return that to your fingers and try the rupture on the bones of the ankle, marking the end which is similar to half of a circle in the lower parts of the body.
And then heat up the cautery like this:
Let it be red hot and emit sparks. And then return the hernia or intestine to its natural position, and place your hand on the area to prevent it from coming out again.
You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs and placed a cushion under them. Another servant is on their legs, another on their chest, holding their hands.
And then place the cautery on that sign with your hand on the point of the cautery, and guide it into you until you reach the bones of the ankle halfway through the diagonal; repeat this procedure if you have not achieved your goal in the first attempt towards the bone.
And observe the movement of the hernia carefully during your cautery treatment, do not move that hernia too much that might cause death or other serious harm to the patient.
And know that when you use the cautery near the bone, do not perform your operation.
And be aware that the size and measure of the children's cautery should be subtle according to their size and strength.
And then cure the area of the cautery for three days with oil until the scabs from the burn are removed.
And then cure that with other ointments until it is healed.
The patient should lie on their back for 40 days until the wound and injury are sealed.
And be aware that you should limit the patient's food according to the duration of their healing time which stretches out his stomach, and ensure that the hernia does not protrude due to the effort to heal.
And when it is time to remove this after about 40 days, administer food gradually, and keep him for another 40 days.
And let him work less and consume food and drink plenty of water, as well as avoid vigorous activities, so that when he uses this complete regimen for healing, he will recover completely.
And I will explain the treatment of ruptures in other parts of the belly, at the beginning, and it is desired that they do not relax, then you should cauterize this rupture from him using a round red-hot cautery according to its size, let it be as long as the tendon like another third part of his; and then cure that with what we have said, it mustn't be adjusted.
And they would say that for the first time, rupture should be treated with a triangular cautery according to this form, since it is done in attempt:
and a line is placed across the width in the middle beyond the rupture, and another line above it; then place your hand on a triangular cautery; for the first cautery is more delicate and better.
Capitol. 46.
Regarding the treatment of torsion.
When pain persists in some limbs due to impact or percussion and the pain lasts for a long time without benefiting from medicine, then you should treat it with a pointed cautery.
And for the size and smallness of each limb, as well as its properties and development, and the location of the torsion and pain.
So if the first cautery helps, it's good; otherwise, continue with more cauteries; for customarily in those pains, points are made on the limb closest to the body, so that they get the necessary cauterizations inside the patient's body.
Capitol. 47.
Regarding the treatment of leprosy.
Some leprosy lesions are treated with cautery for a long time, and especially if the type of leprosy is due to the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
And when you want to cauterize it, consider if the leprosy is contagious and treat it with what we have said in the division, not this one or that one, and fear for the patient's body that corruption might spread throughout his entire body and all his flesh, then cauterize it at the head with your cautery: on the middle of the head, and on the second closest to you; place your forehead at the end of the hair; and both on two corners; and one behind, on the neck or back.
And finish with your hand on the cautery a little inside where you start in the mouth, and if his movements have changed, so that his expiration of thick vapours is alleviated; then cauterize over the wax according to what is needed.
And if the leprosy has already spread to the body and is manifestly evident, then you should treat it with those cauteries that we have said for the head; and on the cautery over the tip of the nose, and on two cauteries over each cheekbone, and on two cauteries over the two neck vertebrae, and five on his shoulders, and a large one on the neck near the spine, and one on the shoulder blade, and two on his elbows, and one on each elbow, and two on his thighs and one on each thigh, and two on his knees, and two on his muscles; then cauterize it over all joints of those mentioned of the limbs and feet, and on every heel of his feet, and on his flesh depressions.
And guard yourself from the nerves that are on the shaft do not burn those.
Some lesions are treated with a cautery on the bone of the pharynx and another in the mouth of the stomach, and another over the oesophagus.
And know that the more accurately you apply cauteries, the better they heal and the less pain the patient feels; and know that the body of the patient is already numbed by the cautery, just like when you are sore from exercising.
And know that the cauteries should be large or small according to the limbs and joints as indicated by the types of tools.
And after that, treat the cautery with cornmeal mixed with honey and another treatment until it heals.
Capitol. 48.
Regarding the treatment of numbness or paralysis.
When a limb is numb or paralyzed and has been treated with medicines, bandages, and it hasn't healed, then you should treat the numb limb with cauteries according to its size or smallness.
And let your cautery go slightly inside the fold of the calf. And after that, treat it with ointment until it heals.
And some lesions are treated with a cautery for numbness which affects the limbs and feet, as well as the neck vertebrae, you can see the nerves that serve that limb, and the numbness is relieved.
Don't assume this unless you are knowledgeable about the anatomy of limbs and the exit of all moving body parts' nerves.
Capitol. 49.
Regarding the treatment of warts that are characteristic of a disease.
When warts are old and do not respond to any of the ointments of medicine for them, then you should treat them with a preon cautery for as long as it takes until the whiteness and color of the wart change, and the color of the wart changes.
And after that, treat it with cornmeal and lentils mixed with roasting oil and leaves of rhubarb, or with pigeon or apricot vinegar from each ingredient, mix half of each, then use this mixture to cover the area until it heals.
Capitol. 50.
Regarding the treatment of boils or abscesses.
When cancer begins and one wants to stop it, then apply a circular cautery on that area around the patient's body in the path where it has spread.
And the wise say that it should be treated with a circular cautery in the middle place; however, I do not see this way, fearing that it might be an ulcer, as I have seen this several times.
And it is recommended to treat it with a circular cautery in the path of the patient as we have said, or with multiple cauteries.
End of chapter.
Regarding the treatment of ulcers through cautery.
When some ulcers take time to mature, and this is due to an excess causing it, or because of the patient's condition, which weakens with age and has few vitality, or through time, and you want to expedite the maturation of the ulcer; then apply multiple small-pointed cauteries around the area; and let that excess be expelled during maturation.
And if you wish for the perforation of the ulcer with cautery, then heat up the cautery which is in this form: and place it at the center of the ulcer so that the needle penetrates.
And if you place the cautery in that location where you have set it, for when your arm's blood is relieved; then treat that area until it heals.
End of chapter 52.
Regarding the treatment of corrosions with cautery.
Corrosion is a spreading decay in the member, which corrodes it as wood burns when exposed to a dry fire.
Then if you notice the corrosion in the place that tolerates the cautery as fire burns wood, then heat up small pointed cauteries and larger according to what is suitable for that place where it corrodes.
And apply the cautery around completely from every side, until you eliminate all the corrosion and do not leave any cause for it.
And let that area rest for three days, and place on the cauterized spots, oil previously mixed until all the scabs are eliminated and all the corrosion is gone.
And treat it with a meat-softening ointment afterwards.
If in three days the healthy meat grows where there was corrosion, that is good; but if not, then apply the cautery over what has weakened in those corroded areas again.
And corrosion is treated with some doses of a quick medicine, which that is half near the location of cautery. However, applying cautery with fire is much easier and faster.
And I have already mentioned the treatment of this with quick medicine in the division, so take it when you have need from it.
End of chapter 53.
Regarding the treatment of warts and similar conditions.
Warts are observed in the various parts of the patient's body that one calls a wart, and it is a large cause, deeply inserted, which affects the skin; and applying cautery to these follows two methods, namely, with fire-cautery and with boiling water cautery.
Applying fire-cautery is to ignite the cautery like a small flame, which is made of iron according to the quantity that contains the wart from every part, and it should have thin grooves.
And let that ignition rest on the wart, and then move your hand with the cautery around the wart until the cautery penetrates to the depth of the wart. Let it rest for three days until your arm begins to itch. And apply a paste made from dried mallow leaves mixed with salt to that area, and let the paste rest on that for a night, so that this may be eliminated from its roots.
And treat the area with a meat-producing ointment until it heals.
And if they are not eradicated, and warts occur on the surface of the body, mainly on the chest and the feet, then you should apply cautery with boiling water in those areas; take a small ball of iron or of charcoal or of ashes from burning wood, place that over the wart; heat up some boiling water in the ball slightly, hold your hand, and move that around with the compression of your hand all over it, press the edge of the ball against the root of the wart, and the hot water will find its way to the root of the cautery; then let the patient endure the taste of the hot water for an hour, and afterwards remove that, so that this wart coming from its roots may be eliminated.
And do it like this for each one and then proceed with the other, making sure to cover all of them in your body.
And treat those pus that come from the roots of warts, which allow meat-producing ointments to regenerate the skin.
End of chapter 54.
Regarding treatment with cautery for tremors.
When experiencing a tremor due to friction on nerves or because of fever from a friction cause, or for any other similar cause, you should apply four cauteries or five over the ribs of the back, between each rib with one cautery; and on their feet, and above the stomach, place an olive oil cautery.
And the patient's tremor subsides, hastening the recovery of the illness from friction.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
Regarding the treatment through cautery for injuries to the heart.
When in the body there are external injuries and pus-filled wounds that are made of thick corrupted materials; therefore, when they appear at the beginning stage, it should be treated by cautery over the entire part of the fistula using a fine point of a firebrand stick; or one with an elongated erestology; or using a slow lens-shaped cautery.
And some boils are to be treated with cautery at the beginning of their expulsion according to this method; they are not to be incised, and the excess is removed by doing so, and it heals those.
However, it should be treated with an evacuation followed by phlebotomy.
Translation for "Capitole lv." is:
Regarding the treatment through cautery of a flow from an infection caused by the incision of a blood vessel.
Too many boils that cause bleeding from a blood vessel should be treated by incising the boil which is prone to rupture, or by making an incision for abscesses or cautery of the limb, and then proceed with this method, it will be difficult to keep back such bleeding.
So when such happens with any of them, you grip the pillow with your hand at the opening of the blood vessel, and place your hand over that area to hold the boil under which the bleeding remains until you do this with your stated method, so that it doesn't escape.
And place in the fire the olive cauteries small and large, for many numbers, and blow on those inside where there is a spark.
And take one small or large from those depending on the place and wound in which the artery has ruptured, over that vein gently blowing until you have held your stated method, then cauterize inside so that it is cut off and restrained that bleeding.
And if the blood is expelled from the opening of the artery when you hold your stated method and remove the cautery, then take another olive stick from among those in the fire that are prepared for this, so do not cease to do this one after another until the bleeding is restrained.
And be careful not to burn the nerves here, and that it brings other mischief to the patient.
And know that when blood flows from the artery, it is not possible to restrain the bleeding in those cases, especially when the artery is large, unless you use one of four methods: or use a cautery like this which we have mentioned, or extraction when it cannot be removed, where if it can be removed its extremities are burned and the bleeding is restrained, or bind it with a string or bandage by making it tight, or place them on medicines whose virtue is to restrict the bleeding; they should be strengthened with powder in the tightening of the binding.
Let whoever administers a decent restraint of this bind with a bandage and by tightening the fabric or due to causes of burning and appearance, do not apply anything but tar.
If this happens with any and the doctor or medicine is not present, then apply the aforementioned pause on that vein opening as we have said, and understand to make a large tightening of it inside so that the bleeding is stopped from the major part of the wound, and over the artery let this not be removed; and above the artery rub with water that has been vigorously rubbed out inside where the bleeding is cooled and thickened; and take care in which should be cauterization or the need for medicine.
Regarding incisions, punctures, and blisters, as well as phlebotomy and boils, and their appearances.
We have already discussed in the first chapter about all illnesses for which cautery with fire is suitable and medicine that causes burning, and the occasions and reasons for it, and the tools needed for these, as well as I arranged the chapters of the rise to the feet.
And I proceed in this chapter for that purpose, so that the one who seeks it may be relieved, then about what has been requested.
And before I begin this, let it be known that in this chapter you will find what is mentioned in the first chapter of cautery.
And because of that you must be cautious, for in this operation there are many boils that need evacuation which involve blood from which life is sustained by the application to the vein or incision over the abscess or opening for expulsion or purification of the boil or removal of arrow or incision into the cheek and their appearances. And all of those are accompanied by fear, trembling, and in most cases death for them.
And I warn you that do not let this happen to you which is an error, for some boils must be treated using methods of men and other methods of illnesses. And among them is one that dies from their illness and this means death for him, also due to the severity of what he finds in his illness, and because of the length of his illness, and fear which means death.
And that one gives you their advice and it is called this, you are hoping for that health, and their illness is harmful.
And indeed, you must agree with the one who comes to see you of whom this manner is like; and your caution must be greater than greediness and your desire; and do not assume any cause about it except for certain knowledge that verifies what you should do, and through which a possible success can come.
And use in the treatment of all your sick people with prediction and indication of what leads to their health, for in that is your help regarding acquisition of fame and memory, approval and glory.
Oh, children, God listens to your true understanding and does not withhold direction and protection from you, for that is in His hand.
And I have ordered this chapter to be distinguished by chapters according to what precedes in the chapter of cautery, for treatment of the head to feet, so that you may enjoy what you request about this and what you need.
First chapter.
On the treatment of water which is contained in a child's head.
Know that this sickness, which often affects children, is due to the heat of their head and when old age begins, it increases in the child's head causing pain.
And some swellings for unknown reasons which are not understood.
I have not seen this sickness in anyone other than children; and for all those whom I have seen dying, it seems to me that they are marked by death, and thus, I see a finished work in them.
And I have seen that a child's head which was full of water, the top of his head was always so magnificently swollen that he could not put it down due to the size of his head, and more than the humidity increased inside that became death.
And this moisture either gets added between the membrane and bone, or is added outside on the skull.
If the moisture is between the membrane and bone, and the pus is little, then you must make an incision in the middle of the head at one crack across its breadth, and let the length of the crack be about two fingers wide so that the moisture can flow out, and this is how surgery should be done:
And if the moisture is more increased and the pus is larger, then there are here two cracks done like this:
And if the moisture is outside the bone, its sign is that you open all parts of the head's seams and when you press this against your own hand to its inner parts, water is squeezed out, which is not concealed like this. And if you make incisions in the middle of the head at three cracks according to this manner:
And in the incision extract all the moisture; and strengthen these cracks with bandages and pillows; and on the fifth day apply oil over it, then remove the stitches and treat the wound with tallow and ointments, and strengthen the head evenly; and feed the patient with dry meat of little moisture until their member is comforted and healed.
And another way of incision is to consider the size of the pus collection and water accumulation which some swellings may be more at the occipital region, or in front, or on the right, or on the left; therefore pay attention to where the pus appears and the filling with water, and do this according to what is best for you.
And observe that do not cut the artery and allow fluid veins to drain out of infection so you can evacuate moisture from it.
Second chapter.
When it happens in some catarrh or trauma to the nose or feet, and it is old this condition, and you do not consult about its treatment with medicines, then the primary treatment here is incision of those two arteries.
And when you want to incise those that cause the patient's head pain, then rub the area with a hard cloth so that you can see the arteries, and strengthen the neck of the patient with some cloth; and consider where is the pulse; and the places above the places which are close to the ears, they may be hidden in some people.
And on the artery apply tallow, and incise each one at the opening of each sharp part leading into the bone, and let this be according to the breadth of the head.
And if you want, enter the tallow inside the artery and thread this through the incisions in its parts above.
And let the length of the incision be about two fingers long and adjusted, so when any vein is incised, the pulse is stilled at its exit point; which beats cease through frequent jumps.
And if the artery does not appear at the centering point, then you must measure from the ear the quantity of space about three fingers wide, and apply tallow there, and make an incision into the bone.
And whatever removes blood is a quantity of wine one uncia. And strengthen the patient with more or less wine depending on the quantity which appears from the strength of the person and filling of the artery.
And then consider the wound; and if there remains above the bone any cause of the skull, then you must incise it so that no pus is formed.
And then strengthen the wound with pins and strips of linen, and treat that with ointment from within to be healed.
Chapter III.
On the extraction of the arteries which are in the temples.
When an old headache or intense pain occurs, due to moisture from agriculture and the quality of those pains in the temples, or if it's an old headache that strongly resembles them, then we treat with the methods of healing medicine, but this doesn't solve the issue. In these ailments, we proceed with the extraction of the arteries in the temples, or the cauterization of those areas as we have demonstrated.
The method of the operation and extraction is as follows: the patient removes their skin where it's located in the temples; understand that there's an apparent artery in the temple area, which you can see by its shape from their pulse, this is usually hidden in few individuals due to its intensity.
And if it's hidden, then the patient should strengthen their neck with some cloth; and place over the area a hard cloth or vaporize the location with hot water until you can see the artery clearly. And then take the spatula, which has this shape: And then you burn the vessel with it in such a way that you reach the artery; and afterwards place on it oil and extract that from the superficial parts until you extract that of the vessel and discover those of the tunics which are left there, from all sides.
If the artery is delicate, then wrap it at its extremity with an onion peel, and proceed to remove a part of it according to its length which allows for the stretching of its extremities and their contraction. And do not create bleeding; because if they are not cut, no blood will rise up from them altogether.
And then evacuate a little of the blood. Inside three times.
And if the artery is large, then cover it in two places with double strength thread or with cords long, and do not cut it until after the healing of the wound, making sure there's no blood flow.
And then cut out the excess that is between two threads; and do this either right away or another time.
And if you wish, cauterize that with a cautery inside the hole, using a surgical knife until its extremities are incised, and stay in the place of that half-done work.
And it's better for the patient if they have fever or are prone to chills; because cautery is caused by those causes that help in the final stages of moisture, therefore it's better in adolescence.
And cover the extraction of the arteries that you cut to your liking, they should be placed over the patient's clean dust, and treat them with dry medicines cause them to produce flesh and in heat until they are healed.
And if during your work another opening occurs and there is bleeding from the artery, then you must stop the blood flow, either with a cautery or by filling that cut area, and hold your hand until the bleeding stops. And if none of those causes are present to you at that moment, then place your hand on the area while the bleeding is slowed down, and wet that area with cold water until the heat subsides, and strengthen according to what is done.
And what is lighter in the extraction of arteries is that you cauterize the vein with this type of cautery having two needles, because you have placed both areas on the needle, and then remove some of them, with fire, until they reach the hole and cut the vein into two places, so that it becomes extended where there are its extremities, which are not hardened by this cautery.
And this is how the cautery looks:
And let the heat of both needles be constant. However, if there is more heat than two needles it's better, as long as they are sharp like two needles close to each other and do not cut the flesh at speed.
Therefore, if there is any thickness, heat the fire in those and cut the flesh slightly.
And this work is better in all works and much lighter.
And let the space which is between two needles be the size of that mentioned.
Chapter IV.
On treating bodies with sharp and sour tears from the nose.
When it's sharp tears, and those are the bodies of veins which lie above the nose in front, and this isn't cured by any means according to medicine, then the patient's face already reddens and they walk as if it were a dance of mosquitoes, their noses being exhausted, moistened such that their skin is known, and their eyelids are scratched by the sharpness of the tears, they are old in treating those with this operation, so I'll proceed with this treatment.
And you order the patient to scrape off the skin that is on their forehead, and then make three equal distance slits on the forehead according to its length. And if the length of the slit is two fingers: one slit should be equally distant from the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second according to the length of a small movement of the tears which are in the lacrimal area, and the third on the other side.
And protect yourself from the beginning of the arteries which are in two sides, and extend your hand along the continuation of both jaws. And if it is the size of an opening that needs three fingers to measure its quantity.
And if it's for you a sponge or moistened cloth, take them off until the sweat dries on them.
And place the tip of two sharp points, this is the form of the incision for him: that starts from the division between the thighs and continues to the second opening. Remove everything of that whole chain that is between two openings at the cheek which is above the bone, and do this for the incision to continue to the second opening. And place the tip of this tool without the point and enter into the first incision another blade, which is called a scalpel, sharp on one side and blunt on the other.
And place the sharp end of this tool should cut off the associated flesh, and place the tip of it inside the bone, and insert this between that and reaches the middle crack, and cut off everything related blood vessels descending from the head to the throat.
May this incision continue up to that appearance of the bone, and do this in the middle crack between the other crack.
And when a quantity of sweat has drained out, press on the places where the sweat is concentrated with hot cloths.
And place yourself on each crack where it is warm, and place there the powdery substances of wine and oil mixed with wine, and remove if it does not cause pus to form.
And on the third day loosen the bandage and administer large quantities of warm water or soup, and then cure this with balm in oil among others so that the wounds are healed.
Capital .v.
Of the treatment of coughs by cathartic and descending throat parts from within the head.
When in the case of a hot cathartic and continuous, and sometimes emptying out the throat from the patient's thighs, and their examination is well done, and the eyelids are ulcerated with their hair loss, and at the back of the head there is acute toothache and consequent straining, then you should know for these occurrences that the materials and cathartics do not come from mere veins of the internal parts.
And the best treatment for those is this: tell the patient to scratch their forehead, and then make an incision in that area of the forehead right in the middle, a small one by the width (and start from the crack on the left temple into the right; and the incision goes into the bone; and extend your hand along the bumps of the temples which are rough for chewing), so that the bone is exposed.
Dry all the sweat with a sponge or on linen and then place between the two edges of the crack with old linen or on linen pieces. And after that, strengthen it from above with powdery substances of wine and oil so as not to cause pus formation.
And when you loosen this and that the pustule has already diminished, then understand that it washes out the bone starting from his navel flesh, and then treat this with the regimen of drying which makes the flesh sweat as if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of mastic gum, mix them, make a paste from them, and apply this remedy to these wounds in the native flesh.
Captulo .vi.
Chapter VI.
All causes that cause pain in the ears are of four kinds, some or they are mineral like gravel, such as iron and salt, others or they are plant-based such as mustard or fava beans, or they are fluid-causing substances such as water and mixed wine and similar to them, or some animal.
And therefore when gravel causes pain in the ear or another similar cause from those causes that do not settle and grow in the ear, then place the ear to the sun, and if you see the gravel, then distill some substance of vinegar or wormwood oil for it, and then administer the extraction from this, and make the person sneeze with the condition, and cover their nose when they anticipate sneezing. And place some pieces of cloth or wool on the circuit of the ear, and spread the ear over them, those patches that are heated by these causes.
And if it is not heated, then administer extraction from this with the tool called epigean bistoury, which is the form:
And if it has been treated with an epigean bistoury, good. Otherwise, then administer the extraction from this on a sharp stick made of wax-duplicated wood.
And if it has not been treated with this either, then make a hollow in wax and place the end of the tube into the ear canal and seal around the edge of the tube with softened wax or oil, so that it does not overflow except for the tube. And extract from your nose against strong attraction, those that are heated as we have described.
And if it is not heated in this manner either, then take alum or vinegar which has been strained through wool, and place some small amounts of it on the tip of your tongue, and apply this moderately around it. And then insert him into the ear canal for ease, and remove the moisture from the ear.
And so if none of the causes we have listed is found, then you must prepare to cut that one ahead of time so as not to encounter an abscess or cramp.
And the way to cut that is when you start, touch the patient's saphenous vein and remove the blood according to the nature of it, and then make that incision between your hands and turn the ear towards the parts above, and create a small crack in the root of the ear; you must press the veins of the patient where it has been pinched by you. And let the crack be in the shape of a crescent moon so that it reaches the bone. If the bone is intact, leave it as long as possible with suitable instruments; and while you work on this crack during that time use speed, and treat it until it is healed.
And if the cause that affects the ear is one of the fats that grows and inflates, then you administer treatment and extraction to it; but if it does not suit your disposition, then take a thin strip under tension according to this form: And apply the excision of that fat which is in the ear.
And don't stop when you think that it is already moistened by the ear's vapor, and place this one in small lumps, and properly extract from those to the nails or with a subtle gesture, or with an incision as we described, so that the extraction of it is relieved.
And in the water which enters into the ear canal, make the patient sneeze as soon as he starts, and fill his ear with some old cotton wool, and place it over that ear where there is water. If this way of treatment works, then it's good; otherwise, take small and thin stones and lemons according to their length, shape them into balls and warm them a little in the fire, and let the patient insert one of these into his ear canal and blow on the part of that stone inside the ear. So don't stop with this method until all the water is treated within it.
So don't stop with this method until all the water is treated within it. And once the water has been treated, you should use paper or onion.. and put one end of it into the ear and extend the other end into fire so that it burns the upper part.
And place another onion and do this process as many times until all the water is treated, and remove it using a siphon, as described above.
And if there's an animal inside that ear canal, if it's small, like that and similar to the patient, treat it in the same way as we described for the division; but if it's a large thing causing it from within, then administer its removal through gestures and fingers. The cause of this is easier than all other causes that affect the ear.
And when dealing with the removal of worms that develop in the ear, if you treat it using what we described for division and in the section on distillations and do not let your treatment affect, then observe the ear under sunlight.
And if any worm-related cause appears here, then remove it with gestures or with subtle tools; but if there's no such cause, then take a tube and stretch out this one which is the form of that: And insert the subtle end into the ear according to the amount that suits your patient's need; and then suck through it strongly, doing this several times until all the worms are treated.
And if it doesn't suit your disposition, then fill and seal the circuit of the tube with beeswax as we've described; then administer distillations that have already expanded the previous ones in worm treatment, which you can find detailed in the section on distillations.
And let your discharge be at the place where you pour in medicinal oils into the ear with this tool whose form is like this: And make it of silver or reed, stretch them out, in which there should be a small tube, and on the plane surface.
And make it so that when you're dealing with the size of the canal's cavity here, if there's any necessity for it. And if you want, take the reed and wrap it around the descending part of it with cotton, then pour oil into the cavity of the ear opening, or juice from some herb, or whatever you choose among these medicines in the tube - and that is inside the ear - and then insert the reed with cotton above it and press it until your hand feels the oil being expelled into the cavity of the ear opening and the patient senses the oil internally.
And whatever is inside the ear should be warmed by fire slightly. And remember that the distillation you do in the ear should not be too hot, because the ear medicines do not tolerate this.
Chapter VII.
On the treatment of wax blockages in the ears.
Sometimes, some children inherit abdominal swellings from their mothers that are not perforated, and this happens in some men as well, wax blockage in the meat of the ear due to pus or flesh there; and this wax blockage is sometimes made at the entrance point of the ear channel which does not allow passage through movement, and sometimes it's outside the parts.
When something happens in the stomach of a patient, which is not comprehended by experienced doctors, it's in the more difficult situations for treatment.
And when you can achieve that, just hold the patient's ear to the sun and observe in that manner. And so if you notice an apparent protrusion, open it with a subtle incision of the kind this is shaped like:
If the end where its width is small, with one part sharp and the other not; and let the incision be of two lines long, so that it doesn't hurt the ear.
And if the protrusion is through soft flesh in the ear or at the back of it, then make that with a subtle incision and penetrate it vigorously until all the flesh is inside.
And if the protrusion is in the inner part of the ear, then take a sharp line and carefully dig that with fire a little, and then place it at the back of the ear.
And if you have felt a protrusion due to the ear being crushed, relieve the pressure on it with ease; and be careful not to hurt the nerves of the ear.
And then, in the ear, place a cloth according to the size of the protrusion which you have wrapped in Egyptian ointment; do this for several days until you are sure of the healing process; or dip something into water and grind it over the wound with the third substance and use it; and if you notice that the ear has healed, then proceed as follows: crush the substance and substitute it with another one which you cover in bandage made from cloth soaked with rubbed oil, until the pus pocket drains out; and continue to care for this until it is fully recovered.
If there is a leakage of pus, then immerse the sponge or cloth in water and place it over the ear, and use another treatment that restricts the pus flow, which is mentioned in the distillation treatise.
Chapter VIII.
Chapter VIII: On treating atezil, which occurs on the eyelids.
Atheyl which occur on the eyelids of some people are moist, while others have them in dry form.
Then cut them with tweezers or scissors, and divide the parts of their roots from their stumps, and apply this substance to the affected areas after grinding it.
If there is pain accompanied by pus discharge, then you cauterize them with a small, pointed cautery tool.
And the best cauterization is to have the incisions close and when the swollen areas return only if there's any remaining cause of their roots; and when they are cauterized with fire, those roots burn up and do not return.
Chapter IX.
Treatment for granuloma that occurs on the eyelids of adults.
Swollen areas that appear on the eyelids of adults may be caused by certain reasons which accumulate into granuloma in terms of their size and hardness. Thus, due to its size, it's called a granuloma.
And there is an addition of thick moisture on the eyelid that you and I observe.
Therefore, the operation in this case is that if you observe the granuloma extending within it from beneath the eyelid and is hard to touch all over; and its cause is minor.
Then cut it across its width, and carefully dig out the whole area until it's empty, and hold that with tweezers and remove it.
And if the figure is large, then you adjust it with stitches; and care for this until it is healed.
And if there's little of it, you won't encounter any harm with that because the heat from this restores and renews this.
And if the large one is declining towards the inner parts of the eyelid you should remove from inside the surface. Then cut this eyelid and hold this granuloma with tweezers, another that you use to start, press this in all directions, and if the eyelid has been stretched by incision, there won't be any cause for concern.
And close to the incision, wash the eye with salty water; and care for this area until it is healed.
Chapter X.
On treating excoriation on the upper eyelid of a person.
Excarnation is the gray matter that's produced in the tunics of the upper eyelid, mostly affecting children, aggravating their health and causing them to have catarrh; and they can't see the brightness of the sun for which their tears are continually falling on it.
And you often have to let those irritants act on their faces all the time, and they sleep with their faces. Their eyelids are wet on their eyelashes, which are already covered in puffiness and the imminent appearance of excoriation is at their eyes; and when you press this area with your own fingers, you hear a scraping sound coming from those.
And one surgical method is in that when the ear rests on your head, and you place a cloth under him/her and make wax; you make a circle according to the amount of pus all around, and then press this over it while pressing with your fingers from all sides so that pus scraping accumulates in the middle of the circle. Then cut in the middle of this moisture with an incision across its width, and the incision should not be larger than the one made during tuberculin puncture.
When in the hand position you must cut through the palm completely until it reaches the wrist bone; once in the later positions process the wrist by cutting along a white fatty tissue line according to the shape of the wrist.
Then extract those on the sheets which you have enveloped between your fingers at the far parts, and move them with your right and left hand until they are dispersed.
And be careful not to tighten in the cut so that at the opening, it does not go too far and you don't let it down.
If it does not reach your arm in the beginning of the cut, then adjust inside the cut by making a small facilitation while processing the arm; and then extract that as we said earlier; and prepare cloths for him in water and wine to soak them; place those over the area and strengthen those with powder.
And in this way, they pass salt on it while placing that at the cavity of the cut to ensure that what remains from that moisture is removed.
And then treat it until it is healed.
If it happens that a boil appears at the spot, then treat it with plaster bandages until it is healed.
Chapter 11.
On measuring the pulse.
When on the eyelids of the eyes are natural marks and are ancient, then those are to be considered as symptoms of illnesses such as constant tears, swelling of the eyelids and the inner lining where this is a cause for destruction of the eye which is called ophthalmia. The treatment can be done in four ways: or with a hot cautery; or with an acute medicine as mentioned earlier in the chapter on cauterization; or it's treated by ligation and suturing; or through needles as I shall say later.
And thus cut where you place the eye's head in its right position; then convert the eyelid of the eye to your left hand, and if it has been converted, that's good; and if not, insert a needle into the one that is at the source of pus within the eyelid, and make the needle penetrate through from below, and this should be - close to the edge of the eyelid where the hair grows - close to the skin, then pull out the string above on the eyelid, and convert it back.
And then create at the opening of the part inside the eyelid, have the skin adjusted to the surface incident to the major lacrimal duct towards the lacrimal sac; and then extract the string and place the eyelid with a small amount of cumin or cloth powder on it, and place your hand over the eyelid to test, as if it were a mallow leaf.
However, when measuring the shape according to the amount of elevation of the eyelid, which has already varied among humans, for those who have a significant incision in the upper eyelid proportional to its level of swelling.
And then place on the surface over the two lines you've marked, starting from the major lacrimal duct towards the minor lacrimal duct. And if your cut is close to natural skin as thick as the thickness of a king.
And then place the needle at one of the two corners of the cut, and then scrape that whole area, and adjust it according to the incision; apply both lips with glue or a fine thread over the tongue or wool, clean up any debris, and adhere what is excessive from the threads onto some causes causing swelling if you wish to do so, otherwise don't treat.
And then let the thread stitches of the needles heal within three or four days, and treat that accordingly.
And if you want, let the wound undergo its stitches, and treat it with things that dry and constrict, so when the eyelid is raised you seal off the wound area and add to him; however, stitching should be better, therefore this was done by our predecessors.
However, in his anxiety about the eye, it is a good operation, and not in his fear.
And it's another way to correct this, and that is having the shape of a mallow leaf on the eyelid, then elevate the eyelid by three uncia measurements, spreading them according to this form:
If it's not possible to do this, use the uncia measurements, and if this isn't equal, then take a needle with thread on it, place that in the middle of the shape, and place another string close to the major lacrimal duct, and the other string according to near the minor lacrimal duct, then adjust between your fingers the strings for equality, then raise your hand up as high as you're raising this amount, lift the whole cut area like we've described.
And adjust both lips of the wound for stitching, and treat it until it's healed.
If you encounter an abscess, then perform your incision or cut, drain that abscess with gauze and resemble it to the patient, applying ointment.
And sometimes some inflammations under the eyelid that their skin turns, then cut as you use according to what we've said about incision; however, stitching is more artificial in certain cases.
Cauterization with needles follows this form: And you should convert the eyelid and divide the figure that is inside according to what I have recounted; then, with skill, make two canals or two subtle stars whose length is according to the length of the eyelid and their width is proportionate to the width of the socket. And you have already penetrated into the extremities of each part, where you have the threads.
Then add whatever subtlety under this that is excessive on the eyelid of the eye, and strengthen the threads of each part with a strong tension, then smooth it for a few days; until the tension causes the wound to heal and be discharged and then falls off by itself.
If it has been delayed, then break the thread at the corners, and afterwards cure the wound until it is healed.
Then when it is solidified, the eyelid is elevated and the skin does not pinch.
And this is how you make two canals according to this form: Make the quantity of length and width neither too much nor too little.
Chapter XII.
On the elevation of painful skin on the eye when the skin is hard.
When the skin is unnatural, hard and rough and painful in the eyes, then the operation on it consists of taking a subtle needle and placing it gently in each of its soft spots, and adjust the extremities of it so that you pinch each one with a subtle gesture. And let the length of the needles be as wide as a palm.
And then make another subtle needle under this one quickly, and pinch the extremities of that if you want.
And then place the patient's head in your position so that it is close to the sun, for your work will be demonstrated, as this is a subtle and small operation.
And then insert the needle into the adjusted edge of the skin where there is a need for skill, and let it penetrate the eyelid smoothly until you remove that from the natural skin.
And then pull the skin over and insert it into the incision, and let there be one or two or three threads and no more.
And then pull your hand into that so that the skin is pulled out to the incision in the eyelid towards the natural skin.
If it is pulled out to the incision and not torn by the skin, pull out to the incision in the parts towards the needle which you have made at that point, so that from there the pulling will be out of the track.
And take that away from the eye view, then you will pull out smoothly and the needle, and cleanse each one and harden the eye, and leave the bandage for two or three days until the skin adheres to its place and grows over it good flesh.
And if the skin is too short, then you adjust a long hair of natural hair, and elevate it towards that, or leave it so that it grows approximately over some space, and then elevate it.
Chapter XIII.
On the treatment of elevating which happens above the eyelid.
When it appears in the eye of elevation, and when it is contraction of the eyelid when it is contracted within them, or on the right or left part, due to bad consolidation of wound or section or cautery, and it is called leporine, this elevation is natural or accidental, and it is made by consolidation of wound or section or cautery, or in imitation of their deformities.
The method of the operation in this case is that you should cut through that consolidation and separate its layers from it, then place a layer of linen cloth between those areas and bind them together until they are healed.
And do not cover it with any kind of wound care that would dry out, because if you do this the elevation will return worse than before for there will be no time to heal.
Use these causes that soften in this way as with fenugreek, soak it in water at which the linen is submerged for a short time or a daisy balm, which turns liquid with some of the oils, immerse the cloth in that and treat with that.
And the treasure of your treatment is to perforate through all means until none remains according to the shape that appears at the beginning.
And this operation which we have mentioned is merely a correction of elevation that does not return the form of the place according to what appears in front.
Chapter XIV.
On treating elevation which occurs on the eyelid.
This elevation which occurs on the eyelid is called vertebre elevation; and it can be either natural or accidental.
Accidental elevation is caused by wounds, cuts, cauterizations or other similar things.
The method of the operation for this is that you should take a needle with two threads and place it in the flesh, then make it pass through the left lacrimal into the right lacrimal, so that the thread reaches to both ends of the tissue.
And extend the flesh on the sides above the needle and place it with the needle, then cut widely in the cavity. And therefore, if you return the eyelid according to how it covers, that is good; and if not, take the lid and pause it in the cut figure, and on that convert the eyelid, and make the two slits at the end of the eyelid, leave them.
And if the ends of the two slits at the corners of the incision you made inside where they meet, and an angle is formed between them when they come together, forming their own figure.
And this figure is the Greek letter: the lambda.
And approximately stop the skin there in quantity as much as the tip of your finger from your side, so that it secures the eyelid.
And approximately adjust the separated parts and sew those with the thread of the wool; and then treat those with what we have said about moisturizing medicines and in the soaks where it is healed.
And if it's cut through by a slit or stitch or cautery, then when you open that to make a flat slit on the skin of the eyelid according to what has been done. And approximately separate with the soak between two lips as we said.
In the sum of the discourse on treating an incision when it's above or below, that flows in your operation, according to how it is prepared like an incision, and that one is in shape of various spots.
And the artisans always prepare tools in every way that is possible for them to allow him back into his natural form or close enough to it, and this patient according to what suits him from the operation and the instruments in their most convenient positions.
Chapter XV.
On the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
When this solidification happens in many men, ensure that the eyelid is above against the album of the eye, and forbid its ease of movement and natural actions. Therefore when you insert the tip of your finger into the eyelid, lift it up or extend it towards the corner.
And you will cut the adhesion against a fine surface, which is not at the sharpness of the incisions, having it blunt slightly so that the patient does not worry about the operation, and leave the surface alone to prevent the eye from losing its sharpness.
And let your incision gently remove that adhesion with ease, so that the eyelid returns to its natural shape and the entire adhesion is healed.
And you will place in the eye salty water which you wash with; or distil from junia dissolved in water.
And you will separate between the eyelid and the eye with an ointment, and place on the eye wool immersed in egg white, and then for several days use remedies that help to heal it.
Chapter XVI.
On incision of the eyelid and the elevation of flesh in the tear duct region.
Knowing that the eyelid can be done in two ways, one is nervous and resembles a hard fine ciphac; or it is non-nervous, resembling white moisture congealed, which when you touch it, or forces that to take on an inch, it is removed and the inch does not stick in it.
And both species do not begin until the main tear duct gradually covers the view and prohibits light and eye movement.
The method of working in the operation is that the patient holds their head in its usual place, and then you open their eyes, lift the eyelid with your hand, and carefully remove the eyelid at the corner and extend it upwards. And you take a needle and insert a horsehair or a cowhide or calf leather or something similar, or double the tip of the needle gradually and fix that in the middle of the eyelid, then push it through the needle, and tie that to the thread; extend this upwards, remove from the hair the part at the edge of the needle which secures the pupil. And you follow that through the hair up to the back of your head.
And you will cut the rest in the direction of the tear duct with a fine surface or small cuts, and removes the flesh of the tear duct naturally so that there is no continuous flow of tears through this operation.
And sometimes the eyelid under the sun in this position or with the hand, as we have said, and then remove it from the surface of which this is its shape:
And remember that when touching the surface do not touch the corneal epithelium and that this happens in it during rupture, and that the pupil is perforated.
The operation heals in the eye a little of salted water or distilled from junia made with vinegar, and leaves that for another day; and then treats that with what is done internally so that it heals.
And if the eyelid is not nervous and you cannot insert the needle, or it does not stick with this amount of the inch, then for this type of eyelid it is treated with medicines, and it heals in this way as I have recommended in the division.
And if you want to divide that, then open the eye of the patient and take a fine surface with a sharp tool in this manner: In subtlety. And if you notice that it is being rarified and confused and concentrated in that part, then blow into the sickle-cut of your left hand or into the cut on your head or into salted water, and pour the fumes inside until the other day.
And then continue with that operation until all that is yours has been removed, otherwise let the opposite pus come out in the fumes, and then you will see it, and heal from the beginning the pus within so that it may be cured.
And continue with your operation on her until she is healed.
The eruption of the lacrimal flesh, if there is pain in the fumes due to great injury, suspend it until tomorrow; and cut into that part from time to time, and do not finish the incision so as not to cut off any tears.
And then blow on the lacrimal sickle-cut and make cuts until it is healed.
Chapter XVII.
Regarding the incision of an ulcer and what is born from well-adjusted flesh in the fumes.
Some ulcers in the fumes of some have caused pus to be born, and is pressed until it covers the pupil, or pushes up against or strengthens near the eyelids and stiffens the eyelids onto the parts that stick out further, and is assembled like a parapet's edge.
The operation for her is that the patient rests their head in the place where it belongs; and then open the ulcers of that area and collect all that flesh with convenient instruments, and hold them with forceps or a spoon; and then cut the flesh from the beginning until it's all finished with the scissors, and be careful not to let any pus come out during this operation.
And let your incision be with the one you cut those with or with an iron we recommended for use in the operation of nails, or with small saws according to which comes the form towards this chapter.
Then once your incision is complete and all that flesh has been removed, then fill the wound with salted water, or blow into it powdered sulfur and resembles powder of corrosive medicines, and place over the wound in a corner some white paste from goose grease until any pus comes out.
And if there are any causes of ulcers that cause nausea from pus, and you fear pus coming out, then examine the wound and treat that pus with water that softens that pus, and continue with this operation until it is healed, similarly do in the well-adjusted flesh that happens in this type of wound.
However, you must allow for complete healing of the wound through natural or accidental means, operate with iron, and do not put your hand into any of these operations while that member is undergoing this operation.
Chapter XVIII.
Regarding the collection of pus in the wound.
Sanguinaria are those veins of sulfur which are stubborn on the wound and prohibit it from performing its operation, and allow the wound to heal over a period of days.
So it is necessary at the beginning that you consider if the wound in which there is pus is strong and in it there is no other ailment than pus, then you collect that pus.
And you command the patient to rest their head in its natural place, and suspend those veins with one ounce or two depending on your judgment; that one ounce of fine duplication according to this form:
or gradually two ounces into a single object according to this form:
And then collect those veins with fine forceps, with subtlety, and remove the pus little by little, as you see those veins being removed from the wound and turned over.
And remember not to let the wound reach the extremities of the iron; and if your operation is in the middle of the day facing the sun, and if you are firm in your operation that you only cut those veins.
And when you have completed it, then blow on the wound with a sickle-cut or sulfur to increase its acuity in what has been removed from the pus.
If it is not possible for you to collect all at that time, then cover the whole area with what softens your pain, and let her rest for a few days until her pain subsides and any pus comes out.
And continue to work on her according to the natural process until she is healed.
And this is how the saws look:
Chapter XIX.
Regarding reducing swellings in the nose.
When you treat swellings with a cautery or with an incendiary medicine as previously described and it is not healed, then there is no need for you to do so but rather make cuts on the pus that represents its maturity, and drain all the moisture which is in her, and let air when the opening reveals the nose.
And once the nose is revealed and you notice corruption or blackness in her, then treat her with a stimulant as such:
And it is called a rough hat, and it is made of iron, and the cap should be red as if to resemble aloe which can be made punctured by the tip of a file or finely ground (as in the following form).
And place that over the rotting part of the bone, then gently rotate it with your fingers, and press your hand little by little in until you know that that corrosion is smooth.
And make some incisions there, then restore the affected area from causes of drying and constrictive.
So if the place is consolidated and it's in your good flesh and it removes the body from sickness and pain for forty days, and it doesn't renew itself and it doesn't cause you accidents, then you will know that it's healed.
And if not, then it's in your belly and you reduce the fissure to the shape of the nose, according to this method: and that is for you to uncover from either bone or with acute medicine, once discovered the bone, then you take it in accordance with this form:
The extremity of the iron is triangular, and the shaft of the tool should be extended into this extremity as it will fit like that.
And place that over the bone, and have it near the lacrimal; extend your hand a little further than your nose, then gently rotate your hand towards the groove so that the entire bone can penetrate, and feel the patient's back as you find air when touching their chest.
So then restore the affected area with medicines that dry up like this, according to what you have heard.
So when the flesh and the place have endured it, then that matter which flowed to the far parts returns to the nose, therefore that is pus slightly on the back.
Chapter XX.
Regarding the reduction of the prominence of the nose.
When the nose protrudes to its entirety and does not cause discomfort or decrease, then uncovering the back, follow it closely, and make incisions on the neck's scarification and cleanse with good drainage; then place a liniment over the nose made from acacia and aloe, sesame and sarcocolla, and strengthen the plaster placed around the nose in powder form.
And the method of powders is that you take cloths made from lion's hair, each cloth divided into four parts; and make them from those hairs.
And place those one over the other according to the amount of which the nose needs. And strengthen them above those with a firm bandage; and apply the vacuums to that incision area; then leave the vacuums and smooth the nose strengthened day and night.
May it be so while the ligament is softened, then uncover that it's strongly smoothed out.
And keep the ligament during the day and night as we have said.
And if the nose has already been reduced, then good, and if not, then continue applying the plaster with powders and bandage as well as vacuums until it heals.
Chapter XXI.
Regarding the excision of the prominence of the uveal membrane.
When there is disruption within the uveal membrane and it becomes prominent like half of an onion peel, its form resembling a human, and one wants to excise this, then this operation on you will be as follows according to what we have recommended. You will insert the hook into the groove of the uvea from the remaining part in the upper part, then place the hook elsewhere with double length on the side of the lacrimal portion, let that penetrate and smooth out the first hook according to its position; then excise that double line area and lift the corresponding part of the uveal membrane around the hook, and strengthen that area.
And then extract the hook and place over the nose wool infused with hen's egg white, smoothing it so that the thread falls onto the eyeball.
And then care for the nose as to ensure that it accommodates that once the wound has healed.
And some incisions are made around the entire circumference of fabric within the nose to adjust the prominence greatly, then puncture it with a thin spout that reaches into the base of the nose, and carry moisture in a cloudy way, and descend the nose and enter very soon.
And strengthen until it heals.
Chapter XXII.
Regarding the treatment of conjunctivitis.
This illness that is called conjunctivitis is nothing other than an infection that settles in the nose resembling running water and it is not that.
The method for acting in this situation is to have the back of your hand on top of the prepared saddle and straighten it out. Then take your two hands near where you see the infection reaching the remaining parts, and dry it without letting it drop down, keep looking at the nose as you would when examining anything else.
And if it doesn't descend into the nostril, know that it's water.
And if the movement of the infection isn't prepared to descend into water as we said, then have your back of the hand between your palms and take a thin needle and insert it over the skin piercing just below the continuation of the conjunctiva at the cornea (into the desired area), so that the infection is expelled.
Once it's expelled, then you will distil water down the nose in which you have mixed honey or water with which you already prepared fennel and honey.
And then it's treated for other causes that lead to health restoration.
Chapter XXII
On the treatment of bile descending from the gallbladder.
We have already discussed the types of bile in division and which one should be pierced when explaining it, now that according to health.
Now cover the patient's back between their hands on a mat and hold the bile there, apply strong pressure.
And place your right hand near the edge of the bile's surface. If the bile is where the water is, it's the left bile; or with your right hand if the bile is on the right side.
And with your left hand hold the other one, if the bile is on the right side; or with your right hand if the bile is on the left.
And place the tip of the tool near the crown due to pregnancy in the tear gland's area on the eye's surface, and then remove the tool with force and rotate your hand towards there.
And penetrate into the tear gland and feel that the tool has reached because of vision obstruction.
And cover so that the length of the tool's path to the punctum is the size of the space from the pupil to the end of the shadow, which is the tip of the tear duct; there you will see through the pupil with vision through the transparency of the cornea.
And place the tool inside the spot where there is water, and push it down slightly a few times, then if the water descends immediately, then see the patient's face right away in their vision area, and keep the tool in its duct.
And rest for a little while; if the water has descended, then lift that again before the tool gets wet.
And when it is stuck and does not descend, then remove the tool gently, rotate your hand slowly towards there, and dissolve a little clear salt from gemma in water; then wash inside the duct with that water; then pause outside the duct like a stop or cotton dipped in rubbed oil and album of milk, and let it cool near the duct.
May not those who are of our time place anything like a small piece of wax on that with milk albumin.
And if the tool does not fit inside the tear duct due to its hardness - which is true for some men whose tear duct is hard in nature - then cover that you take the spatula, which is called almond and this is its shape:
And then puncture that conjunctive tissue, do not let your hand end at the root of the hair, and do not force it if you make a path towards the small area under the tool.
And then insert the tool as we have explained.
And complete your work by having the patient's back comfortably laid down on their bed in a dark room where they can sleep, and forbid all movements.
And let the patient rest in their natural state for their nature to be clarified, and do not allow them to turn their head towards either side from all directions.
And arrange the pillows according to their usual position within the bed.
And then uncover that in this dark room and expose the eye to some causes, and then return the pillows back to day VII.
And cover so that you do this during the time of treatments or soon after the infusion. Have it so that you remove this in order for water to flow slightly by great and vigorous observation.
May it happen that a boil appears during this time, then cover that you uncovers the duct by the seventh day, and correct that with water which causes the boil to heal.
Then you fully restore the patient's vision and rest on their facial expression which governs their speech for some days, existing in this dark room.
And then gradually leave that dark room while conversing with them about the causes.
And know that during an operation, it's not excused for the disciple to lose vision at times, and then you should be diligent about the procedure.
And we have arrived at some of those who are in the Artach region, and some said to perform a fire in Al Ayar using an perforated tool where water is produced.
However, I have not seen this method perfected in our land where it has a perfect water, nor does this water exist in some of the books of the ancients; and perhaps this water is new.
And these are the forms of the types of tools for when they're on those, that which someone doesn't know those:
And they should be made of ivory or metal precisely, and the ends of them are like this triangular subtlety, the sharp end is also like that which one forms.
Chapter XXIV
On the treatment of wounds in the nose.
When in the nose there are various types of wounds that might cause some reason which is combined with weight movement or with a local illness, and this sickness is called a polyp resembling that landscape represented. And if the wound is cancerous, it's covered and of dark color; and regarding this one, its wound is not like that dark color.
When dealing with such conditions in these bodily tissues that are neither deceptive nor cancerous, ensure the patient is placed between your hands and exposed to sunlight. Wipe away any moisture from their body and clean under your nails, taking care not to damage the skin in those areas. And take care to remove what is from the other parts far away, and carefully separate whatever you have understood from those sharp thin cuts under one part where you know that all flesh has been affected; if there's a cause for which removal is possible due to some condition of the patient, then with one of the finer tools make an incision so that the pus can escape from it. If you are dealing with pus or an abscess that needs to be incised, then hold the point of your instrument over it; if it's a malignant boil, then treat by cauterizing inside where the pus has been removed and ensure all cavities have been cleansed.
And after that, place your hand near the nose close to the incision, add vinegar or water nearby. If you've opened the nostril and there's moisture inside the palate from that action, then know that it has been healed.
If moisture doesn't penetrate as you work, then know that inside the patient there is nothing to worry about; in places where pus has been present, you can remove bone from the nostrils which hasn't been affected by incision.
So when you have to dig into the patient's body where there is any lump, use your fingers to examine it and handle the wetness carefully. Pause between each finger movement with an appropriate amount of force, and guide the operation by feeling for the edges of the lesion or by other means that are possible in this situation.
And once this has been done, let the smell of it extend into the patient's nostril canals so that it permeates their nose, and place your hand over the opening. Many children who have undergone similar procedures at school are seen engaging in these activities too, and there is a minor reason for those who wish to perform them.
And then hold the two ends of the thread, one end that hangs over the nose and the other that extends into it, and prepare to suture the flesh where the threads are in the string (thread), do this carefully ensuring that the flesh is indeed around the threads at these points.
And then extract the string (thread), pause at the extraction of pus in the nose with a small knife, and do this for three days or longer until everything that has loosened from the flesh completely detaches.
And finally at the end of the procedure, place a lead catheter in the nose for several days after it has been healed.
If you are administering treatment that dries out (pus or wound), use this method.
And this is the form of the device used for nose flushers that distil oils and medicines in the nose:
And create this from silver or bone, which should resemble a small open lamp, as small as a little cup, and make it similarly.
And if you wish, make a closed catheter like a cane, and the canal of this tool for nose flushers should be flat, open. There should be a handle at its rear end where you hold it when you're using oil or whatever you want from liquids and susceptible causes in it.
Capitol .xxv.
Dealing with ailments at the extremities of the nose.
Notable symptoms are noticed at the extremities of the nose, and it is magnified and treated over a few days during which observation of the patient begins.
And for that, when you have entered it at the beginning of the appearance of symptoms, remove all of that. And then place over the spot or the site where the cautery or burning medicine is located.
If the incision is delayed until it magnifies, then consider if it's calcified, hard, of dark color and with little feeling; do not touch this part with iron as it might be a cancerous boil. The notable symptoms towards that which you are incising this boil for its large malevolence toward that, where it was located.
And if the boil feels soft rather than hard and is not of dark color, then if incision is possible throughout that area, then evacuate the patient and make a careful incision. Treat the spot with what dries out and wait until it has healed.
Capitol .xxvi.
Treating the nose, lips and earlobe when continuity is lost due to disease or deformity.
Know that when continuity fails in one of these cartilages, it is not suitable for surgery unless certain individuals are involved.
When dealing with any cause of these issues, consider if the disease is fresh at its pus, then adjust both the patient's lips to surgery, and proceed to treat it carefully until it has healed.
And if the lips affected by loss of continuity are already separated and any one is made healthy, then when you have removed all parts from its apparent connection where pus might be present. And then adjust the two lips with stitches and strengthen those; over them pulverize dragon's bark powder and apply a paste; place a small amount of diafinicon plaster or another consolidating plaster on the powder, let that dressing dry for two days or three days, and then remove it and replace that plaster letting in between the staples so they can be removed by themselves, and afterwards treat with ointment until the healing is complete.
The way of the suture involves adding the continuity solution or with needles as we have recommended in abdominal suture, or adds the continuity solution with thread as you have and to know.
Chapter XXVII.
On the extraction of those causes that come in the two lips in the internal parts.
Causes seen that resemble hard wax dots like seeds within their lips in men, some are smaller and others are larger.
Therefore cut the lips and cavities of each of those hard lumps in every part, then fill the site with a paste inside where the wax is thickened, and then wash it with warm water and treat the area with that which is anti-inflammatory, until it heals.
Chapter XXVIII.
On the incision of the adjusted flesh in the gums.
Large number of seen signs over the adjusted gum which the ancients called albus, therefore cut that with a thread or whatever you have under tension and incise it according to its thickness, let the healing come out or let the wax run.
And then place over the site a paste or other agents or excitatory powders.
And if that flesh returns, then cut it again, and cauterize it, for once the cauterization will not return.
Chapter XXIX.
On the reason of teeth with iron.
When in the surface of the teeth both internal and external parts, as well as between the gums, there are sharp protrusions, lumps, and some signs are blackish, they are formed citrines or verices that go through the gum causing a corruption to occur and the teeth become lumps.
And then cut between the patient's thighs and place their head in that position, and pull out the teeth where those protrusions and similar signs appear inside so no further cause comes from them, and do this with respect to blackness, citrinitas, and other changes inside as they become modified.
And if that is the case with those of the beginning reason, good; and otherwise, then you repeat the reason on those to the other day and the second and third until it arrives at the last statement in what you want.
Know that the teeth require different forms of restorative treatment and figures of signs according to how your operation is prepared. And to know which razors are used for the tooth's adjustment of the internal part is different from those used for the tooth between the teeth according to other forms, and these razor forms must be prepared by you which you will see shortly:
Chapter XXX.
On eradication of teeth.
And when you cure the tooth of its pain throughout the entire operation and in the total eradication of it, there is no cause that justifies the swelling after it has been removed, which is a substance during which the healing occurs in the removal of it.
So when the patient has been convinced that the tooth needs to be removed, you must firmly certify which tooth is painful, for symptoms of pain disappear with the removal of the tooth and fall into a healthy tooth, so you remove that tooth and immediately the pain does not cease until the maladjusted and painful tooth has been removed, which we have seen this way in the operation of the barbies.
So how do you certify which tooth is painful and that you know well, then you must incise in the circuit of the tooth at its root where there may be some swelling, so that it dissolves from the tooth with the gum tissue on all sides, and then pull it out gradually towards your thumbs or through fine blades at their small ends as it begins to fall away.
And then scrape with strong force or blow out forcefully, and place the head of the patient between your knees so that you do not harm them, and pull out the tooth according to rectitude in manner as not to tear it, nor give more pain to the patient.
And if it is not properly removed, then take one of those instruments, and hold that under all parts with ease and exert the removal as it was done at the beginning.
If the tooth is broken or corroded, then you must complete with cloth that wound and strengthen it at its fine end so as not to be torn during your compression on it with your hands.
And when you make the incision precisely in the circuit of all parts of the gum tissue and preserve your strength so as not to tear it or damage that part of it, return to the patient through the skill which is greater than the first pain of it.
And remember not to do what some ignorant barbers do in their haste and audacity during tooth extraction, as they do not follow the things we have recommended; for many seen symptoms cause great maladies among men which are more difficult than being torn off, and all or some of their nerves get stretched out, or you pull that tooth from certain bones in their jaws as we have testified.
And after the eradication of the patient, they wash their mouth with vinegar or add salt to it.
And if there is an internal bleeding in the stomach, like hemorrhages caused by ulcers, then apply a certain amount of saffron and sprinkle it over the wound. If that saffron does not work, then use cauterization.
The shape of the forceps and the subtle tongs used in dentistry during the beginning phase is long at the extremity, short and thick with a handle, so that they don't bend when you use them.
And it should be like that with thick handles inside where they shouldn't bend when you first use them, being short at the extremities.
They should be made of Indian iron rods with straight extremities, and the extremities of those should have teeth from which one enters inside the other through constriction from top to bottom. Some of their extremities are shaped like the bill of a stork, which is called ciconia, this tool is used for gripping, and they have strong constriction.
Title XXXI.
Regarding the removal of teeth and extraction of bones from fractured jaws.
When you need to extract a tooth that is deeply embedded for some reason, then press with both hands on the area until the spot becomes soft; and then insert a tool or use tongs from which the extremities resemble the bill of a stork called ciconia or glove, the shape of forceps:
The ends of these are made similarly inside like a chisel or wedge.
And if you do not follow your judgment with these forceps or tongs, then press on the root and remove all the flesh, and insert this tool which is called an awl, it has the form of this:
And it should have a short thick extremity that is small at the end, and not be too large so as not to get stuck.
So if the root is extracted through that hole, it's good; and otherwise, use this tool among others whose forms are these: the form of the first instrument is triangular at the extremity in which there is some thickness:
The form of the second instrument is that it should be triangular and have a more subtle extremity.
And indeed, using this tool which has two ramps, like the following form: And there are other instruments as I will describe for the shaving of teeth; this young man uses this tool that resembles a large cat's paw, and here is its shape:
Of a triangular twisted or short extremity that has some thickness and is not too large to avoid getting stuck.
And know that the tools for treating teeth are similar to other instruments.
Let the craftsman be wise and skilled in his art, finding for himself according to what it means to him in operations and various diseases; there are diseases of which the ancients neither described nor used proper instruments because of their varied forms.
Should the bone of the jaw or other bones of the mouth be fractured, or should you place pressure, then it is essential to weigh yourself in relation to that spot at its suitable location for your tools and forceps as mentioned in the extraction of tooth roots. Also use this tool whose form is thus:
And it should have a subtle thickness gradually reduced, and held within the mouth so that it does not slip or escape until all the bone is extracted through drilling; then restore the site with suitable medicines.
Should there be a small pus pocket in the bone, then extract that with its contents and address its discoloration, treating it internally to achieve healing.
Title XXXII.
Regarding the treatment of prominent teeth compared to others.
When teeth are prominently located not according to their natural position, especially so in the case of women, particularly elderly ones; thus you should consider: if there is no difference between one tooth and another, and it's impossible to drill or apply a remedy on them, then that tooth needs extraction; unless it isn't connected with other teeth, then you need to use this tool whose form resembles the cut in meat, made of Indian iron at the end which is extremely sharp:
And if your tooth is sensitive to which you would drill it over many days due to the hardness of the teeth, and not become swollen like another of the teeth.
And if it is a tooth that has been extensively worn by grinding, then grind that with an Indian iron file of which this is the shape:
It is all of Indian iron and the groove is made; it's cut with points as with a file that makes small holes, with which the tooth is ground piece by piece in moist days for ease, so that no other tooth becomes swollen and falls out. Then draw it out at the end, and cut there with some razor blades.
And if it is a tooth where part is broken and you push the tongue over it, then hollow out that place in which the roughness of that portion is stopped and leveled, and fill it up so that the tongue does not slip nor does the word become muddled.
Chapter XXXIII.
On restoring swollen teeth with a gold or silver instrument.
When it happens to the teeth before collapse and removal by impact or collision, and the patient cannot lift themselves for what they eat, and you have treated that with stomatic medicines, but your treatment has not been effective, then when it does not fall into those that are swollen with an instrument made of gold and not silver, which causes silver to turn green and allows days of rest, gold remains unchanged no matter how long.
And let the tool have such subtlety and roughness according to how much it can enter between the teeth; as for the shape of the insertion, take the tool and place twice its length between two healthy teeth, and adjust so that the two bends of the tool grow within each tooth from one swollen tooth or from two, ensuring that the mesh reaches the healthy tooth on the other side. And then repeat this operation in the part from which you started, and strengthen your hand with ease so that it does not become swollen.
And when you apply pressure with the tool for which you are gripping the metal, do not let it slip from the teeth.
And then, using forceps or cut them off, you grind these excess metal ends and add them wherever needed. You conceal these along with the healthy tooth between the swollen tooth, to avoid harming the tongue. And then pull it out like this would be done by a Roman.
If it is dislodged or broken, hold that one or those with another tool in such a way throughout its entire process.
And this is the shape of the teeth and the procedure for treating two healthy teeth and two swollen ones, as you would perform these actions in this manner:
And when you return one tooth or two in their respective places, and they grow back as we have described, and swell again.
And do not let this be any other than good craftsmen and wise ones.
And some diseases are attributed to certain causes of cattle bones, and it is done in this way like the shape of a tooth, and it is placed in the location where the tooth fails, and strengthened in this manner as we have said, and remains and serves there for a long time.
Chapter XXXIV.
On the operation of the tongue that appears in the tongue and prevents speech.
This tendon that appears to you in the tongue sometimes or is natural as one is born with, or accidentally occurs due to injury which has already become fixed.
And the operation on it is that you open the mouth of the patient, its head existing there; and lift up their tongue, then cut this tendon nerve according to the width within which the tongue has returned from its recent position.
If there is any hardness or knot in that area, and this has been caused by the consolidation of an injury, then you heat it and cut through it longitudinally where you have cut the tendon, so that the knot disappears.
And make sure that there is not a crack formed in the edge of the flesh, and cut here in such a way that pus flows out.
And then, wash the remnants of the incision with warm water or with vinegar or with soap lather; and place your patient's tongue in a wet state; thus it will be that when you leave the tongue to the patient each night without allowing any consolidation of another disease.
If pus flows out, place on the affected area a glass tube; but if blood comes out, then cauterize that spot with a continuous flame until you direct it to water. And then let this cure using the other causes until it is healed.
Chapter XXXV.
On the extraction of a ranula on your tongue.
Some diseases may occur on your tongue that resemble small pus pockets, preventing the tongue from performing its natural function; and if they swell up, they fill the mouth.
And the operation for this is that you open the patient's mouth facing the sun and inspect the pus pocket.
And if you find it a dark color or black, hard, which the patient does not feel any sensation upon touching, then do not touch that one which is soft.
And if it turns to whiteness, in which there is humidity, then you put the dog in them, and incise that under a subtle surface, and incise it from every side; and if it smells of wind during your operation time, then you pause over zinc trissat, it's glass, within which the smell remains restricted.
And then return to your work as soon as you have treated it with respect for them, and wash it with wine and salt; and treat that with the other treatment until it is healed.
Chapter xxxvi.
On the extraction of pus from both ears and that which is nothing in the ear canal, as well as other pustules.
When it affects the ear canal, these are glands which are grouped like cotton wool; they occur outside and are named as two ears. When you treat them with what we have said in the division, if they do not heal, then consider whether the pustule is hard, of a dark color, with little sensation, then do not touch that with iron.
And if it is of reddish color and the root is thick, then do not touch that with iron for fear of a bloody discharge; wait until it smooths out as it matures, then either you remove that, or it will burst on its own.
And if it is of white color and clear, then that one should be incised because of the root of its condition.
And during your operation on it, you should consider whether before your operation the pustule has rested after its cautery for complete repose or if it has diminished with some diminution; then let the patient stand in front of the sun, and his head towards you, open their mouth, and place the servant between their hands taking their tongue out using an instrument noble in form:
It should be made of silver or gold, and it should be fine as a reed.
So when you press that tongue and the pustule is shown to you, and place your hand over it, then take hold of the dog and put it in the ear canal, and pull it out as far as possible from the openings. And another thing that you remove is some cause of the membranes, and then you should incise that with an instrument which has this form:
And another thing that you remove is some cause of the membranes, and then you should incise that with an instrument which has this form: It is similar to forceps, however, the ends of it are curved, so that each one's opening faces inwards from the other, very sharp, and made of iron, heated up.
May if this instrument is not in your possession at the moment, then you should incise that on the surface of which its shape resembles yours: it should be sharp from one side, not sharp from the other.
And once you have incised one side, then incise the other according to this method of incision, and as soon as you have made an incision on the patient, they are protected from rubbing with water.
If if there is a discharge of pus, protect them from water by decoction of elderflower or mistletoe leaves and resemble that with the causes of stopping bleeding where the discharge of pus is restricted, then treat it until it heals.
And sometimes other pustules appear in the ear canal besides those two ears, and you should incise those as I have described for the incision of two wounds equally.
And I have already treated a woman with pus which was native to her ear canal, that pustule tended towards a dark color, of little sensation, which had already clogged her ear canal, and the woman breathed through her mouth wide open, and she had been forbidden from eating and drinking water, and she was already near death if it were not for an additional day or two.
And the pus had spread so much that it was filled with two lengths of garlic between which it would pass through in two places.
And I surgically cut it out using forceps and placed one of them in an iron instrument, then pulled that out, and got rid of a large portion of him, then I incised the other end of the tool where I understood the passage, then made the patient open his mouth and held their tongue, then I placed the iron instrument into that pustule.
And then I removed a large part of it, and there was only a little pus coming from him instead. And absolutely the ear canal of that woman returned, she started drinking water immediately, and shortly began eating food. Therefore I did not stop incising for a long time with that pus, and new pus appeared in place of it, which would also be incised as that process continued.
And I had that done and cauterized her ear canal, then it seemed like an addition. And then I wandered around not knowing what God did to that close to me.
Chapter xxxvii.
On the incision of a node when it is pustular.
When there is catarr in the uvula and it's pustular and long, then it's named as a perpendicular. And if it is at the junction of thickened and round parts, then it's called a lump.
And when it is healed with what we have said in the division and does not confirm your cure, and if there are multiple times that pus cauterization has already stopped from him and it's delicate, then you should determine to incise that which is added round; and if it extends towards that length, and it bleeds, of dark or black color or is not under his perception, then you should hesitate on the incision of it, because there is a fear for the patient.
And when you turn that according to the way I've told you of its whiteness and length, make sure to examine the patient and press on their tongue with an instrument whose shape matches his condition, then adjust the scalpel in the new position and pull that outwards and cut it with one of two tools, which are mentioned in the cutting technique for two wounds.
And be sure not to cut that part beyond its natural addition; if you cut more from him, you will damage his speech.
And at the cutting point, use that which we recommended for the cutting technique of two knives; take care to cut only until it is healed.
If the patient is frightened by your cutting his thigh, be sure to use a tool in his cauterization that calms him down, and the way of cauterization involves only water, which you place on top of the thigh where it should be. Then press the tongue with the instrument we have mentioned, take some of the water from the head of the cauterization process, hold it alive, don't make it too thick or too thin, and fill the cavity of the tool whose shape is:
Let the treated part be placed in a cavity where medicine is applied as if it were in the cavity of a gall bladder, and place the tool with the medicine on his lips. Have the patient lie on his left side so that he can spit out or perform gargling in the mouth due to the intrinsic medicine, so as not to cause any harm from that amount on him and save him.
And place your hand on the medicine, and press it over the uvula for half an hour while you observe that she becomes degraded and subdued by the chewing of the medicine.
And if you want, take hold of and wrap it around the end of the ray, immerse the sponge in medicine, insert the ray into the sponge through a tube placed above it so that the sponge adheres to that tube. Do this as many times as necessary for obtaining what you want from the cauterization of the uvula. Then let it dry until it falls off about three or four days later.
And if you feel the need to apply the medicine again, do it, and for the cauterization process, cleanse through the circuit of the uvula with a sponge moistened in water, adjust according to that which is in the water circuit of his medicine, wash it with clean water, dress it afterwards with ointment, and apply remedies inside until it heals.
And this type of treatment is beneficial, avoiding cutting and removing fear over time.
Some uvula inflammations are treated with this subtle cauterization and cutting method, which is cured through subfumigation in this manner: collect comfrey, ivy, yarrow, rue, Arabic gum, chamomile, butter, and similar herbs and mix them with water from those sources. Adjust all these ingredients or some of them into one mixture, immerse it in warm water, let it boil; the mixture should be strained through a sieve on top of the cauldron where you prepare it. It should be brewed to taste correctly. In the middle of the cauldron place a rod, on which is placed an incising tool made of bronze according to this manner. Make sure it's either made of silver or bronze.
And immerse the end in the mouth of the patient so that the steam rises to the uvula over the orifice, while the uvula becomes somewhat opaque.
And continue to apply this treatment for those inflamed spots until they dry up. Remember not to perform this cure immediately after the appearance of abscesses; it might worsen in the abscess area. Do not do what I've mentioned, but declare that you're treating an abscess by cauterizing him instead.
If you don't have this tool, then take a stick and make a hole in his thigh, so that the mouth of the patient can be closed. This prevents steam from burning the mouth.
And this treatment is good for health.
Chapter XXXVIII.
Chapter XXXVIII: On the removal of thorns and whatever adheres in the mouth, as well as other causes.
Inflamed spots stick to the tongue or thorns from plants or some other cause.
And be sure to remove what is obvious from those, upon which you cast your gaze. By pressing the tongue with an instrument in front of yourself, it's evident to you what's inside the mouth.
And what doesn't show and is hidden in the mouth, be sure to make the patient vomit before food is digested in the stomach; this forcefully allows the cause near the mouth to come out through vomiting. Or if the patient swallows a piece of bread or grated lettuce or a bite of dry bread; or take a piece of dried sea sponge, tie it tightly with thread, and have the patient swallow that; then when it reaches the place where the thorns are, it will get stuck. And if you take a wriggler fish and drink it with the tied thread, then lay it inside your mouth and gently pull it out; or take a spoon and gently place it and carefully bring it inside.
And if they don't get stuck with those causes as we've said, then use an iron tool according to this manner:
If there's thick pus that's not small, and if there's a constriction at the extremity of which you should enter into their throat with ease.
And lift his head upwards, and be careful about the touch of his throat bone, because it affects his body and at that point where you push in the bone or spine, or what that surgeon feels with his hand.
But let the patient that person enter with honey, by their knowledge of the location of the attached cause and push it down, then pull his hand towards the tool in front of him, all according to the quantity that is prepared inside so that a surgical incision is made.
Chapter XXXIX.
On the extraction of blood-sucking parasites attached to the belly.
When treated by blood-sucking parasites as we have discussed in the section on treatment with medicines and without agreement, consider this: within the belly of the patient facing the sun, for you to understand the tongue of him through the tool which we have recommended.
So if you manipulate the blood-sucking parasite, extract it from that which is small or from subtle positions in a decent manner.
And if it's not possible for you to extract from there, then take a concave catheter and insert that into the patient's belly, and place in the concavity of the catheter a heated iron, and do this several times (until the blood-sucking parasite is dead and removed from the belly) and keep the patient away from water for the whole day.
And take one cup full of water, and make the patient open their mouth into that, and wash their mouth with that; and don't touch any cause from that for an hour around them, letting the water a second time by their hand whenever they feel the water come.
But if it's not an incision made as we have recommended, then immerse the patient in water or in turpentine with the tool that we have recommended for the fumigation of the uvula.
Do this, and let it remain until it dissolves.
Another method of operation in fumigation like this is to take a torch with burning coals and the torch covered by a cloth in the middle of which there's a hook; place the end of the tool into that hook; then elevate it above the fumigation; have the patient hold their mouth at the end of the catheter, and close their mouth so that the fumigation doesn't go inside until you know that the fumigation has reached the blood-sucking parasite; as soon as the blood-sucking parasite dissolves.
And if it doesn't come out, then you should repeat the fumigation several times, and keep the patient from drinking, eat salty and bland foods instead, and don't drink water, and necessarily this regimen must be carried out.
And this is the form of the tool with which blood-sucking parasites in the belly are dealt when seen; and it's similar to forceps like this, except when it's within them in some curvature: It's laid out on the belly, and the end of it is similar to the beak of a stork, which is curved, with what feels like a file, because when you grasp any object, that thing won't slip.
Chapter XL.
In which is the full discourse regarding pustules and in sections about them.
Pustules are special spots, according to their various manners, as recalled from memory, in this book.
And they vary in piercing and section of them by two methods. Of which the first is through the specificity of pustules themselves, when we take from the moisture.
And the second method is due to the locations where they occur in the body, for when a pustule happens in the head it's different from one that happens in the anus; and the pustule in the meaty location is different from the pustule happening at a joint. And each one has its own way of being treated operationally.
And pustules are some that cover, which do not allow to be pierced except near the maturation of health in those or completion of them.
And other pustules are those that cover which rupture when they cross over and are not maturing according to their completion, such as pustules near joints. When a pustule approaches the joint, the being of them is prolonged until you insert what's inside them in their circulation, and strengthens their corruption of the muscles or nerves of that joint, causing a constriction effect on that member; or it's a pustule close to the main body part, and if you delay piercing it until its maturation has failed for the main body part; or it's near the anus, therefore pierce the un-maturing one; and does not cover when you pierce across due to incomplete digestion, but the one that is near the anus, so that you do not release them and they become elongated within the parts inside the anus, forming a fistula, or made in the end of it that's not healed. And you should cover until you know the time for piercing the pustule, which is when it's matured.
And you should know that it's matured when the pain and fever subside, as well as a decrease in swelling and pulse rate, and sharpness of the head of the pustule, and other signs.
And when you know that the pus hole has been found in the affected area, leave it to drain pus from the abscess and pus coming from the healing of the prominence.
And the hole should be made through the length of the flesh or body, if the abscesses are in the areas of the muscles or feet, and on spots of lumps, on threads of nerves, on arteries; and, similarly, throughout all equal places where reflection does not occur. In those that do reflect, use a hole according to that member.
When the abscess is in a meaty area, then it's best to make an incision within which confirmation of its digestion according to harmony follows; as we have said. If you pierce it before that point, it will prolongate the flow of pus and indigestion, and hardens the muscles and deepens the depth of the wound.
Such abscesses should be pierced according to the size of the flesh or body, or according to where it is on the member that needs treatment.
And when you administer a small incision, and for large abscesses, a big and wide or indurated hole according to the variety of the size of the abscesses.
And others are of the abscesses in which it is necessary for the opening to be squeezed and then heated when made; such that one does so like bread being baked and done until it sticks, as what happens with many dubels and bubos.
And of those that are pierced in a section with three angles; and of those it's done like the shape of a snail shell when being pierced, as with the abscesses of the gouty.
And among them is where a circular section and a crescent-shaped section are administered, resembling those.
As for the one that is not capable of doing so, such as superficial lion abscesses, it's necessary to pierce it with a superficial incision, or flatly just.
And when the abscess is thick and has already collected healthy pus, pierce it but don't worry about draining all the pus at once; take out some part of it, then let the abscess settle for another day, then extract a larger part, then do this until you get a hole that's well open.
Especially if the patient is old and strong, or a young girl, or an infant, or an elderly person in decline, where the animal spirit's unhealthy pus is resolved with the release of healthy matter, making them much better, and you operate on them.
Take great care of this chapter, and when you make your incision in which to extract these abscesses, it's necessary that you cleanse the wounds and consider where if the abscess is small, or a flat section, then administer the remedies accordingly; and if the abscess is large, and the openings from the incision are indurated, then it's necessary that you use leeches in each vein until they reach their time.
And if in the abscess a part of the channel is excised or it's concaved within the circuit, then it's necessary that you complete it with leather strips or filaments made of cloth; as when you knead dough or mix ingredients, considering humidity; and strengthen it on the third day; and proceed with that and treat whatever comes from the ointments until it heals.
And if you experience bleeding from the blood during your operation, it's necessary that you administer water baths and vinegar together in which to soak a cloth, and place it over the area of the bleeding.
And if the blood continues to flow, it's necessary that you administer medicine and treatment along with the powders I've recommended in specific locations of this our book and its divisions.
And if it's during winter, and the location of the abscess is in a spot of nerves, then it's necessary that you coat powders with vinegar and oil, and place those over the areas.
And if it's in summer, and the areas are fatty, then it's necessary that you coat powdered things with water and oil, or vinegar and oil, and do this all until the third day, as we've said, and then it's necessary that you discharge the abscess and cleanse that area, administering what suits him during his recovery until he heals.
And this is what's necessary for the knowledge of treating abscesses universally, but according to the path of distinction already mentioned, about all abscesses in which manner they are treated through recovery by chapters specifically.
Chapter .xl.
Regarding the section of abscesses which occur in the channel of the head.
In the channel of the head small abscesses, and they are special nodes which contain tunics that are part of their nature; and the special aspects of these nodules.
And from them are pinches, and those which contain moisture akin to lime. And of those that contain moisture like dust, and resemble them; and those which are waxy, hard.
And in the section of all, and in the extraction of those there is no fear, like you should not oppose blood vessels when extracting those.
And the operation in the section of those is that you expose them with an instrument whose shape resembles this somewhat, which is called a probe, knowing that it contains.
If it concerns that which contains moisture, then divide that in sections according to length along the superficial section as shown in this form:
And starts at the section of line .B. within line .G. Thus as moisture is evacuated, then you scrape that skin which contains that moisture, and let no cause remain from it, so if any cause is found it returns again, if there remains any cause from that.
And then immerse the affected area in Egyptian ointment if it's present, or otherwise in water and salt; fill that with the ointment and leave it immersed for another day. And as this dissolves everything that is corroded by that skin.
And then apply the Egyptian ointment over that affected area again and once more if you need to, within which assume there is no remaining cause of that skin; then treat the wound with ointment until it heals.
And if pus contains fatty nodes, then you should incise there according to this form: You create a section in the shape of an X, and make cuts between the two edges of the section and cut there from all sides, and exert your strength in the extraction of the tissue which contains that.
If you feel discomfort during surgery, then do what I told you first.
Similarly do for the purulent area and healing according to what we have told you; and for the purulent area is light, because it has few symptoms and little moisture.
And some of these pus sores are in the head in some people where there is no moisture; this cause is why I incise over a sore on the head of an old woman and open up the sore like a hard, white lump, which could not be squeezed, and if it was applied to one, that wound would occur.
And in other occurrences in the head apart from this head, like the sores that come on the cheeks of children and you know the reasons for the earlobes, but the area of these all is superficial.
And pause the puncturing of those from the lower part of their body, so that it brings comfort to the body in the parts with pus.
And then treat those with what is suitable for their healing process.
Capitol .xlii.
Of the section concerning scrophula which occurs in the throat.
These pus sores are found in the throat and under the jawbones, as well as in the lymph nodes; some occurrences happen in other parts of the body.
Those occur in the throat; they are masses that develop among themselves. All scrophula of those is within their own tissue, just like in the lymph nodes and pus in the head, as we have recounted.
The types of these scrophula are lumps; some contain moisture from those, others contain moisture themselves, and the malignant ones do not respond to treatment.
And in that one which you must have good disposition in the Tocament, of which the color which is evident corresponds to the color of the codena, and it extends everywhere, not adhering to the nerves of the throat, nor to the veins, nor to the artery, and it's not swollen so when you incise that on a superficial section above the codena to the part below of the body between the line of .G. and the line of .B., you burn that from all sides, spread the edges of the codena with anointing oil or with onion paste if necessary, as we have said for the sores in the head, and remove that little by little.
And it is more caution to avoid incising the vein or nerve.
And if the cut is not too deep that it adjusts to your hand during incision, or if it calms the patient, then do not incise what's unnecessary; and if you incised a vein or artery and are prohibited from your operation, then pause in the inflamed sore with powders that stop bleeding, strengthen the wound, and leave it so that the heat of the sore is reduced and the wound becomes softened, and begin to heal. When the pus has been drained.
And return to your operation when you have completed it.
And then ask according to what I told you about whether there is any cause of the other small scrophula, then incise those and cleanse them.
And if it's in the area of the large vein, then when you should not incise that scrophula from its area. Before this, when you are working with it on a thick thread and let that fall naturally by itself.
And then fill the wound with old cloth which you have already immersed in Egyptian ointment, and then treat that.
And if you incise that whole scrophula, then when you adjust the two edges of the wound and let a little pus come out so that there is no excess fluid remaining.
And if you notice that there is excess fluid due to the size of the scrophula, then when you understand to incise its area, remove that and administer suture as what was said.
The treatment for those suffering from the scrophula disease that contains moisture, you should pierce there at the surface where it appears in your patient's location of maturation, and make a piercing on what is the base of their body's pus, as we have said.
And then administer a piercing, you must apply grease and resemble those, in order that it corrodes what is rotten from the corruption. And when you turn the ulcer to be cleaned, then you treat that with grease of flesh-generating substance until it is healed.
Chapter 43.
On the section of the boil in relation to an incident inside the glandular area.
They did this section on the boil, and I haven't seen anyone in our land who has done such a thing.
And this is the record of the sermon of those.
In men they have a corner, a place that should be avoided when removing the boil, as thus it might not be done properly since all veins and the major ones in the thigh are here.
In those who have boils on the mouth or in the glandular area or both ears, when the malaise is not in the nose, one should avoid the section of the boil to prevent the loss due to perforation.
So when we want this, that we incise the boil leaving three circles of the circles of the boil, or four on a smaller section by latitude in that which is between two circles according to quantity, so that the section is in ciphac, not on the cartilage. This place is suitable for section as it lacks flesh and its blood vessels are hardened.
And if the doctor is cautious, then immediately extend the gland's duct at its base and then open the duct until it reaches the channel, but avoid blood vessels if any of them seem to cause pain.
And then incise it according to what we have described; this is indicated on the section of the channel by the inflammation which is from that excrement in that which has burst and through the elimination of pus.
And leave the wound open for some time.
Therefore, when the time is ripe for the feared incision, add two layers of the duct of the boil, and if that alone is the cartilage.
And then administer medicines that encourage new flesh to grow until it is healed.
And it is recorded that Albucasis that the summa of the sermon which we have described, exposition shows that some of those boils have already removed the gland of the thigh, and the thigh has gone into death, and his body was septic, and some would incise the epiglottis so that the thigh breathes over the site of the boil for one respiration, and thus saved from death.
And for this reason we command to leave the boil open until its malignancy is consumed; and it's the malignancy of him over three days; and then we command thusly the boil, and treat it until it is healed.
And what I have seen through my experience is that a servant felt a cold in her gland and incised on one part of the lung canal, and I was called to treat him, and they acted just as if it were crying from the dead, and opened the boil and removed the pus which was excreted from the boil little by little.
So I would confess that she did not incise a vein or artery, and the wind came from the boil, and treated it until she was healed.
And nothing happens to the servant unless even in the pus, and some days return to treat her conditions.
And I also say that near the section of the boil there is no fear.
Chapter 44.
On the section about the boil that occurs outside the gland, which is called the hernia of the gland.
This boil named hernia of the gland is a large boil according to the color of the body, and it moves in women.
And it follows two ways, whether it is natural or accidental.
And in the natural case there is no need to cure.
And the accidental follows two ways of which one is similar to fatty lumps, and the other way is like a boil that forms due to the occlusion of an artery, and in that case there's fear. And do not presume about it as if it were iron, but only for the one that is small. And you should press that and investigate it as described, and if you find something resembling fatty lumps, and is not hanging from any of the veins, then you should incise it like a lump, and extract what it contains from the skin and pus; and otherwise, then thoroughly examine its entire structure, and treat the area with whatever promotes healing until it is healed.
Chapter 45.
On the section of types of lumps.
Of the lumps there are various kinds, and I have already described all their types in the division.
And you should understand this difference between a lump and an ulcer as to avoid confusion.
And I say that in ulcers there is warmth, fever, and violent pains within that quench the boiling of excess; and the process of decomposition occurs when later the fever, pain, and heat cease.
May it not be heat or fever nor pain, and consider that lion's heart which is in his own stomach.
And according to the color of the blood, and the patient's appetite is like a fever and is done similarly with urine, whether it's more or less, and this depends on two species: whether they are fatty and contain moisture, and the colors of the moisture are spots, as I explained in the division.
So when you reach the treatment of nodes, remove that and inquire about that at the time of eating which is called an introduction, according to what comes with its form in the forehead which is close to this.
And this is the method of questioning for abscesses and all nodes, and you take this instrument and introduce it into the pus-infested area that you find in the abscess, and you will work your fingers inside little by little until you know that the instrument has penetrated the wall.
And then finish your hand according to the size of the abscess, and then extract the introduction and consider what is left in its wake.
And if the moisture is external and of any color, then you incise on the superficial section as I said in other abscesses.
And if there's no moisture left from the introduction, then you know it is fatty.
And dry off over it as if to form a cross according to this shape: And do as you have been taught, hang it on hooks, and scrape the wall from all sides with ease, and if possible keep the skin or sack over that, then extract that cure towards the node.
May if it breaks during the operation, it's not possible to extract that cure, and spots will be visible under this, and then you will extract it piece by piece without causing any damage.
And if there's some reason for its return with it, the node returns according to what's possible.
And if you notice that there's a small part of it with some cause, then fill the wound with some corrosive and sharp powders, strengthen the wound, place over that which is the pus spot, cure it from another treatment until it's healed.
And if it's a large node, then cut both of the patient's lips and cure that which is inside it.
May if it's pulsating against or not, then cover and heat the place of where the blood flows that is the vein, smooth that stretch for two days or three until the wound heals and stops bubbling from the blood; and then return to incise that which has broken inside the node.
Chapter forty-six.
Regarding the necessary forms of the instruments in sections and punctures.
Among those are the forms of the introductions, and there are three species, from which one is large, and of them, one is intermediate, and of them, one is small.
The form of the large introduction is this:
The form of the small introduction is this:
They should be made of iron, alum, or pointed ends that descend properly, so that they warm the internal parts in the abscesses.
And these are the forms of the experienced ones, and they are named long, and one of them is called red.
They are in three species, which include large, intermediate, and small.
The form of the large experienced one, it's this shape:
The form of the intermediate experienced one, its this shape:
The form of the small experienced one, its this shape:
Let it be known that they should be for those abscesses, exits, and fistulas, through which between them are of bones and other causes.
And they are round rods, large, like thick needles with the wounds sewn on them, and made of copper, or from copper or iron, or silver; and the best ones are those made of copper.
And they are introductions of black feathers that it's known should allow the passage of fistulas in the cavity of which there are reflections, which are reflected towards their levity to those reflections.
They are in three species, among which some are long, and of others intermediate, and the others short, according to the amount of width of the fistula and its constriction.
The form of the large experienced one made of lead:
The form of the intermediate experienced one made of lead:
The form of the small experienced one made of lead:
The forms of the forceps are of particular shapes, among which some are simple ones, which have only a curvature, and they are in three species: large, small, and intermediate.
And their tongs are from iron, and they are in three species.
And among these tongs have two curves, and they are in three species.
And their ends have three curves, and they are in three species.
All of these are necessary in their place.
Shape of a simple small hook, its shape:
Shape of a large spoon with two curves: Shape of a half-spoon with two curves: Shape of a glove with two curves:
Shape of a large spoon with three curves:
Shape of a half-spoon with three curves:
And these are the forms of the scalpels on which cuts and incisions are made to the nodes and abscesses, and they come in three types; one of those is large, half-sized, and small.
Shape of a large scalpel:
Shape of the half-scalpel:
Shape of a small scalpel:
The ends of those [scalpels] on which cuts are made are sharp, while the other ends are not, and they are not held in such a way but rather so that during the operation on nodes there is a fear of cutting into a vein or nerve. For those it heals the patient and finds tranquility somewhat due to the adjustment which you find in the excision, for from this adjustment you obtain the excision of the abscess.
And these are the forms of amadou sticks, and they come in three types: large, half-sized, and small, just like that.
They are made from reed and resemble a pipe in which alcohol is placed.
And at the tip there's a punctured area and an inner sponge hidden in it, within and without, as you wish, just as you see.
The forms of spatulas, which are hidden between the fingers, allow you to pierce the abscesses without feeling the pain of the patients, and they come in three types: large, half-sized, and small. And these are the forms of those:
The forms of suction cups from which the discharge of pus is removed, and they come in three types: large, half-sized, and small; these are their forms:
They are made from the wood of the citron fruit, round with some length, and they are delicate.
And know that these kinds of suction cups are in large, half-sized and small ones, so that with them you can remove the pus discharge at speed when it's necessary, and otherwise when your first remedy is not medicine.
However, do not use those to remove pus anywhere in the body, but use them only on fatty areas, just like on the swellings and thighs, and on the swellings of the arms, breasts, nipples, belly, and groin, resembling the fatty swellings that are moist.
And some cases involve the use of those instruments or small cuts resembling the wounds made in this way; with which pus is removed when done through bloodletting, or when you need to cut a vein or artery.
And some cases involve making circular incisions according to this way:
Chapter XLVII
On the treatment of male breasts which are assembled by females.
Some cases involve the breasts of certain men becoming swollen as they begin to resemble skin, and similarly these breasts become swollen, resembling female breasts and being far apart.
And for those who experience this, know that you should cut these at a lunar section according to this way, from the line of .B. into the line of .G., and thoroughly scrape the roughness, and fill the wound with an ointment, and adjust the two edges of the wound for suturing, and treat it internally until it heals.
If the breast declines towards the parts below and is softened by its size just like in women, then it should be cut into two halves releasing pus, at two sections resembling a lunar figure, where each is contained within the other of you, with the major line containing the minor according to this way of the line of .B. and the line of .G. Then thoroughly scrape the seam which is between the two edges of the wound, remove the swelling, and administer what has been said about suturing and powders as necessary in its treatment until it heals.
And if you do not complete the cut of this that should be made due to the anxiety of the patient and pus flow, then know that you should cover the wound with a piece of cloth submerged in corrosive ointment and treat it internally until this corrodes which is from fatness, and similarly heal it until it heals.
Chapter XLVIII
On the operation of puncturing abscesses that occur in the breasts.
These abscesses that occur in the breasts are from the species of scrophula, tumors, which contain a layer that is sack-like.
And of those that contain moisture; and of those containing moisture you should puncture at a lunar section according to this figure: from the line of .G. to the line of .B. And when all is evacuated which is inside the abscess, then cover it with a piece of cloth and treat internally on the other day.
And then keep massaging it with a suitable ointment for water, until it heals.
And if the abscess of the glandular nodes or the catarrh is present, then you cut over that space as we said in the section on catarrh, equally.
And if the wound extends into an area that causes pus production, then apply the cautery according to what we have explained previously.
Title: Forty-nine
Section on abscesses that occur due to archery or through veins.
When archery breaks and the vein becomes consolidated which is over that area, then pus-filled lumps occur as abscesses. And the signs by which one can recognize whether inflammation or an abscess is due to an artery or a vein: when an abscess due to archery is long extended in the body; and when you press on these described places, you feel a whistling sound in them.
And that which is due to a vein appears rounder as it manifests within the body.
This section discusses this abscess, particularly focusing on those with distinct symptoms, as well as necks, the throat, and specific bodily lumps; it's a large one, so its treatment requires careful consideration, especially when located at the extremities or at the head where precautions must be taken.
Regarding the one due to the inflammation of the archery outlet, divide it in the vein section longitudinally. Then cut open the section with scissors and expose the archery, freeing it from the tunics that are uncovered.
And then treat that needle and allow it to penetrate into the other side, strengthening the archery at two spots - this causes your skillful extraction of two archeries which are within the knights.
And then cut open that spot which is between two ligaments within the space where the disease and pus are present, so that it may dissolve the abscess.
And then apply treatment in the area where liquid is being produced within, which falls between the ligaments; and treat that with ointments suitable for water until it heals.
And if it is an abscess due to the section of veins, then you must have your hand this way that you take control over the location where there is the possibility of pus from the abscess within the body; and introduce the needle into the spot which you have already held with your hand, allowing it to penetrate. And be in such a situation where you extract that part from the other side, and then bind up the abscess using two ligaments as I instructed you according to the ligament of an apple when you have two parts on either end of the thread.
If you fear that you might pull out the thread, then insert a needle into that spot with your first needle throughout the entire abscess; strengthen your needles in four spots.
Dry out the abscess in the middle of it until when you touch what is inside, then you cut away the excess membrane, leaving behind whatever is attached to it.
And then place over the powder which you have submerged in vinegar and oil, and apply treatment with cloths and ointments until it heals.
Section one of the abscess that occurs due to twisting of nerves.
This is similar to how abscesses occur in archery and veins, as well as when they occur due to percussion of nerves or excessive handling, and similarly.
And the method for this is done in the places of the assistants or at the wrist, or anywhere where there are swollen joints.
And it is a heavy abscess, similar in color to the other body parts, within large portions of its disposition, and when stretched due to suddenness, you feel in the thighs what seems like fainting.
And it is not an abscess that extends throughout the body, and by itself controls the veins, spreading everywhere and not going forward or backward from its location.
Therefore, for those that are within the joints, it should not be confined to iron, which will indeed promote healing.
This section discusses how to treat abscesses in the head or forehead by puncturing the veins through a space. If it is a small abscess, then you should take care of that at the root and cut off that part from its roots.
And if it is large, then you should suspend it with a string, scratch that area, and hold it there; adjust the wound with stitches, and treat it until it heals.
Title: Fifty
Section on the section of abscess that occurs from a boil, which affects the abdomen.
Consider the following symptoms observed in the abdomens of those individuals and in other parts of their bodies that these are referred to as 'fungus' due to their similarity with fungi. The roots of this issue are subtle but the head is large; they also describe the mouths of those affected, which vary from being small to becoming extremely magnified.
And I have already seen one case where in that person's abdomen there were two parts resembling fungi, and there was no distinction between those white ones with small roots.
And already the mouths of those affected would be inverted and split, moisture would flow continuously from them.
Therefore, I inserted and removed those in one on each side up to about eighteen inches in depth. And the other holds up one.
And in the operation at their beginning you consider whether the patient is wet, and if the color of the sweat is white, wet, with a slight rash; then you cut through their skin laterally, and in your presence apply a cautery to the fire, which boils off any contaminated area; and if you find dirt, cauterize that.
And if you see that the patient is nervous and fearful, avoid cutting with iron; rather take lead which has been freshly made, and strengthen that wound, in this way as we have described. And leave it for two days.
And adjust around the constriction of the lead thread; therefore, do not stop strengthening large amounts of lead in this area until it is removed and falls out by itself.
And if the area is covered by a thick rash, then in cutting it there might be some cause for fear and alarm, especially in that which is in the abdomen.
It's possible that you will cut out the rash, then apply a cautery to prevent it from returning.
And take care of that area until the wound has healed.
And watch that you do not assume to cut out anything that is of a dark color, with little feeling, under careful consideration; for that will be an abscess.
And I shall come back with reminders nearby.
Headmark 52.
Regarding the treatment of the navel's prominence.
Navel prominence is caused by various factors; it can be due to fissures in the belly that is above the abdomen, and it results from the patient's skin or intestine as happens in other ruptures. Or it can be due to dirt which flows from veins or arteries as was explained earlier, or it could be due to constricted wind in them.
If it's due to the belly's fissure and from skin inflammation, then the color of the pus is similar to that of the body; and there's severe pain, and it appears in various locations. And if it's due to the protrusion of the intestine, then that location corresponds to what we've recounted, with greater intensity, and as you press it on your fingers, it disappears, and then returns; and it feels tender at its location so you should introduce water and vigorous work.
And if it's due to dampness, then there is pain and it doesn't disappear when you press with your hand, nor does it get constricted or swollen.
And if it's due to dirt, then these signs appear in the pus turning blackish.
If it's due to nothing but flesh, then the pus is heavy, large, and hard, and its color depends on an amount.
And if it's due to wind, then palpating him feels painful.
And in the operation for him you consider whether the navel prominence is due to dirt from arteries or veins, or wind; here lies the prohibition of treating him, as fear and alarm occur there just as we have taught about pus caused by arteries and veins in the chapter.
And if the navel prominence is due to the intestine or skin, then order the patient to hold his breath and stay lying down. Then test in the area of the entire navel, and then tell him to lie facing towards your hands on his back. Then encircle with a lateral incision around the circumference of the navel at the point you have tested. And extend the size of the pus well above the line with large cuts; and surround that area with strong lead or wax in this way of covering decently.
And then cut open the middle of the pus that extends over the muscle and insert your finger into that area to remove the intestine; and if you find it or detect it by the muscle, then pull out the affected area immediately and push the intestine back into the abdominal cavity.
And if you find the skin, then take that with a cut; and remove any excess in it.
And if it's against your artery or vein, then encircle that spot and return to your operation. Take two needles and place them in these two strong leads, inserting the needles into the circuit around the pus area in a way of crossing, making them penetrate. And strengthen the pus in four parts over the needles.
And if you want, hold the needles and leave that spot so that the flesh will stretch and fall by itself; or cut that when it becomes thinner and is placed in this way, then proceed to treat that with what is prescribed inside until it heals.
And if the navel prominence is due to no flesh or dampness in it, then you should remove the pus as we have said and eliminate the dirt or dampness, which you find there, and then treat that with what is prescribed and strengthen that area.
Headmark 53.
Regarding the treatment of wounds.
We have already discussed in the division of different types of wounds and how they are treated with medicine, and it is squamous when the treatment with iron does not result in ulceration; we also spoke about wounds produced by the negligence and carelessness during their treatment.
And it was said by the ancients that some wounds heal in places where there is the possibility of eradicating them completely, such as on the head which is found in the breasts or on the thighs and in areas corresponding to extracting everything from them, especially when they are small at the beginning.
When it is ancient and very painful, don't bother touching them, because I cannot heal from one to another like this, nor have I seen anything else, nor has it been cured in this way.
And during the operation on you is as we have said, you lead and allow the patient and purge of black bile in some stages, then you apply that, if it's blocked filled with obvious symptoms.
And then prepare the patient for the preparation in which the operation is located, and prepare to cut the veins leading to that; and then hollow out from all sides with a good excision inside so as not to damage any cause of your illness. And let the blood flow, and don't stop it slightly at that place, and squeeze the spots, and cleanse your blood thoroughly either with your hand or with an instrument of which is within your capability among the tools.
If you find an obstruction of large blood or in the vein or artery, then apply heat to that inside where the flow of blood has ceased, and then treat it with the other treatment where it is healed.
I believe this line refers to "Caput" which translates to "Head" in Latin from the term "capitol". The phrase may be referring to surgical procedures concerning the head or mentioning a part of anatomy, possibly related to medicine or surgery.
About the treatment of dropsy.
We have already discussed in the division of the types of dropsy due to water, and the signs for each type. We will use medicines for their treatment.
And that which is cured with iron is merely the type of anemia alone, and it should not be treated close to the types of tympanites or dysentery; for this latter is fatal.
And when you have treated this type of dropsy due to tympanites with medicines and your treatment does not respond, then consider the following: if the patient has already become debilitated or if another illness or other type of dropsy exists within them, such as coughing up phlegm or abdominal pain etc., in these cases, you should not treat them with iron, for caution is necessary about this.
If you find that the patient is suffering from excess of vital force causing illness, and if there is no other illness but dropsy alone within them, neither old nor young, then the way to operate on them is: lift up the patient among your hands, minister to them so as to release their abdomen with your hand, expel water towards the part left of the pubis, take a thorn spatula according to this form:
It should be of two long parts with sharp ends, like a spatula. However, it must be slightly shorter in your hand, such that during the operation you do not go into the intestine, and you gently apply it.
And then consider if the formation of dropsy is from parts of the intestines. In that case, you need to find the section three finger widths away below the navel along the line extending towards the pubis on both sides.
If the cause of dropsy (hydropic) is due to an ailment in the uterus (fetus), then your section should be three fingers to the left of the navel.
And if the cause of his/her condition is due to the womb (menses), then your section should be on both sides.
And don't let your section be on the side where you want the patient to lie so that the excess fluids do not accumulate in that area.
And then puncture the entire length of the tool and enter that section. Lift your hand between the length and the siphon, and scrape that area. If the quantity is as large as a fingernail or roughly so.
And then puncture the siphon so that it reaches to the desired location, which is where the water is. And then remove that and insert an instrument of this form: And it is similar to a fine silver catheter. It's made of silver or horn or ivory. At the lower part of this device, there is a small point, and on its sides are three points: two from one side and one from the other; the tip of this device is cut like a feather pen, as you would see:
And on the tip of this is an upper part that's like a bracelet. When the device reaches water, it starts moving over the instrument immediately, then evacuates some water in the middle quantity during this time period. If you evacuate more than from here without delay, it may weaken the patient due to resolving their spirit-animal essence, or they might experience suffocation leading towards death.
Evacuate from that according to the vitality of the person and according to what your interpretation means about the disposition of the patient regarding the vitality of their pulse and their goodness.
And then remove the instrument, drain out the water that causes it, as soon as this is held back by the intestines which retain the point above the siphon of which you have recounted to you that you must puncture in accordance with that manner.
And gradually use the instrument on the other day if you see that the patient tolerates this, and extract a small amount of water, and do this for several days with caution, and refrain from any mistake that would not let the water evaporate completely.
If you fear for the patient, and allow a large amount of water to evaporate, then treat that area by burying it in hot sand, with moisture applied in the bath, and waited under the sun for a long time; and treat that area with drying medicines until they are healed.
And apply the cautery on the stomach, and prepare the paste close to water extraction, according to what I have recounted in what precedes.
The translation for "Capitol .lv." is unclear as it does not provide enough context or seems to contain an error due to its format (.lv). If ".lv" was meant to denote Lithuania (a country code), additional context would be necessary for a proper translation.
From the cure of children who are born with uncircumcised urinary tract openings.
Some of the baby's veins extend from their mother's belly, and the head of their mixture (or umbilical cord) is not punctured (or is stretched or not in its right place).
Then cover the baby with the incision as soon as they are born, with a fine spatula according to this method:
And place on the baby's cord a thin lead pin and join it, keep this for three days or for forty days.
And when they want to urinate, let them urinate; and return the baby back afterwards.
And if you do not pause the lead, it's possible that the urine which goes over the area will not close this closure.
Take care of that which has the cord stretched with a lead pin, as we have said, for too many days until it is enlarged.
Take care of those in whom the cord is not in its right place, which is the cause for these, that one who was born and has the cord at the end of his penis so he cannot urinate inside, until it raises the penis with his hand on the top parts; this does not affect his offspring, according to his own semen cannot reach the mother correctly, and it's a defect marked by this.
The method of the operation for him is that he lies on his back, and you extend his penis head with your left hand with a strong extraction, and cut the tip of his penis head at the opening of the prepuce with a sharp blade, like a feather or without cutting any part, so that his foreskin resembles the head of the penis and that his cord falls into the middle place according to this method.
And remember that in your operation for blood flow, what spots occur here; and wait with him until you have cut the blood vessel, and treat the wound so that it heals.
The translation for "Capitol .lvi." is unclear as it does not provide enough context or seems to contain an error due to its format (.lvi). If ".lvi" was meant to denote a chapter number, additional context would be necessary for a proper translation.
Regarding the white material that occurs in the prepuce at the tip of the penis and discoloration, blackening, and adhesion of the prepuce at the tip of the penis.
Veins appear in this white matter on the skin, indicating a mark or scar tissue.
And of that one is malignant and the other is not.
Not malignant, take care to suspend with a fine one and cut that between which you remove everything; then cover over that spot under the Egyptian oil paste; then treat that area with transparent oil until it heals.
And if the white matter is malignant, notice its color, then take care to apply cautery near the cut and the ratio of him.
Take care if white matter is in the prepuce at the tip of the penis (uncircumcised), and one part of white matter is inside the prepuce and the other part is outside; then take care to remove white matter which is inside until it consolidates; and later you treat that outward, when you treat that period, there's no guarantee it won't get wet.
And it happens that blackness and corruption occur in the genital organs and in the prepuce; then take care to remove all that has already degraded and is about to corrupt or that has already been corrupted; and mark on that area with honey, which is treated with flour made from poppy seeds and crushed sesame seeds and groundsesame.
And treat that with the other treatment until it heals.
Take care if you have blood discharge, then apply lunar cautery according to this method:
And for young cauterization, it is done in two stages at the same time, which are during blood discharge and when the wound is corrupted.
And if the tip of the penis is corroded and completely destroyed at that moment, then take care to insert a lead tube into the meat of the prepuce so that the baby can urinate through it.
Regarding the adhesion of prepuce at the tip of the penis (this adhesion occurs only in that which has a prepuce, and circumcision is not performed on him; and when adhesion happens due to wound or abscess) take care to excise with blunt blade until it is dissolved and the tip of the penis is free from all parts.
And if it's difficult to excise those thoroughly, then take care to excise with blunt blade from the tip of the penis and prepuce; thus is that what happens when the prepuce, being thin and slightly heavy, is pierced by its thinness.
And then separate between the prepuce and the tip of the penis with a blade of their size, which has already been moistened in water to prevent sticking to another piece of skin.
And then it is treated with a string tie until it becomes solid.
Chapter 57.
On the formation of children and the treatment of what happens to those who are circumcised.
Circumcision is not a solution for continence as with other diseases: rather, it's more about our operation and will, and unlike that one, it's particularly necessary in children, so we must assign the best operation there and cause less loss to health.
So they say that the ancients did not perform circumcision in some of their free tribes, where they do not use their laws, but rather because we have acquired this through experience, I have found out that the majority of artisans and barbers use circumcision and tonsure on testicles and on nipples; and they use foreskin on faith and ingrown toenail on the thumb.
And I have tried all these ways and found no better tonsure on foreskins, on faith that is on tonsure like ingrown toenail, which cuts off the chain more above, which the chain of prepuce has two tunics, and leaves the soft part underneath, and strength is lost to another ingrown nail and secure pain. And the tonsure which is done by aphecati, and is digital, of which the carpenters use, does not guarantee the removal of the nail from the end of the male member, for it forces inside the hole of him.
And in the operation on the thumb, strength loses to rust and spoils your operation. And the foreskin of the child is short by nature, and veins don't swell in such a manner that it needs tonsure, I have seen that.
The benefits of tonsure that is done on foreskins and nails on faith, I discovered through experience, because the nails are proportionally removed; so that the sharpness above is as that which remains. And thus when you press your hand it's proportioned to two sharpnesses, and cuts according to a comparison in one time; and there is no error of foreskin from all sides on that, at which none makes mistake entirely.
And the manner of the first operation is that you make the child stand more if he's one I understand somewhat small, so you should only lie the faith in his penis and leave it for another day.
And then make that child cheerful in every manner of that way that is possible to you according to what receives his intelligence. And then make that child stand between your own hands well prepared, and do not let it be too close; hide the nails in your hand or leave them on your thigh, so that the child does not see those nor any other of the tools.
And then insert your hand to the penis of him and blow into the foreskin, and pull that inside until the tip of the penis is released, and prepare the tonsure for what's added in it due to inflammation.
The shape of the nails during tonsure, this is the shape:
Let the first ends be uncut and the others be cut, so that it doesn't release the stem of the nail, and let the length of two sharpnesses be as the length of two fingers equally.
The mistake in tonsure is that it cuts off the whole intrinsic foreskin or part of it, you should avoid cutting.
So cover that of your hand to your thumb before the scabbing of the area, and cut that according to equality.
And if you cannot hold it on your thumb, then remove that with a knife and cut that.
And if it has been three days, and the swelling of that remains on your penis after scabbing, then let that be under that which melts the scab, and scrape that smoothly, and cut that according to what is prepared for you.
And beware of the tip of the penis, that should not be on him.
And then treat that with what heals the wound from those powders which we have recommended in the chapter on powders.
And if it's cut into the foreskin to measure, and follows the parts above, that doesn't show to him.
And then treat that as we have said until it is healed.
Chapter 58.
On the treatment of retained urine in the bladder.
Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by blockage due to gravel or concentrated blood, or by placing or through a string, similar to what we have described in the chapters on methods of treatment.
And if what we have said does not dissolve and the cause is forcefully applied to the patient, then advise that you perform an extraction on them using a tool called a syringe, which looks like this: It's made of silver and is finely crafted like a lion's claw. It has the same length as a needle from a sewing thread but is half its size in length, with a subtle taper at the tip.
And the method of draining urine from that person is to take the curved horn and bind it with wool or cloth for good adhesion; then insert the ends of the horn into the area where you left off with the syringe, cut any unnecessary part of the horn if there's any issue with the wool, rather forcefully insert it into the syringe channel. Then vigorously move the syringe back and forth along the line of fluid on the skin.
And guide the patient to lie on their back, and oil the bladder and the groin with a mixture of oil and olive oil and water.
And guide the syringe into its position so it reaches the area of the groin; then bend the groin above the umbilical fold; then press the syringe inside that spot; then press that spot inwards until it reaches the bladder; and that makes the patient feel relieved at the empty cause, and if it is not done according to this order, but rather as where there's a twist.
And guide the tool little by little with the wool, until urine soaks the wool.
Then extract that and do the cure with urine, use a syringe, don't stop doing this and use the syringe until the bladder and patient experience relief.
Chapter VI.
About the quality of bladder irrigation using castor oil and suitable instruments that are in accordance with this.
When there is an ulceration or abscess in the bladder, or there's inflammation within it, or if you need to distill water and medicines in that area, then it should be done with an instrument called castor oil clamp. Here is its form:
If there is no response at the end of this line, then it is sealed. And in that area are three prongs: two from one side, like times (implying to insert them at intervals or evenly distributed).
At the beginning is a concave area where this happens and it's inserted. The quantity depends on how you insert them. When some cause is pushed out by that from the humidity, it's pushed back in. And when it's expelled, it gets pushed back out again. When something is expelled far away, according to what happens with the clampcedra tool used in naval battles where naptha is applied.
So if you want to alleviate the humidity in the bladder, insert the end of the clampcedra into the humidity and pull what is being pushed out towards the areas above, where the humidity gets pulled back into the clampcedra's cavity.
And guide the end of the clampcedra into the groin according to what we advised with the syringe; and press the humidity in the same way you press it, as soon as that humidity reaches the bladder, and relieve the patient.
The form of the subtle syringe with which the bladder is irrigated, and this is its form:
And it should be made of silver or tin, where its tip resembles a small feather, and let there be a hollow inside it.
And guide the bladder to be moved, pause in that place where you want to irrigate with moisture in the bladder, and then bind that area between two pieces of thick leather, and heat that moisture over the flame.
And guide the end of the syringe into the groin.
And guide your hand on the bladder with the moisture until it reaches the patient's abdomen, so that the moisture already reaches the bladder.
If you do not have access to the bladder, then take out one from a rabbit and make it into a circle; and pierce that completely through its roundness; guide your strong horn in those prongs as they are turned around; add the circle just like you would with oil and water, so when you place that part where you want from the moisture, you use oil and water.
And guide that into the tool as you did with the bladder, and position your hand inside so that the moisture reaches the bladder.
Chapter LX.
Of the extraction of pus.
We have already discussed in the division the types of pus and its treatment with medicines, and the difference between pus produced by the kidneys and pus produced in the bladder, and the signs of that.
And we have said about pus where there is an operation with my hand, and section.
And the pus produced in the bladder is that which gets stuck in the bladder.
And I explain that with clear exposition and abbreviation.
So I say that pus produced in the larger bladder mainly affects children; and of its signs is that the urine that leaves the bladder resembles water in its fineness, and appears like sand in that; and the patient rubs their penis, with spots that are flushed red, and they are roughly treated; and from there opens the anus through cuts made by those.
And for children who have reached fourteen years, this is the final stage of treatment; and it is difficult to treat in the elderly. In young people it may be somewhat like that which is between those.
And of the one where the pus is more and the treatment is easier; if it's small, it's contrary to that.
And to achieve treatment of that, we approach the beginning of that which modifies the patient by crossing their arms which enlarge all the opening which is in their intestines; and that opening prevents the spread of pus due to the inspection of them.
And then place the patient on their feet and have them stand up to get some rest, all this so that pus can descend into the bladder's cavity or jump out of any spots.
And then make that cut between your hands which are prepared, and let the rest of their things lie still as they are for them, so that the whole bladder may be made to descend towards the parts lying down.
And then ask for that and all of that preparation.
So if you feel the pus in the space, then immediately cover it with a section over them.
And if you don't touch it all yourself with your hand, then cover it that you apply oil to your index finger of your left hand, if the patient is a child, or use this method for a full-grown young person, and insert that into their anus. And proceed with the pus until it lies still with your hand inside. And convert that small piece gradually into the neck of the bladder.
And then press on that with your finger, and expel that towards the outside parts from the location where you have placed the section.
And command the priest to press the bladder with their hand; and command another minister that with their right hand extends the thighs towards the outside parts above, and with their other hand pulls up the skin which lies over the thighs, in the part of the location where the section is made.
And then insert the spatula so that this is its shape: and divide it inside that which is between the anus and the thighs, not in the middle location, before the left side of the inner thigh; and the section should be on that pus and your finger should be in the anus, and made to be a transverse section, so that the section outside should be wide and inwardly tightened according to the quantity from which I removed the pus should fit it, but not excessively large, as we firmly hold your finger which is in the anus the pus must be allowed to pass after the section and is opened up, taking into account their abilities.
And know that there is some pus which has an angle and margins, so that the passage of it becomes difficult because of this.
And of that which is like a piece of string, and is round, and causes a slight obstruction in the passage.
And if it's that one with angles and margins, adjust it in the crack.
And if it's not like that, then cover it with your own, or strengthen over it moderately, the tip of which is like a file on which you strengthen over the pus and don't go beyond it; or insert this delicate tool with curved tip.
And if you can't over that, then widen the tool a bit, and if you want blood flow, cut in strength that with etched glass.
And if the pus is more than one, then at the beginning you push your hand into the opening of the bladder, and then cut towards it; and then push a little bit close to that; and similarly perform this if there are more spots than two.
And if it's large pus, then ignorance is that you cut there with a large section, which happens to the patient in either of two ways: or it gets stuck or turns into its continuous evaporation process, so that the location isn't completely solidified.
And administer expulsion of it before it gets out, or carve in the fracture with scissors where you extract that in pieces.
And when you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with ointments of aloe and dragon's blood extract, and strengthen that. And place over it a cloth dipped in oil and vinegar or in ground oil and water mixed, so that the pus does not seep out.
And then return the patient onto their back, and do not untie the bandage until the second day.
And when you have untied it, immerse the place in water and oil, and then treat it with a clear ointment and an ointment of balsam until it is healed.
If in the wound an abscess occurs with pus and corrosiveness, treat it accordingly. Imagine that if the disease is like ice in the bladder, where urine is forbidden (and this is known by the release of pus in urine), then intervene with your treatment in the wound and extract that pus. Otherwise, it could cause the bladder to corrode the bladder and its putrefaction.
And then wash the wound with vinegar and water, salt, and against any species, use what is suitable for its healing until it is healed.
And during all the hours of your treatment, pay attention to both thighs and adjust the medicines that are placed on the wound.
And if the lump is small and it's in the root of the penis, and there's restricted urine flow, then treat it with what I recommend before reaching a section; and this treatment often results in healing; and I have tried this, and you should use a soldering iron to pierce it, like this:
Make the tip triangular, sharp, place it on the shaft.
And then take the tool, and hold onto the penis, let the lump rest there so that it doesn't return to the bladder.
And then insert the iron into the penis, puncturing it with ease so that the tool reaches the lump. And turn the tool with your hand in that lump little by little, and you puncture the hole inside as you make another on the other side; so urine is immediately released.
And then press your hand on that which is hardened from the lump at the tip of the penis, when that is crushed and drained by urine, and the patient is healed.
And if this treatment is not suitable for any cause that prohibits it, then hold onto the lump, and another tool on top of the lump. And then place the tips over the lump in this penis between two strands. And then extract that. And then untie the bandage and remove the frozen pus which is formed in the wound.
And you do not need the soldering iron around the lump, only to prevent it from returning to the bladder, and the other bandage on top of that because when it is untied the soldering iron nears the exit of the lump, then the cure returns to its place and heals the wound.
And for this reason it is necessary when you have the soldering iron above, that you raise the cure to those parts above, or that it return with your compliments, and thus heals the wound as we have said.
Chapter 56.
On removing the lump from women.
Lumps in women are rare.
And if you see a lump in any of those, then it's difficult to treat her, and prohibited by various methods.
One of them is that when the woman has weakness below the waist.
And the second is that you don't find a woman who knows how to identify when she's fertile or not, if she tells the doctor during her period, or if she has menstruation.
The third is that you don't find women who know this art, especially hand surgery.
And the fourth is that the site of section on a lump in women is far from the location of the lump, so you need to perform a broad excision, and there it's fear.
And if necessity requires this of you, then you should take a competent woman who knows how to do it, and is not easily available.
And if you lack that, then approach a doctor who is subtle, or present a knowledgeable woman in the matters of women, or a woman who has part of this skill.
Then make that woman present, and command her to do everything you instruct her, from the inquiry about the lump to its beginning; which is, to check if the woman is fertile, then proceed by having her touch her own anus and feel for the lump.
And if she finds that, restrain her with what you say, and then command her to prick it.
And if she is not fertile, then command the matron to insert her hand into the patient's vagina and inquire about the lump, because places her left hand on the bladder, and presses that well.
And if she finds that, then proceed by gradually removing it from the opening of the bladder to those parts, within her knowledge up until reaching the depth of the thighs.
And then prick that location near the edge of the opening you should reach to the depth of the thighs from any part for her and center the lump in that thigh area, and let her know not to be pricked by the lump when she does this.
And the excision should be small at the beginning; and then insert the tool on that section, and if you feel the lump, then adjust in section according to the amount that she knows can be removed from that.
And know that the stones of the kidney are grains: those of them are few and large, sharp like a lion's tooth, long and round, and have small openings.
And know how many kinds of stones there are for you in this way that you may signify about what you want.
And if you want to release the urine flow, adjust on the site of the broken pipe and let it out for an hour until the obstruction is removed by the urine, then continue with your operation when the stone has been taken out.
And prepare for yourself the tools that are said to be used in the extraction of stones in men, so that you may assist with those during your operation.
And if you want to facilitate the urine flow, and you know that the expulsion of urine is through the channel that is incised, then you apply powdered substances on the area and strengthen it with powdery and tightening agents; do not proceed this way; let the stone be and do not remove it, for a weak person would die from this illness. And treat the wound.
And once the intensity of the urine flow has stabilized for several days, and the wound is clean, then you can proceed with your operation when the stone has been removed.
Chapter sixty-two.
Regarding hernia correction section.
Hernia watered down is nothing but the addition of moisture in the white muscle which contains the testes and is called the scrotum.
And some hernias are in the private parts which nature prepares for each individual within when it is cut that there is already another testicle; and this is the passage of the reproductive organs between the white scrotum which we have mentioned, and it is not like this otherwise.
And the generation of this hernia is due to weakness which affects the reproductive organs, causing this substance to infiltrate them. Some occur due to blows applied to the testicles.
And this moisture has various colors; the color of it might fade to yellow or become blood-red, reddish-brown, or be dark fatty, or be watery white, and this is what is most common.
And the signs by which one can recognize where this accumulation of water is located: if it is in the scrotum that we have mentioned, then the swelling is often long and cylindrical in shape like a testicle, showing the testicles, as moisture surrounds them from all sides.
And if the moisture is in the private parts themselves, then the swelling will be cylindrical starting from where the testicles are and that's why one assumes there is another testicle.
And if the moisture is between the passage of the reproductive organs and the white scrotum, then you will feel its circumference.
And if you want knowledge of the color of the moisture, then you examine the color of the moisture in the swelling through an incision made deep into it; according to what is present in the mark left by the incision, judge as to what is inside.
And when it comes to treating him, we instruct that you provide the patient with water if this is possible for you and increase his food intake.
And have him lie on his back on some cushion or other thing for a little while, and place clean cloths under him.
And have yourself sit on the left part of him, and instruct the attendant to follow behind him on his right side, who will extend their hand from one of the sides up to the passage of the reproductive organs and to the opening of the abdominal cavity.
And have someone take a lateral incision and divide the passage of the reproductive organs through the middle point longitudinally into the abdomen near the pubic region.
And have the section made according to a straight line equal in distance from the line where you would find the skin of the testicles, until it reaches the white scrotum including it.
And cut it out, observe and remember this so that you do not incise further; your cutting should be at the point where what you are cutting hangs down more towards the testicles and carefully examine it according to the amount you can.
And then puncture the wet scrotum with an ample hole, and extract all the water.
And then separate the two labias from this section with scissors and extend the scrotum to those above; do not touch the passage of the reproductive organs that are included, and cut the scrotum in that manner which is possible for you. And cut it out entirely or in pieces, and especially its thinner part on the left side; if you do not examine his incision meticulously, there is no certainty that the water will not return.
And if the testicles are moving outside of their passage during your operation, then when you have completed the section of the scrotum, return inside it, and properly adjust both labia of the passage of the reproductive organs with suturing; treat that like other wounds until it heals.
And if you find that the testicles are corrupted by another illness, then remove the vessels which are below the scrotum's support, extract the testicle, and treat it accordingly as we have said.
And if the water is accumulated in two parts always, then you know that these are hernias. Therefore, cut this part as you did the other equally; and if it appears to be an operation to you, then do it.
And then you cleanse the wound, and immerse bandages in oil or in rotted oil; place another bandage which was immersed in water and oil, spread that over two kidneys and the wonder of the belly; place above dry sheets and powders, cover those above neatly according to this shape:
And then two sheets should be prepared and filled with wet cotton according to this shape; they should have their ends covered by a stitch or in contact with damp wool, and stitched onto the front of your pants. The one end should cover the buttocks inside the other, and the second end should reach down to the knee part of your trouser legs. Two ends on each side under two thighs, and two others on each knee, and all stitching should be done along the seam of your trousers.
And when this hernia is treated artificially with the help of a cautery in place of an operation on that section with iron; you should take a thin surgical blade and make an incision there along the line of the genital region, then ignite it according to our instructions as soon as white pus containing water has been discovered. Then perform the cautery following this manner: And it is similar to Greek writing.
And then pierce that pus, and ignite until all the moisture has been expelled.
And then extend the pus with thread, scrape it with the thread, and scrape with a heated fine cautery. Insert that as much as is possible into your patient so as to remove all of it; and be careful not to let the flame touch him.
And know that this operation is safer and further removes infection than an operation on the wound, and better than sectioning.
If your patient experiences an adverse reaction to pus, whether during the operation or when using a cautery, or from infection, then adjust how you treat this adverse reaction according to the method described, and apply that treatment to them as it is said.
If the patient is weak, and doesn't anticipate a second operation due to its horror, then perform a puncturing according to what I advise; it's when it's certified that you should do so, based on what we've discussed regarding meanings, indicating that this hernia is watery.
And when you place the patient on an elevated bed, then puncture the abscess at the lower part of their body near the spine, and perform the puncturing according to the length of the body.
And let the opening be large enough to drain all the water.
And then place your hand there and smooth it out, making sure that all remaining water can flow away. And later treat that area until the wound is healed.
If an adverse reaction occurs during the removal of water at that time, you perform it: this is not done simply because white pus in the wound causes an adverse effect and prevents water excretion. When this happens, adjust so that you insert a tool or instrument into the wound through which water from dropsy can be extracted; its shape follows from this procedure. Or position a small object in the pressure area of the wound instead.
And know that water returns, and is replenished approximately every two months or so; when it's added, then puncture according to that method described, whereby your patient will pass their days.
Chapter/Capital LXIII.
About the operation on fatty hernias and their treatment.
And know that in the operation on this kind of hernia, there is a risk of infection in major areas; for which I see your release and salvation through that better method.
And I remember the operation on that and the specifics of abscesses.
Therefore, you describe that abscesses occur in the bodies where the kidneys are located, and this is done due to various causes: or by an acute excessive accumulation, which is poured into the kidneys, or by impact.
And the color of the abscess corresponds to that of the body itself, and is not accompanied by pain, it's a heavy abscess.
And a light pus is a liquefied abscess, the color of which is dark, and there's no sensation in it.
And in some cases, operations are performed due to blockage of the arteries, and because of that inflation you already recognize its memory, or due to inflammation of the veins.
As for when it's due to inflammation of the arteries, you recognize this by spreading the abscess when you press that with your fingers; and don't touch it as you do so.
As for when it's due to inflammation of the veins, that doesn't spread in any cause, you should press them with your fingers.
And it's possible that an operation can be performed on this kind and other muscles; for you should make an incision along the line of the kidneys, and then press your finger to the areas above, extract pus from the white pus, and release the retractor of the veins, tie them, and cut out any pus retractor from all parts of the area where your fingers are.
Therefore, if your finger is already within those muscles and they're consolidated, then you should extract your finger and make an incision there.
And if there's adhesion in any cause of the pus or between them, then you should release all that adhesion and make an incision there through a circular cut.
If it is the natural flesh at the site of adhesion which is behind, then you must incise all that belongs to him and remove the pus as we have said.
So once your operation is completed, then fill the wound with oiled and pounded wool and grease; and afterwards take care of that like another treatment until it heals.
Chapter LXIV.
Regarding the treatment of a hernia caused by wind.
Wit is an abscess enclosed by some sort of covering resembling a bud, and it causes difficulty in movement, exercise, and walking for the patient.
And in treating this illness there is a remembrance of what comes before it due to fear.
However, let us say operation according to what I do first.
And say that you should have the patient lie on a raised couch; and place the suspension of the testicles at the parts left to them; and put your hand under the groin with your fingers near the crease that is palpable in the pubis; and let those other ministers assist you, and extend those up to extension forcibly.
And then make an incision with a sharp knife across the section through which the veins lie, where their veins are exposed.
And then remove from all parts as we have said in the extraction of worms which are in the temples.
And then put in those one needle with a double knot, and insert that at the first of the sites where the wind occurs, and insert that again on another occasion at the end of them. And then make incisions in the middle place perpendicular to the length of the body according to its width, and extract that which is aggregated from the liquid and putrid humors.
And then treat the wound with the treatment of other wounds where you want health to be produced by itself because they bring down the veins which are under one or two groins, which is not bad for this.
If wind affects all the veins, then you must have the testicles be extracted or that the testicles due to this cause the veins to collapse, for them to lack all nutrition through the incision of the veins, and they will be hardened, or that collapse on their own not become juvenile in those.
Chapter LXV.
Regarding the treatment of intestinal hernia.
The occurrence of this hernia happens through a section that extends over the abdomen from both sides of the navel of the belly, so moving the contents of that rupture to one of them.
And this rupture is either from the navel or from an excision of it, and it happens in these two species due to various causes: impact, or through a jump, or through noise, or through elevation of some heavy cause, or through similar actions.
The sign of this, when it happens through extension of the navel, is that it occurs gradually over a long period of time, and does not happen suddenly, and it is an abscess evenly within the belly, where the navel compresses the intestine.
The sign of this is when it happens through section of the navel, which at the beginning causes sudden intense pain; and it is an abscess different but apparent from under the navel towards its left side, and this is due to displacement of the intestine, and the body of this in front of the navel area.
And some cuts are made on the intestine's skin, and this intestinal hernia is called by that name.
And some cuts are made with suction, and some cuts go into the intestine's cavity, here it is retained, and this causes great harm for the patient, and some cuts lead to bad pain and more intensely when pressed.
And in the treatment of these species of this illness there is fear, so you should avoid surgery in that area.
And the method of operating on that is to command the patient to return the intestine with their hand towards its cavity if it returns according to its own movement, and wrap it around their collarbone between your hands, and raise the patient's breasts.
And then stretch the string which restrains the testicles to their sides, and make an incision along the entire length of the testicles; and place two blades at either side of the section according to where you need to cut that section open with them.
And if the section according to the amount that is possible from that, let all the pus come out of it.
And then cleanse that area of the navel leaving the string of the testicles, where white hard belly is exposed from each part.
And afterwards you insert your hand where the testicle is cut, where it is between white belly, which leaves the string of pus, and behind white belly, and remove from that adhesion that is behind the intestine.
And then hold the string of the testicles on their sides, and also extend the white belly with your left hand at this point, and lift the intestine towards the belly at the section; command the minister to spread the intestine up here and you dissolve that adhesion behind with completed solution.
And surround your fingers so that there is no cause for the hernia being wrapped in the hard white scab. If you find any cause for it with him, then you cut that off on his belly leave them.
And then pierce through the remaining part of the scrotum's opening in a section where there is flow and healing as we have recommended according to what we said.
And then apply wool oilpause on the wound; and apply the thread we recommended (and some white scabs are cauterized, which we mentioned nearby to the bleeding point, where several points will occur those) and make that thread flat inside so it falls by itself.
If his discharge is delayed, then let the water of urine be applied, and pause on it inside where it falls as we have said.
And then treat the wound with another treatment for wounds so that it heals.
Chapter sixty-six.
About ventral hernia.
In this hernia, it has not been seen that anyone has been burned during the treatment of it.
And the first would say that it is done like we recommended in the hernia that comes from above; which is that you bind the vessels near the section towards there and make it easier for him; then dry out around the abscess in this way, so that it works on it where the vessels fall.
And treat the wound according to what we said until it is healed.
Chapter sixty-seven.
About the disturbance that happens in the joints.
Some points should rupture in the joints as we have said, and let it out from the spot.
And don't give any cause to the doctors for hernias in the patients; and if they do, it is few; and return them all at all times.
And if the time extends with this, a fissure is made in the skin so that the hernia descends into the belly; and it happens like this because of the extension of the skin which is in the joints as we have said, which cause is that the skin is extended, and nearby it is softened and there appears an abscess and lets out.
And the treatment of him is with cautery as was preceded in the description of him.
And some points are cured with iron according to this manner: and that the patient sits on his two cushions under your hands, then dry out the area of the rupture of the abscesses by working at it in width according to the quantity of three inches.
And then strengthen the white skin which is below the opening where it becomes exposed.
And then take the rod and pause it on the most protruding part of the skin, and press it against the navel in the belly.
And then pierce both protruding spots on the end of the rod in the skin, and adjust one of those to the other with stitches.
And then remove the end of the rod, do not cut through the skin completely, nor stretch the skin or any other cause such as I have to know in the treatment of intestinal hernias.
And then treat that with the treatment of wounds, and as you pierced through the ends, remove that and restore the wound so that it is consolidated; where the skin contracts and the protrusion of the rupture is not adjusted.
And cautery is better in this place, which is closer to health.
Chapter sixty-eight.
About softening of the scrotum's opening.
Some points the scrotum opening in some men becomes soft because the muscles that are within it become soft, and you attend to him.
It is necessary for the one who is attending to his treatment that he make the patient lie according to his two cushions, and uncover the entire opening which becomes soft over the normal opening; and then have him adjust both folds to the stitches.
And if you wish, cut off at the beginning the excess of the softened opening with three or four stitches and have a secure stitch.
And then pierce between the stitches; and then treat according to the treatment of other wounds until it heals and lets out the ends.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
Of castration.
Know that castration in our law is condemned, but due to certain reasons written within me that I must remember this here; and it is not necessary to remember this person only for two methods, of which one is when the doctor is questioned about this matter, they should know the cure for this individual when it happens. And the other method is that we have had many times where the need for castration in other animals for our young ones' development is required, just like with mares, and dogs, and pigs, and similar to those animals.
And so I say that castration is done in two ways: either through impalement or through a cut to the section.
In the case that it is done through impalement, the way of the operation is to make the beast urinate in salt water so that the individual's genitals become softened and swollen, hanging down. And then take those away with your hand until they dissolve and do not show any marks on the skin.
In castration done through a cut and sectioning, you must have the animal and press on the cord of the testicles with your left hand.
And then let the suspensory ligament go, and cut on each side of one spot where two muscles will process themselves.
And then cut out those pus that you have scraped off anywhere. And do not leave any cause for the prostate gland, but rather the subtle prostate which is above the bladder.
And this method of castration is better which is done through impalement, for impalement with ease leaves no cause for the testicles so that the animal desires copulation.
And then treat the wound until it is healed.
Captulo 70.
Of the treatment of hermaphroditism.
Hermaphroditism in men is according to two ways: the one is where orifice appears in the space of the testicles' cord, in that which is between two testicles forming a male part with female hair.
And some urine discharges from that opening, which is in the cord of the testicles.
And for the females it is a special case: that the female part above the pubis behaves as if there are two male testicles of men somewhat too small to the side, like the prepuce in men and two testicles.
And the treatment is of three kinds: for two of the males and for one kind of females. And it means that you must cut those tight tissues until they discharge the secretion of that, and then proceed to treat those as for the other wounds.
And in the second type of male where urine is released which is in the cord of the testicles, there is no treatment or operation for it.
Captulo 21.
Of angina and flesh swelling due to female causes.
Strong angina is adjusted on natural causes that are removed and should be observed over time; some cases become magnified in certain women to the extent that they spread like in men and invade intercourse.
And so, you should hold the excess of angina with your hand or with a tool and cut it out.
And do not finish with cutting only, especially at the base of the penis, so that there is no flow of pus.
And then treat that as for other wounds until it heals.
Malignant flesh is flesh that grows in the womb of the mother filling it up, and naturally extends to the parts forward according to the shape of the penis (for which some originally called it "caudal impotence"); so you should cut it out like cutting angina, and treat that until it heals.
Captulo 72.
Of the treatment of hemorrhoids.
Hemorrhoids occur when the female part is not perforated, or it's just a small tear. And it can be due to nature or by accident.
Accidental occurs due to impotence which has preceded it, and that is caused by either rough or lubricated flesh, or a subtle prostate.
And it can happen in the penis of the mother, or around her belly, or under excessive pus, or at the base of excessive pus, and you should prohibit coitus, pregnancy, and childbirth, and strictly prohibit menstruation as well.
The recognition of that is made by observing the midwife, if the protrusion is obvious, you can see it from afar; however, if it's not visible, then you have to touch it with your fingers or with a stick.
If the protrusion is due to a subtle prostate, and it's between the two lips, then you should touch and release that area.
And you place your hands on the two lips of the flesh, and then position your index fingers under both sides of each of them.
And the woman should be lying on her back with her legs spread apart, and you should extend both lips as forcefully until that subtle prostate is broken and the protrusion becomes open.
And then take wool and dip it in oil and place that over the area, and let him be at home for a day so that the cut area is not solidified.
If the gall is thick and viscous, then you must induce vomiting using a spoon or a mint leaf.
If the operation is for fish flesh, then hold that with a ladle and incise it.
And use the medicines that help stop the flow of pus and alleviate pain, such as pepper, pus from the stomach, and gallows, add them to hen's egg whites.
And administer an open lead pipe for it in case the wound does not heal lightly.
Hold that there for a few days and administer honey wax afterwards.
And let it heal with the other consolidating treatment until it is healed.
And sometimes it happens during the primary preparation of other meats, and you must follow this method when incising. If the operation is for a white boil, then it should not be made contrary to iron in any way.
Chapter 73.
Regarding the treatment of hemorrhoids, tears, and red blisters that occur in women's genitals.
Hemorrhoids are a condition involving the veins in the area where blood flows continuously from them; and for old hemorrhoids, they occur like this.
And I have already explained in the division of those kinds and their signs, as well as to say which ones receive treatment and which do not.
So it's said that hemorrhoids and tears when in the early stage of pregnancy and do not show symptoms are given treatment with iron.
Those ones which are in the mother's orifices on which you feel a sensation, these are the ones that are treated.
And you should immerse the woman in hot water and then spread the thighs or put a hard cloth on them, and incise those on the anus.
And after that, dust those with the flow of pus from one of the internal powders for pain relief, such as pepper and similar to those.
And later scrape her feet for an hour, then place her in cold water afterwards.
And if the pus continues to flow, then make her drink a decoction of sumac and mares milk and walnuts and similar.
And later take honeycomb flour and mix it with honey, oil, and water, then make a poultice from this on the back.
And if the blood is discharged, then eat it; otherwise, attach two suckling devices and to their nipples make incisions.
And later take wool and immerse it in the juice of pressed spinach or in the juice of wormwood or in vinegar water, then attach it to the place; and treat the area with ointment until it is healed.
And treat it until it is healed.
Chapter 74.
Regarding the incision of cysts that occur during pregnancy.
Various types of boils that occur during pregnancy, such as white boil, urinary boil, ulcers, erysipelas, scabies, herpes, and other boils. And I have already mentioned these illnesses and their types and their signs, as well as treatments for them in the division.
And it's true that I've said in this treatise about the boil caut that comes during pregnancy when it's about boils that lead to health issues, and if you want to know how the operation is done with iron.
So consider if the pain from the boil at its beginning is sharp to percussion and pus, fever, sometimes it reddens and if you feel a sensation on it, then note that an incision is needed, and treat it with what helps in maturation until the sharpness of incidents ceases.
And then you must incise the woman on a board that has two edges; and lie down on her back and place her feet at the lower part of her belly, spread her thighs, keep her elbows on her sides, and tie it nicely with what is convenient.
And then the midwife should follow the left side and administer the tool through which she will open the mother's mouth, the shape of which will come about from the causes that will happen later.
And when you want to administer this tool, fix it at the opening of the mother's mouth in the woman, and what enters from the tool into the mother should not be more than the opening of her mouth and harm the uterus. If the tool is larger than the opening of the mother's mouth, then you must sprinkle powder on the texture of the mother's mouth so that it prevents all tools from entering into the opening of the mother.
And you must sprinkle the fluid that flows through the tool at its end above and have it keep the tool and stir up this fluid until it opens the mouth of the mother.
And when it appears, and is touched with the hand and is hot and wet, then you must stop this by putting a spoon inside of it.
And when the illness has been evacuated, you should place in the wound a cloth submerged in rubbed oil or olive oil containing some medicinal substance; and immerse the foot in that section of the knee.
And cover the knee and over the kneecap a clean wool cloth submerged in water in which pears have been boiled.
And after about two days apply grease which, when added to this medicine, helps to heal it.
And some baths are washed the knee and the wound in water and honey, then return to that water which has been boiled with rosemary or almond oil, and afterwards apply the medicine again.
And if the wound is inside the inflamed knee, then you must forbid its cure with iron, use instead the remedy we have mentioned in the division.
Capitol seventy-five.
Teaching midwives in what manner they should treat breech presentations so that it occurs according to the natural figure.
A necessary cause is that the midwife knows the position of a normal childbirth through signs on her, so when you watch the woman in labor and she wishes to breathe deeply from the air, and this process is accelerated by what happens around her during labor, speeding up the delivery of the breech baby. Then you know that this part is according to natural position, as it breathes above its head, and the second one either hangs suspended or down by the umbilical cord.
So when you observe those signs, then let the woman's stomach be compressed by herself so that the baby comes down lightly when it presses on its head, make her deliver the second one, and eliminate all excess fluids for good sanitation.
That which is another for this part is unnatural and impossible, when the baby is breathing on its feet and the body of the person is breathing in front of their head and feet, and the hand of the person is one, or at their foot,. Or when the head of the person is breathing and their hand, or at their belly, then it becomes lighter and more upright on its neck, resembling the unmanageable figures.
A necessary cause is that the midwife must be knowledgeable and discerning in all these matters, and avoid error and deception.
And I am showing you every figure of those [conditions], and what instrument is in those based on which it signifies and rests upon that.
When the condition is resting on its head due to natural exhaustion, and it's strong on the woman causing a difficult parturition, and weakens her virtue, then have that person try, or whatever women can do for themselves, and fumigate their head with fenugreek oil and olive oil moist.
And then insert the midwife between her own words small and needle at that location for the second one, or dry it with her own finger where there is moisture in her. And press on the woman's stomach so that it expels the fetus.
If it doesn't expel, then let the woman be treated with colic from butter and fenugreek soup.
And then command her, along with the breathing exercises, to be compressed and make her sneeze in a confined space; and open her mouth and nose for an hour, so that the fetus can escape promptly.
And if both parts of the fetus are expelled at the beginning, then you should gradually reduce those exercises towards easier breathing little by little. If you do not follow the instructions, then let the woman lie on her knees and lift her feet above, and then bring the knee to the ground; and let the woman be held so that she does not fall from the shock.
And if the parts are not turned inside and the fetus is still within, then insert those and extract the opening of the fetus or tie it to the woman's hand with cloth and extract it equally, so that it can be expelled.
When the fetus is expelling through her hips, then let you urge those inwards, and gradually turn the fetus slightly, and make that equal, and take one of her feet and stretch those inwardly little by little.
If it is expelled into the thighs, then let you command her to squeeze herself, and make her sneeze in confined space, which can be expelled promptly if God wills.
And if it is not expelled as we have advised, then let you return the fetus little by little until you place it according to its natural figure, so that it can be expelled more lightly.
And if it is forbidden to do all that we have advised, then take colic from ginger and dissolved gum, beat them thoroughly in the mortar for good pounding, and place on the abdomen of the woman, under her lower belly. And then let that be rubbed with hot water until she achieves her flanks.
And when you notice that the parts of herself are hardened, then let her be subjected to fumigation with myrtle and keep her there. And after an hour of fumigation, let her be placed on her knees, and then make her sneeze and open her mouth, lift her from there, and press the lower part of her abdomen slightly, so that she can expel the fetus promptly.
Evaluation of the patient lying supine on one of their sides. It is to be evaluated in the reduction of the hand for the patient, more so if you cannot reduce that, then elevate the woman and let it happen.
And if it cannot go on its own, then have her recline on the bed, and compress the thighs of the patient with vigorous compression, and apply medicines which I prescribe and recommend for purges.
And if the child has emerged, then have her lie on her back, and study about the reduction of the head, and arrange the body naturally, and make her sneeze, and instruct her to squeeze herself as she is restrained.
Evaluation of the fetus on the back with the limbs spread out and the skin of the patient is twice that of her mother. Make sure the midwife holds the hand of the fetus and gradually rotate that little one bit by bit, and make it easier.
And when it is as much as this and has been equalized, then pause on the belly with what we have recommended using oil and purges.
And gradually instruct her to get up little by little, and when you have done this, then have the patient lie on one side of the bed and instruct her to be leaning over the right hip, and also instruct her to squeeze herself; and make her sneeze under certain conditions. The preparation for the birth of the fetus is completed on the side.
When it begins to happen in horror according to this manner from the mother, consider it, and then you immerse the second one into your nail as it is emptied of moisture.
And if the fetus is hanging over the face and neck of the one in question, then you should immerse that from the umbilical cord, so that it is not retained and stays alive.
And gradually push the fetus into the parts internally while pausing that according to what is seen, and instruct the woman to squeeze herself several times, and may it be discharged easily with a short time if God wills.
The birth of twins or multiple fetuses. Know that twins have frequent movements, and some have three or four, but this is unusual and quite strange; yet these are natural causes, not supernatural.
Count them, whether they are multiplied, one second, and are separated by chafing, distinguish those among the ligaments in the umbilical cord of each of these. Some movements happen naturally so that it seems like one fetus is discharged with a natural process, and some movements happen artificially as we have recommended.
And if some of them are difficult for you, then proceed with the birth and bring it to the point that we have described of non-natural figures, then treat those in the same way as we have recounted.
And if the midwife is subtle and does what makes it easy and subtlety, and at a delay, and adapts herself according to all figures as she has been prepared by her skill leading to health.
Remembering what forms within the womb from embryos and aborts.
Some veins are formed in the belly into one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and more than ten, at which point you should verify that a woman who aborts has given birth to a child of five, and another with all these features, which is caused by the measurement of the glorious sages.
And all of this must be taken into account according to what is in the science of the midwife that leads her to that faint resemblance of which it is spoken, and thus pauses herself accordingly as she sees fit.
Chapter 76.
On the extraction of the fetus when it is dead.
When you care for a dead fetus as we have said in the division of medicine and it is not outside, and you are reluctant to use surgery with your own hand, then consider that if the woman is of good health and not affected by any of the accidents through which her loss is feared.
And when the woman should be laid on her back on the bed with her head inclined upward and her thighs raised.
And the minister should have that of both sides or be tied in bed so that the body does not extend beyond the extraction of the fetus.
And then you moisten the mother's mouth with oils, with purging remedies of high quality and fennel and seeds from her.
And then the surgeon anoints her hands with those oils and salves, and places his hand in comfort near the liver, and carefully positions his hand at the spot where he leaves the needles in the flesh.
And places them conveniently at this: therefore, you must consider if the body is ready to have the needles inserted onto its head, and then you leave the needles in his arms, or in his neck, or in his mouth, or in his palate, or let him grow a beard, or in his Adam's apple, or near the places between ribs, or let the flanks be done.
If the insertion is about his feet, then near the ankle, or in the middle of the back.
And have the needle in your right hand, and flatten his curvature at that spot which is between his last fingers on his left hand, place your hand comfortably and leave the needle at one of those places we've mentioned, within which it reaches its deepest point.
And then place and keep another needle or the third if necessary, so that there is equal penetration, and not extension according to his straightness simply.
And let your effort be at every part, so that the pain in him is relieved as much as when pulling out teeth during their extraction.
And place him where their extension is mollified; and if any part of him is held back, then have the surgeon apply some of his fingers with oil and insert them thoughtfully and move them in the place that is being held back.
Therefore, if the part of the body is out-of-place, then have the needles inserted at a location where it may be put back more easily; and do this until the entire body is out-of-place.
If the hand is bent in front of the other, and it's not possible to reduce that by restraining him, then have a cloth envelop that; and carefully extract that until everything is out-of-place, and cut into it or at the joint of the hand or at the elbow.
And do this also with the other hand and on both feet.
If the head of the body is large, or it gets restricted during pulling out, or if there's water adjusted in his head, then have someone insert between his fingers a sharp needle and cut open the head, or find that with an instrument named "alundat", whose shape will be similar to the other instruments around here.
And similarly do this if the body has naturally large proportions: then have someone incise that with chainsaw or take it out as we've said with an "alundat"; and carefully extract the bones with forceps.
And if the head is pulled out and restricted at the Adam's apple, then have it cut so that the moisture in his throat is melted.
And if it's not complicated or doesn't get pulled out during pulling, then you simply incise the head as long as it feels easy to do so.
And if the exits of the abdomen are blocked or in his dropsy, then have you perforate that where the moisture runs inside him.
And if the body is over his feet, then the pull of him is gentle and the direction towards the liver's mouth is gentle.
And if it's restricted between the abdomen and the feet, then have you extract that with cloth which you will envelop around your hand, and cut the abdomen and feet where the fluid runs in those places.
And if the other limbs are still in place and you turn the head, then the surgeon will insert his left hand; but if the liver's mouth is open, then insert your hand into its front part, and carefully position it under that, and pull him towards his hands until he reaches the liver's mouth, and then carefully insert one or two needles, and pull him towards those.
And if the liver's mouth is restricted by an abscess that happens to one, then have it not be overly inflated over him; before this, administer the administration of causes of wet and fatty things. And apply bandages; and keep monitoring the patient with waters that are soothing and moistening.
And if the body is on its side, then as much as possible make it to be cut open: and apply what we've said for the living body.
And if this is not possible, then have it incised in layers, and be extracted.
And make sure that you do not leave any cause internal from the second one.
And when you have completed all your operation, then administer what we've said about the treatment for abscesses that happen in the liver.
And if there is pus flowing out, then let it be with stiff waters and administer the other treatment.
And I have already seen a woman with a dead body in her abdomen, and then on that spot another pus wound was formed, and the other dead fetus is inside the body. It happened to him for a long time that an abscess formed in his umbilical area; and inflated such that pus was bursting out, and he began to bleed.
And I was called upon to treat him, and treated him for a long time, but the wound does not consolidate.
Then I would place on it due to some causes a plaster of intense attraction, and operate on them with an instrument, and after pass a few days, and operate another bone; and I was too amazed, as in the belly there is no bone.
And then I thought that they were from the bones of the dead body.
Then I cleaned the wound and removed the dead flesh from it, found the bones existing in their usual positions, and already observed this manner for a long time, correct up to a little arm of them.
And I didn't find it strange at all, but rather that in this is science and help for the one who makes use of doctor's skill in treating illnesses.
About the shapes of the instruments necessary to remove the body.
Shape of the vertebra in which the majority opens:
This is the shape of the stretcher on which they are equalized, to which two vertebrae belong at the ends of two fuses. But let this vertebra have a more delicate curvature, and make it of wood or from the trunk of a boy.
And let the thickness of any fuse be two fingers and the edge of each both sides be one finger, and the length of each is a palm and half; and in the middle of two fuses are two joints of those metal fuses which are already fixed, of which the length is slightly more than a palm, and the thickness of each is about two fingers, or slightly less.
And these two additions should be inserted in the mouth of the mother so that they open when you turn the two prescribed vertebrae.
Another shape, similar yet more delicate and lighter:
Make it of wood or from the trunk of a boy according to the similarity of forceps. But at the extremity of it have two additions as follows, and the length of those additions is about a palm, and the thickness of each is two fingers.
And as you want to make the mother open with that, then cut the body above so it lies flat on its back, open what is between her thighs. And close your hand on the instrument as you do with scissors, equally according to the quantity that you want of the opening in the mouth of the mother for the meter to make what you want.
The shape of the vertebra which they said were ancient:
Shape of the pusher on which the body is pushed:
Shape of the2 on which the large head is held:
And it resembles forceps with teeth at the extremity as follows, and some times is made long as forceps according to this shape, as follows, which has teeth like those of a saw on which it is inserted and held. Shape of a little:
Shape of an ungual having one spine:
Shape of an ungual having two spines:
Shape of a spatula having two ends on which the head is separated.
Shape of two spatulas lateral:
All those instruments are exercised, and when there is an increase in the species of that and they are prepared by the artisans, it becomes lighter for its operation and more suitable to prepare men by their quantity.
And do not use those instruments until you are equipped with them, for the need of those is not excusable.
For the extraction of the second one.
When the second one is retained, you should command the mother to hold her breath, then order that she sneezes with the condition, and strengthen your hand on the mouth of her and on her nostrils, and if thus it comes out, good.
And if not, then take a leaf and pierce through the cover with a needle and pause there to breathe into the mother's mouth, as in calamus and roughness and nettle and chamomile and powdered gum Arabic and cinnamon wood and balm. All these herbs or some of them should be submerged in water in the leaf, then place that above the fire.
And place a pipette of jute in the mother's mouth, and let that remain inside so that it evaporates into the cavity of the mother.
And make her sneeze as we have said, and the second one will be expelled quickly.
May if this treatment is not effective and does not work, then you command the midwife to immerse her left hand in sesame oil or in a high-melting point wax, and insert that into her mouth and remove the second one with it. If she has found it, then take it little by little until it reaches the opening of the mother, then insert her hand as we have advised. When she finds the second one, extract it gradually according to its straightness so that the mother does not fall due to violent attraction. Before you proceed, make sure she is comfortable on her right and left sides for ease.
And if the mother's mouth is constricted, we have already recommended treatment with sneezing and with the use of medicinal herbs.
May it be that without considering all the causes we have recommended, then you must refrain from repeating any abstraction, rather immerse yourself in understanding how what emerges from you reaches the mother's mouth through her thighs, and close off that area with grease and fourfold medicine; so that thing will last for a few days and dissolve and become expellable.
When it is expelled, the malady rises to your head and stomach, and this causes illness; therefore, ensure that inhalations of essential oils and suitable remedies are administered for this.
Such as the already use a fumigation with rosemary and dried figs.
The form of the instrument through which the woman is fumigated should help in retaining menstrual periods and the secondary period:
It can be made of iron or wood.
And the delicate end is placed against the chimney and the wide end over the fire, and the fumigation should be placed above the arms of the fire.
And let that place where this fumigation is consumed, then repeat with another.
Regarding the treatment of an unperforated baby's belly.
Newborn babies often have closed bellies that are sensitive and full. Therefore advise the midwife to pierce with her finger that lump; if not, pierce it with a sharp needle, and make sure it doesn't touch the wound.
And then apply heat to that with woolen cloth soaked in vinegar and oil; and then treat it with grease where it is sterile.
And if you fear it's full, then leave a tube in the mouth for several days, and remove it when the baby wants to drink.
And if there is overfullness of the belly due to consolidation of abscess or boil; then ensure that this consolidation dissolves, and treat it with what we've said about treatment and lead.
Regarding the treatment of fistulas that occur in you.
The fistulas that occur in the pelvic region from low pus are nodules and swellings, which often appear near the anus or in the space between one of the parts.
And it is a fistula or spots.
And as that swelling is old and prone to white or powdery moisture, some of these conditions can occur when some of these fistulas penetrate.
Those that penetrate are known by what emerges and by windiness; some of them cause discomfort to the exhalation, and it is noticeable when those worms exist.
Some of those fistulas are found in the space penetrating into the bladder, and into the male organ; some of them penetrate between the thighs and into the crotch.
And in the place where a fistula penetrating into the anus and not penetrating is known, you should insert your finger into the anus, and gently insert a needle or wood into the fistula when there is no obstruction.
And if there is obstruction in that, then insert a soft needle or horse hair into that place where you feel the lump or the hair in your finger.
And if you do not feel that anywhere, nor does any cause of expulsion, worm or windiness occur as we have said, then know it is non-penetrating, and then take action for treatment.
And when the fistula penetrates into the bladder or into the male organ, then its meaning is the expulsion of urine from that and prevention of anything that makes the place susceptible to medicine until it becomes consolidated.
And if it penetrates into the thighs joint or inside the bone causing pain in the circulation, then this is a sign that the needle goes inside here if there is not obstruction inside the bone and pain in the circulation of one's parts; and that it causes constant pus; and this is not valid for that medication, nor does it consolidate with grease.
And in all those penetrating fistulas, not everything is cured, and the treatment of these involves hard work and the manipulation of medical leaves under which they are formed.
And in that one that is not penetrating and is not old, iron-based healing is hoped for as I will recommend to you, and what I have already prescribed.
And that the patient lies between your legs with their back raised, causing their hips to be within them, their thighs are inclined towards their abdomen, and insert a soft needle or horse hair into it if there is obstruction in the fistula, knowing where the needle passes.
And if that sensation is around the mouth, then you should insert your finger into the mouth.
And if you feel the needle already penetrating through your finger alone, or anything else that is felt between your finger and that lump or flesh, then you know for certain that this one is penetrating; therefore do not work on it, as there is no healing with this, as we have said.
However, some would say that it is cured in certain men of a tart nature.
And concerning the treatment that is hoped for in the patient, it is to ignite a subtle cautery according to the width of the fistula, as previously described, and introduce that flame into the fistula inside where it reaches around the intestines; and then continue that operation two or three times until you know that all those flesh areas adjusted to the fistula resemble feather quills.
And then treat that with heat in the form of fumigations enveloped in cloths where they cook all those flesh areas which are adjusted. And also treat it with medicinal ointments for healing and consolidating the flesh, if it is healed, well done; and otherwise, then it is not healed within a certain time period for other treatment.
And if it enters inwards and does not penetrate inside the one you named which is in the anus, and between that and the mass that is rapidly dense with flesh or fat, then suture the fistula in the area where it cuts through the surface of the intestines. Then dry the intestine from the start point of the fistula, and see if the mass dries out, and it's inside the fistula where drying occurs until the section reaches the place where the end of the mass is, and the mass is released and heals.
And then cleanse those fistula flesh areas which are assembled like the plume of an eagle, without damaging any of them.
And if there is a discharge of pus that comes between you and your operation when these flesh areas are inside you, then let it be as much as necessary and with the pus use a small instrument to apply heat or apply acute medicine. The heat from the fire that is applied well has two purposes: it is an adjustment for these adjusted flesh areas, and also a cutting off of pus through the evaporation of moisture.
And then treat that with heat in the form of fumigations or herbal teas where the affected area gets warm, and then after this, treat the wound with ointments for hard flesh that generate healing and consolidation.
And in the medicines with which they are tightened up and dried out; when after this, it is restored, and already it is healed and you don't fear further treatment.
And if the fistula has already penetrated into the anus and is extended from the surface of the body, then insert your tool in the anus and ask about it.
And if the mass is dense or flesh-like and close to penetration, then it's not an operation in him but according to trust and hope rather.
That is the cause to administer one of three ways for him: or that it be cauterized as we have said; or that the affected area dry out until you achieve the point where it's possible to insert several and the healing is underway; and don't dry the affected area in order not to penetrate the fluid containing the intestines, and do what you wish with the opening of the patient's buttocks according to your intention; then treat that with what we have said which makes him healthy. Or extend that quickly and remove that pus that dries out inside near the anus as we have said, or on the mass or with another sharp instrument, and then cleanse those fistula flesh areas which are in the drying section where you can use probing; and strive to restore the entire wound through drying, and if there is a pus opening above not being consolidated, and damages the opened fistula near the anus, and allows only little pus to flow from the buttocks. And sometimes the fistula is closed in this way: when you insert the mass into the fistula, and it's around the anus on the surface of the intestines and near the opening of the anus, then take a piercing tip like a needle according to this form:
And insert into that filial layer covered in fur or around it; and then insert the mass into the skin within the fistula until you achieve its healing.
And if it's penetrating near the edge of the anus inside, then you remove that fur from that area as you introduce your tool into the anus; and extract the end of the fur and adjust both ends simultaneously, and strengthen each one, and leave this for one day or two. And when more penetrates the fur in the flesh, strengthen it inside where those flesh parts are penetrated by the ends of the fur and fit together.
And then treat the wound until it is consolidated and healed.
And if the opening of the fistula isn't penetrating, then make it penetrate in any way that you are prepared for, but not through the anus, which is not something for you to do so as not to damage the intestines; and then have it healed within this area.
The method of applying a sharp spout to the one that is divided by the fistula: the curvature of which is quite sharp and the other part is not sharp, so as not to insert it where it's unnecessary, just like sometimes.
The process ofhemorrhoids in which pus flows at the opening of those.
Hemorrhoids occur in two ways: some are like charcoal within the anus, while others are like fat from raisins. And among those big and small ones, it allows the body to heal from those symptoms for that period being one, with spots, and on its surface, and in the extremities of it.
And those that are on the surface of the buttocks according to the lesser months of humidity, from which there flows yellow water or a little sickness in the body continuously, and according to the color of the body.
And the cure for that which is inside the stomach is to command the patient to rest and to squeeze it so that the stomach burns and the boils appear before you. So you apply this to their ankles or whatever you have on your finger, and then apply this to the patient's limbs.
And if the fingers are not treated with those due to their moisture and softening of them, then apply these on the drapery fabric or wool cloth, or with flaxen cloth, and extract these on your hands, and then apply this to them, grinding some powder near it for them instead of a cautery; or cauterize them as instructed in the section about cauterization. And then cure those with another treatment once they are healed.
And if the buttocks do not allow evacuation, then apply an incision to the patient with a small bite-sized cut, and wash it with that which is in the stomach that allows for slight evacuation when the patient is squeezed.
And if the boils are outside the buttocks, then the cause of them is minor, and you should apply this to your finger or with a stick, insert these, and then treat these with what we have said until they heal.
And when you have made an incision, make sure to provide suture for them according to this manner: take the wound wrapped in a bandage and insert it into the needle, then extract the boils towards the parts above; have that penetrate with the needle along the other part, and wrap the two ends of the thread around that part laterally. Strengthen the boil with firm stitching, then cut off the thread and remove the needle.
And do this to all of them, leave one open and don't sew it up, so that the excess pus can flow from that.
And place a cloth soaked in rubbed oil or in lint over the buttocks; then place this over the stomach and command the patient to rest. And leave that open until it closes; and when it is healed, treat those with ointment or with another treatment until they are well.
And since they are old and no longer work in that medicine, then ensure that you puncture them with the tip of a pin or with your finger until they become wet and allow for pus to drain out from them, preventing consolidation; then treat these until they consolidate.
And you should puncture them with strong pus until the first one drains and they are scraped off; then treat these until they heal.
Understand that abscess formation is the key, and it should not be done unless it resembles a small round spot according to the color of the skin like a flea bite, and it occurs throughout the body but especially in the limbs and feet, so for those pains you should prescribe rest.
And understand that it should be incised with what is in the artery of the key, and kept with forceps or tweezers, and its root should be removed; then treat that.
And if you wish, cauterize it as instructed in its chapter.
True warts are small, hard, round pus-filled bumps on the surface of the body, and they occur commonly in children.
And for treating them, you should stretch or puncture that, or strengthen it with thread or cloth until it heals. And if you wish, cauterize this as we have said, with fire or with acute medicine.
Ants are small bumps that are felt or pus-filled on the surface of the body and tend to occur near joints; whenever you stumble upon such a bump in them resembling a bite from an ant, they are formed around the body.
And the treatment for this is to take a copper or vinegar reed and ensure it's strong; place that over the ant so that it covers the circle around it on the body; then rotate your hand with the reed until you puncture what is in the artery of the ant, and place that under its joint, and remove the ant from its root.
And if you wish, do this with an iron or steel reed in this manner:
Take the part above the reed leading to subtlety, it's silent (it's not perforated) wrapped in a way that from afar the appearance of this is removed and its rotation becomes apparent.
And if you wish, cauterize the ant as instructed in the section about cauterization of maggots in the chapter on cauterization.
The forms of the instruments that are used for cauterization.
Some cauterizations are done with silver or copper rods or melted and hammered metals; some are made with small and large instruments according to those used, where the size of the instrument matches the part being treated in the care of small children's injuries; and for those whose scabs are stubborn or painful, the cauterizations should be small.
The form of large but few cauterizations:
The tip of the cannula over which the bag is tied should be wide according to this manner; and let there be for the patient's part where the bag is tied, as often happens.
And the end of the patient's pus that enters into the anus should be closed (not open) like a tight seal; and in front of this there is a slight indentation. In one side of the buttock, there are two notches, and on the other side, one notch. The width of the notch should be according to the thickness of the rays and if it's thick then make it slightly smaller.
And let the bag in which medicinal substances for the bladder of beast or sheep skin are placed be as wide as a hand.
And let it be pierced with narrow slits like those that are made when it's being rolled; and the space between the slits should have the same width as described.
And then insert a strong piece of raw beeswax that is as wide as ten pieces or roughly so into those slits. Adjust the bag to it; when you place the bag on the patient, make sure it's spread out in the tip of the cauterization between two distinguishing points firmly and make the cauterization at each slit: The quality of cauterizing that is best is when you fill the bag with medicine which should be heated according to the tolerance capacity of the patient; take care not to have too much or too little of the application.
And then have the patient lay on his back, and lift their legs while placing a person or a blanket under them. Then apply oil or albumin of egg or fenugreek or semmelanz extract to the cauterization area; insert that into the anus with ease. And then let the doctor take the bag and squeeze it twice forcefully until everything in the cauterization is expelled from inside the intestine; remove the cauterization and when done, lift the patient's legs onto the bed.
And if the medicine forces it out on its own, use as much as you can tolerate. And if sleeping with that lasts for a whole night, it's better later in youth.
And if you cauterize that during stomach ailments and the patient sweats due to this, then repeatedly apply the cauterization until they recover.
And if there are abscesses or pustules in the anus, then make the cauterization subtle and tight, like those that are done on children.
Regarding the treatment of infections.
And I have already mentioned in the division of treating infections what was suitable for free treatment, and thus I will also discuss treatment with me, according to the situation, using medicines.
So let it be known that infections are varied according to where the infection occurs and depending on the location upon which they are found.
And the reasons for which many wounds cause infections are as follows: through the penetration of dirt, or tearing of flesh, or impact with a spear, or a club, or an arrow, or any other causes leading to such injuries.
As for infections that occur in various parts of the body, these are like scalp infection, or neck infection, or foot infection, or abdominal infection, and so on, concerning each of the limbs.
And I recommend treating certain infections by pausing this reasoning and rule for other infections.
And I begin with simple scalp infections, the memory of compounded ones will come in at the start of the next chapter.
So let it be known that when a simple scalp infection occurs and there is no fracture, consider this: if it's due to dirt or any substance, then you've waited long enough for the pus formation even if it's large and you fear potentially developing an abscess in that patient, then you must sweat them out and perform a cephalic leeching right away; do not delay this. Then remove the blood according to the quantity of its virtue if no other contraindication prevents leeching, especially when the blood that comes out from the infection is little.
And ensure the patient doesn't overheat, drink much water, or consume heavy foods following the bloodletting.
And if you're advised against any reason after this minor adjustment, then limit food intake and avoid meat or drink.
And pause on the infection if it causes an abscess; apply heat in olive oil or with wine that has been made sticky for this purpose.
And if you're sure of an abscess forming, then pause on the infection, especially when it's recent and the air hasn't changed that powder which I recommend applying slightly.
And if the air has already changed there, then pause on certain ointments until they are healed.
And if the infection is large or due to tearing and substances, and the patient's lips are not closed by bandages, then adjust them according to how I will recommend suturing their wounds.
If the disease has already been revealed through the bone and skin, and it is not retention but a small suspension, then you should cut that area and proceed to treat the wound with medicines, restoring flesh in place of the cut. And command the patient to eat vegetables which are easy on digestion: beans and peas, cooked until tender, within which they can be eaten.
And if you find decomposition in the wound and it does not stick to the bone, then you should cut out all that putrefaction and remove it, and proceed to treat that area.
If in these wounds an artery or vein from which blood flow can occur is involved, and it cannot be removed with medicines alone, then you should inquire about the artery. If you find that part of it has not been cut, then you should cut through that section using a sharp tool, or seal it; and if necessary causes this to not work as described, then you should cauterize where the blood flow stops.
And if these wounds are simple and small, then their cause is minor; sprinkle this powder over them, let the wound harden before the air changes those.
And the method of this powder is as follows: take oil from aloe, part one; dragon's bark oil, part two; and ashes that have not been completely extinguished, parts three. Grind all together finely, fill the wound with it, and press it in tightly with good compression until it sticks over that area and coagulates under the blood.
And after that, cover it with powder and let it rest on the wound, do not remove the dressing while it remains like this until the medicine has been absorbed in such a way that it is healed.
And sometimes you only perform a cautery for this alone when you do not have aloe and dragon's bark in your current possession.
And perform this surgical operation for large wounds when it is necessary to rest on them and spread out, and those are recent wounds with their blood, which the air has not altered.
And if the air has altered them, especially in summer, then it is not appropriate to place this powder where we have said, but instead treat those with what we have mentioned earlier. In that case, apply some more easily digested ointments on those areas; or you can sprinkle onto those a mixture of flour from the kitchen and water within which they soften; proceed to treat them with another cure until they are healed.
If you happen upon a fracture wound in bone and it's small, then you should extract that with gesture.
And I direct the treatment of skull fractures in this case of poisoning.
From the wounds of the chest.
And if the wound occurs in the chest, there is no difference in treatment compared to a simple skull wound.
And if the nerves in the chest are cut or an artery, if it's nerves, they're not in their natural place but should avoid treatment with those that cause violent constriction, like onions and garlic which are sharp and resemble them when applied to nerves, causing them to constrict. And do not cover the wound with any cause of total obstruction, for the substance of nerves is obstructed and its continuation is in the brain, which is the source of all bodily functions.
And if that which is treated with lighter medicines, such as washing with double water, an infusion of boiled or unboiled oil, thyme when washed with double water and the other minor herbs according to this method, ointments are applied.
And if the wound is large, then you administer suturing, or tighten the ligaments of the patient, and proceed to treat that with powders until it's healed.
And if the wound is deep or occurs at the lower part of the soft tissue, then pierce that in the most depressed location.
And if the wound has already been cut and blood flow is obtained from it, then you should separate or dry that part, or seal it, or cauterize it if necessity causes that.
And if you have already cut the muscles of the belly or all parts, and so the veins in the chest are saved, then you adjust the intestines with stitches over the spine of the belly without touching that; first equalize that and return it to its natural shape, then strengthen that with a decent tension, and let it rest for several days; proceed to treat that with ointments which cause constriction and stimulation until it is healed.
And if the wound has already penetrated into the bone, then you should puncture that. And if there are fragments of bone in it, extract all those you can from them; and what is not visible to you, allow that to rest so that the wound heals internally, and separate it until the pain subsides and its removal is eased.
And if the wound is recent, then apply this recommended powder over it. And if the wound has formed a fistula, then treat that with what you will remember later in its main part.
If it's a thrust by a lance or collarbone, and you take into account the severity of the wound when the patient is breathing heavily; then know that the wound is fatal.
And if it's not deep in the patient and the wound is recent to his/someone's health, then you should pause in him/her for the first hour with powdered medicine, and don't strain that so as not to allow the health issue to be held within the depth of him/her and return to the body causing harm. Rather, pause on him/her with an attractive ointment, and apply that twice a day.
And if the ointment is not at your disposal, then you should pause near the wound's opening with a cloth to let it absorb what needs draining from moisture; and make the patient lie over the wound so that it can drain whatever is adjusted within them.
If it's already been three days or more since the wound and no convulsions, cardiac failure, nor constriction have occurred to the patient, and you apply other good treatments for him/her, then know that the wound is saved; and thereafter treat it with rest and within another treatment until it is healed.
If the patient's recovery is justified, and it's already been opened completely, then know that a fistula has already been formed; treat that accordingly by its head.
And if the wound is due to incision in flesh or muscle, and it's simple on the surface of the foot or leg, then treat that according to what precedes suture, if it's large, or with powder if it's small.
And if it has already opened inside the bone, and you have incised the flesh of it, then press the wound and remove those pieces, if they are separate. And if they're not separate, then wait until the wound opens, making the extraction of them easier.
And for other wounds that occur in other limbs, their treatment is the same as what we have discussed.
And for wounds of the abdomen.
The illness which occurs in the abdomen is either large, or small, or intermediate.
And disruption is made difficult by another method for small ones, and you know that their reduction is more difficult, so without touching their place immediately after they open and swell up because the material of them becomes difficult to work with.
And therefore the best disruption is intermediate, where reducing the intestine isn't difficult, similarly to how it's difficult in the other two mentioned types.
And know that there are four ways for suturing the abdomen, yet two of these stitches are common and suitable for stitching in other wounds of the body.
And the other two stitches are specific to other injuries, yet they are even more specific to stitching in the abdomen.
I advise you for every exposition and declaration.
So say that when the wound is small and a cause of the intestine gets stuck in it, making its reduction difficult, then this situation falls under one of these two methods: either due to the smallness of the disruption as we've said, or when the intestine becomes swollen from cold air.
And when this happens, you should take care to immerse a sponge with wetted linen in hot water or that you gather in cold water, then cyperum and spices, and insert the intestines into that so that the swelling can be resolved.
And some wounds are like this where there is inflammation, and it's better than just hot water in the resolution of swelling.
And when the swelling has resolved, then you soak the intestines in water containing aloe vera and myrrh, because through this, the material of them is alleviated with little cause.
And if the material of them is relieved by this treatment, then you divide the disruption with a small tool that has incisions in it.
And the first treatment is better when it's suitable that it isn't dry, and there should not be an occupation to dry in need and lack of nutrition.
Of the tool, if it has this form:
One part of it is sharp like a knife, while the other part is not sharp, and its tip is delicate, but not as delicate as a needle, in front it should be obtuse for just a little.
And when the wound is enlarged and pushes out the intestine, then you should know that its reduction should be according to its natural form, in its proper place, if it's possible on this, which is better.
And when the disruption is large and in the lower part of the abdomen, then you should have the patient lie on their back, and place their hips higher than their head; and if it's in the upper part of the abdomen, then you should place the head and feet higher than the other parts.
And similarly if the disruption is in one of the two parts of the abdomen, then you should pause your understanding and consideration at this for which part where the wound is should be higher than the other.
And similarly, you should apply this in large wounds and intermediate wounds.
And in small wounds, pause what is to your preparation, and so that this minister is among your best practitioners, who has the disruption entirely at their hand and adjusts the lips of them, and similarly uncover from one to another that there's no cause for another when suturing.
This is the common method of suturing: when you take the needle, or count the number of needles according to the size of the wound; then smooth out from the end of the break in the ring finger, and strengthen the stitch with one needle, or another where you do not put a thread at both ends of the chain, at both ends of the artery where you leave the chain inside, allowing it to penetrate that part; and you have added both ends of the chain and both ends of the artery, then make four orders.
And then strengthen the thread twice in the circuit of the needle, and some stitches at both parts simultaneously, and add both edges and the wound through addition; then smooth out the thickness of the finger and place another needle there, and smooth that area with a double thread as you did with the first needle; do not stop doing this if it is necessary with the needles until you complete all the compression of the wound.
And if the needles are between hardness and subtlety, where subtle needles lightly cut through flesh; and thick ones are difficult to use in the thread, so that's why you should have those needles being slightly more subtle in both their subtlety and thickness.
And don't let the needle be inserted at both ends of the thread closely, so that flesh is not cut lightly and the wound opens in front of its healing.
And do not make the stitches too long so that the wound does not prevent itself from healing.
And then cut the ends of the needles so they do not penetrate too deep into the patient's thigh; place on top of the suturing powders spread from all parts, which have the ends of the needles; leave them until you know that the wound is already healed.
And this method of needle suture is particularly suitable for small wounds, where only one or two needles are placed around them during suturing.
The second method of suturing is common: and it involves administering during suturing the four ends, from the thread and both ends of the artery, in one go, using a needle with its tip enveloped equally in subtlety and thickness.
And when the needle has penetrated these four ends, reduce the needle from that middle part where it began, so that the tip pulls out of the inner part towards the wound, so that the suture follows the method of fabric suturing in which the fabrics are strengthened.
And pause between each stitch for the thickness of half the width of the finger.
And this suture is known to men.
And with such a suture I healed the wound that had happened to a man in his abdomen which was hit by a stone, and it was the biggest burst of the wound reaching up to half the palm, and it was situated near two palms away from my location and was bursting in the middle of the limb; and then I returned that deposit after the intestine had been allowed to come out for 24 hours.
And the wound was consolidated in about 15 days or so, and I treated it and healed it; and then this vinegar was applied with hot water for several weeks, and he was discharged in his condition.
And the other doctors had judged that it was not healed; and by miracle, for which I did not treat it with oil, where oil could not be found nor any medicine, but I treated the wound like a few dozen times a day, bathing it regularly with honey water until it was cured.
And I can tell you two kinds of suture according to the narrative of Paulus.
And it begins with stitching the thread from the part outside to the inner part.
And when the needle penetrates into the artery and enters with correct direction and length throughout the body, let its end be in the part where you have inserted the needle; then make the needle penetrate from the inner part to the outer part at the other end of the artery.
And when you have made that penetrate, then you make another insertion in that middle end of the artery from the outer part to the inner part; and let the other end which is at this side hang, and make the needle penetrate into the other end of the inner part to the outer part.
And make the insertion of your needle penetrate to the artery in the end which is at this side, as you made that penetration into the outer part so that all of it penetrates.
And proceed from this diagonal side, push that at the end which is towards the artery in the other side, and remove the needle from the artery which penetrated, then reduce that into that thread and push the end of the artery towards this outer edge of the artery; and remove that from the thread which comes from this part.
And do this once and again, and do this twice or three times in between which you complete all that is outer according to that example.
And the whole of this suture method is that you sew on fabric through which you stitch the artery, so that you stitch the artery once from the outer part of the thread end and leave that other loop until you complete it.
The second type of own suture is the Gualia operation, which is to be performed by them and recommended for them. You should apply this second similarity in which some doctors apply it, because they add all parts to their corresponding part according to nature; and they apply the extremity of one of them and the extremity of what they observe to the other extremity of them, and this is done as I have advised you.
When you place the needle at your own discretion on the part outside, and make it penetrate inside that single place, let there be two extremities of the thread; then rotate the needle and have it penetrate from outside to inside in two ends of the string.
And then rotate those twists, and have each part penetrate inside to the outside in two extremities of the needle other than where it is on the opposite side.
And this method of suture is better than the common lighter suture, and it's the kind of suture that precedes memory.
This is the Gualia operation.
And let it be said that for the belly, rectification of the suture is done with two needles. So you enter these into each other with a thread, and begin by entering the needle from where you should enter, and have it penetrate into the opposite side according to the sutures those who do equalize their bodies use.
And know that when the disruption is in the middle of the belly, then the suture for it is harder than for the other parts of the belly.
The judgment of medical treatment against plague is the judgment of the other plagues.
This is why, when you discover the plague near its beginning before the air changes it, and reduce the hernia and fix it properly, then place a piece of meat powder on that.
And if the air has already changed the plague, then place on that certain ointments which in your presence you find make hard flesh and cure threads, and become consolidated completely; and then treat it as is the treatment of the other plagues where it becomes healed.
And if you are not present with the medicines, then place on that temporarily, as it begins to drain pus and fat, and change it twice a day, like this is taught, where it becomes healed; so you would not need another treatment in various situations when the plagues are simple.
And if you fear that the plague might spread to the main limbs, then cover that wool of lion in oil of a high quality or in heated oil, and place this on the area between the armpits and keep it there.
And if you feel pain or decay in his hernias, which usually happens like this, then anoint that with a stinging black oil of vinegar, and especially if the inflammation has spread to the hernia and it causes drainage penetrating inside the cavity.
And know that the one from the large hernia is a slight healing pus, while the other one is in the finer hernias.
And it is difficult to heal where the hernia which is called "gungun" does not receive healing from plague that affects it completely; this is because of the large number of veins in it and its size that is in those, and due to the subtlety of the body there, and due to its proximity to the nature of nerves.
And if what you're dealing with from the plague is the skin, and you get it recently, reduce that according to your judgment for which you reduce the hernias equally.
And if it has passed in the space and already turned to red or black, then strengthen that with a thread at the place that is degraded in him, so that fluids of pus come out, because there are veins and arteries in the skin.
And then cut into that which is another of the ligament, and hang two ends of the thread from the part left open by the plague hole in him, so that your concern for his healing comes along with the release of your action on the skin and discharge of pus from the plague.
Reminder of plagues when they occur in the hernia.
When disruption occurs in the hernia and it is small, then it is possible that it can be restored in some individuals. As for this, I saw one who was hit in his belly with a lance, and it was the stomach plague from the right side, and the plague was old and caused fistula, and his strength and flatulence were impaired.
Then I pursued the healing of him even though it was not reconciled in his healing; rather I sought to find out within what he would heal and where the location is consolidated.
And I saw the location already consolidated, and advised him regarding the misfortune he experienced in his belly; and did not advise him to do anything for that bad accident and abuse of his bodily conditions eating and drinking, and then bathe and exercise according to his daily routine.
And it is advised by those who are experienced that when plague affects the hernia and it's small, then you should bind it according to this manner: You should take fromiguas of large caps; adjust both edges of the plague wound; place one fromigua that has an open mouth on top of both edges of the plague wound; so when it takes over those and strengthens its mouth, cut off its head, which adheres and does not dissolve.
And place another needle near the first one, and don't stop to make needles one after another according to the quantity of the whole wound.
And place that and cover the wound; and cut those excess heads inside the hernia so that the hernia heals properly; and do not harm the patient with injury.
And it is possible that the hernia can be tied with a thin string made from the material of the beast's hernia, because it is more durable; and you take the end of these threads of hernia, and if they are not too thin, then place the end of them on this thread, wrapping it, and then insert this thread into needles and other materials in that part of the hernia, reduce that to the disruption.
And this way of suturing with needles is simply according to trust and hope.
And if the wound is large and wide, especially if it's in a subtle hernia, then there is nothing else but to strengthen it slightly, and not heal it completely.
Regarding the cure of such wounds and fistulas.
Know that every wound and abscess when they fester and harden, and become a ulcer, and do not heal but bleed for all time, and are not excised, then, wherever it is, universally it's called a fistula, and we call that one "azukem" (which seems to be a local term).
And fistula according to truth is a tough and white nodulation, which does not hurt at all, it is as sensitive as when one is in pain from old injuries; because of this, that particular ulcer was called "rizatz", that is, pain.
And it's in moist ulcers which bleed; and a slight increase in moisture gets absorbed in some hours. And sometimes this moisture turns into pus, it's small, it's thick, and it's subtle.
And I have shown all those causes, their signs and the treatment for them with medicines in this division.
And just as I will instruct you about the treatment of a fistula which is performed through surgery by hand.
And know that fistula occurs in all parts of the body; some of them are those that affect large veins and arteries, or nerves, or the spinal cord, or hernia, or bladder, or any of the ribs, or some vertebrae of the back, or any of the joints formed by such composition as hand and chest; and about these they have proximity to the main body parts and are in parallelism.
And so about these fistulas of this kind, they are from the maladies that are difficult to heal and do not receive treatment for their cure, and occupation with such is labor and ignorance.
And if some of these fistulas do not penetrate to the places mentioned earlier and you expect and trust in its healing, and want to know about this, then attempt with iron or needle. And if the fistula proceeds straight forwardly, inquire about it from you.
And if the fistula is twisted, then investigate it with a subtle lead, which being lighter than its body's density will alleviate and bend your concern for the twist.
And if the fistula has any terrifying feature, it is not within your ability to indicate this over them with the tool.
And so cleanse the orifice by your means, for the moisture with which you are cleansing that goes through other orifices and passes from them.
And so inquire meticulously according to your abilities to know if there is bone or nerve, and whether the size of the fistula is distant or nearby. Or if it's a fistula with many orifices that is situated above all this using your strength, using your questioning method by talking to the patient, feeling pain through pressure on the area with your hand, and understanding the meanings and causes of symptoms related to abscesses.
And when you have established the causes through true deliberation, then proceed with the treatment according to confidence: and it is that you will now consider whether this fistula is apparent nearby or in safe place, far from joints, nerves, artery, vein, or any other location I've told you about.
And now you dry the fistula as it was described in its introduction, and keep that which is filtered through corrupt flesh, and that which has been born in the opening of the flesh, or part and such like, and treat that until it is healed.
If the fistula is of considerable depth and follows straightness, then dig into that up to the preon as far as it is possible for you, and then reform that by removing all its corrupted tissues; additionally administer sharp wools wrapped in acute medicines, and insert those inside the cavity of the fistula which you have identified through iron.
And do this by making several incisions within so that the acute medicine may corrode all that is rotten in the cavity of the fistula due to corruption.
And then restore that by applying ointments which generate healthy flesh where it has been healed.
If this does not heal through this method, then you apply a cautery to that as we have advised.
If the cause of the fistula is bone and must be operated on, then you inquire about it and dry it out as we have advised, if you do not prohibit any cause related to a vein or nerve or main limb such as we said.
If the bone is under your discovery and there's corruption or blackness in them, then you remove it where all the corruption has been attacked; and afterwards treat that with what makes flesh grow until they are healed.
And if it is not healed yet like you did before, then know that you have not fully eradicated the corruption; and hence you uncover again over them thoroughly, execute the reason for them and the transformation of them to the final strengthening of your action, and then restore that.
And if it is healed, good that is; and otherwise, know that this corruption is in the depth of far within the body, which could not be achieved, so then in that case there's nothing for you to do but leave it.
And if the bone is rotten and small, or if it's within your ability to pull that out, then you will pull it with fine forceps which suit this task.
And if they are bone masses, then thoroughly execute the extraction of all those, and leave none behind based on your strength.
If it happens that there is any contradiction due to moisture, and in their incision there's neither fear nor mistake, then you cut those ligaments or tissues if they are here, and deliver the bones.
And if you're not ready to lay the bones of your time yet, then place over that wound what will make the wound that way, and leave it so that this is around those bones and ligaments, and guard the wound from consolidation, and ensure that the section which you have incised in your operation remains constrained.
Waxing, if you fear it, place over the cut submerged in a heated oil, or the cut submerged in Egyptian ointment, or in any of those greases, which when they dry these ligaments and bones are separated by the ablution, and from this extraction is relieved.
And if it's a large bone such as the bone of hip or thigh or something like that, and what in them is corrupted is only the flesh from them, then remove this only from behind where all the blackness and corruption is found, and afterwards restore the wound.
And if what in them is corrupted is a large portion, and the corruption has already reached to the bone marrow of the bone, then this becomes necessary to close that up and thoroughly incise into the location where the corruption has been achieved, and afterwards treat that so that it consolidates.
And I advise you to do this that when you uncover in someone's thigh bone, place that as an exemplar and auxiliary for your operation.
Take a young man around thirty years old, who experiences pain in his thigh, and among the divisions within you discover the substance inside the body that has reached to the thigh, and this is pus of large abscesses, but do not attribute it to an extrinsic cause.
And then extend that by the error of doctors until the abscess has opened, and drain away from this fluid matter, and his treatment is carefully done so as to prevent the change into a fistula, and make incisions in this liquid orifices which all exuded pus and body moisture.
And then the care of many doctors for two years, and I did not understand in those things until they were called upon me.
And I saw the change in him and the fluids that flowed from those openings by great distance; and already his body of that man was completely drained and the color of it was yellowish.
And then I inserted a needle into one of those openings and conducted the needle to the bone.
And then I soon examined all the openings and found that these are reaching from every part of the body.
And then I was curious and cut into one of those openings where I discovered a part of the bone, and removed that corrupted thing, it was earthy and corrupted and decayed; and already had been corroded a part of the body that had penetrated to the marrow.
And then I prepared what was discovered by me and exposed from the discovered bone.
And I was sure that it wasn't in the bone but that corruption which had spread and decayed, and I had already removed.
And then restored the wound with consolidative medicine for a long time, but it did not consolidate.
And then I would move on to uncovering the second bone after the initial discovery, and continuously examine any ongoing corruption in the bone.
And treat whatever appears to me of that corruption, then I would thoroughly perform the treatment and restoration for them, and if it is not restored.
And then I would discover another opening and ceaselessly introduce the small bone gradually precisely, performing the restoration for them. If it is not restored within when introducing around one palm's width, and extracted its marrow, then restore that with medicines, and it is slightly consolidated and healed.
And no iteration is needed in the operation and sectioning of them but rather due to the positioning of their nerves and for the lack of tolerance and fear of death that happens to them at all times from excessive evacuation, causing bad fainting.
And so, complete healing is through total recovery, and nothing replaces the hard flesh; good positioning of them in their body returns their virtue to them; they are conversed into their positions and do not oppose them during walking or cause any damage for any reason.
If the bone is prominent in the location of the body already drilled, then cover that second one according to this method: you should take hold firmly with your finger where the tip of the prominent bone is, and command someone else to extend it outwards; pause this piece of woolen thread as thick as the first piece; then place this wool on the flesh that was left by the bone. Extend the end of the flesh so that you can pull it towards the parts that were left, and uncover the flesh over the location which you wish to drill in order for the drill not to cut into the flesh.
And place a stand or table at this location correctly, when you do this it is not forbidden to use the drill which does not cut through the corrupted flesh.
And make sure that the drill is on this corrupted spot little by little; if it is in the cavity of the corrupted bone and does not appear in its appearance when touched, force another opening from its drill.
And if the bone is corrupted and not prominent, before one part continues to the other, and the corruption is in its middle or in part of it, then you uncover the flesh from all parts completely; then place a stand at this location, and then drill that from the first part where there is corruption, making sure the drilling continues for the other part.
And make the drill according to the location of the corruption a little bit, as we have said.
And if the corruption is at the joint, drill that corrupted joint and drill the bone where it continues from the other side.
And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it's not in their natural place but at a junction.
And if the corruption is in the elbow of the hand or the chest, it's very difficult; however, make sure you inquire about how the corruption appears to you and where to uncover it, and describe it according to each position which is possible for you. And with every instrument, rectify it as much as possible when it doesn't contradict your veins or nerves.
And know what the incisors and drills to drill these bones are much according to the location of the bones, and the preparation of those, and their size, and their subtlety and greatness and smallness, and their hardness and their rarity; for you should have all kinds of surgical tools suitable for that operation prepared.
And know that this operation means for you about the kind of instrument you need; when you have great study and long experience in the methods of this art, and evidence from the methods of diseases, which at this point you already possess, to use what is convenient with the tools for each disease.
And I will present to you at the end of this chapter the number of instruments that you should have, similar to which you will proceed with your prohibition, which you will experience on the others. Shape of the saw:
Shape of another saw:
Shape of a large other saw:
Shape of the drill: The tip of this drill should be according to the shape of the star key's head, and its points should be according to the shape of the points of an astelophagi.
And you should not allow that when those joints are corrupted they come into contact with the heads of the bones, or it would be like having a large and broad mouth.
Shape of smaller scissors:
Shape of curved scissors:
Shape of another type of saw that has been made: it should have a curve slightly more than the curvature of its iron, and the member of its steel blade should be bent downward. Shape of it:
Shape of scissors in which there is a curvature:
Shape of another subtle pair of scissors:
Shape of another curved-end scissors:
Shape of small scissors resembling a spider's leg:
Shape of another smaller saw:
Shape of another sawing tool; this resembles a drill, and the end of it is like a saw, and it is exhibited in various locations according to the size of the bones:
The way you should form it depends on the one who is perforated by bones:
And the extremity of them is triangular and has a sharp extremity.
And it is made of Indian iron, similarly to chisels that correspond to all the causes we have mentioned about razors and incisions and saws.
From cutting edges and the jointing of bones.
The edges cut or due to an intrinsic cause or extrinsic, or as you have treated that corruption by treating those medicines and the treatment does not relieve it, or sometimes the corruption needs to be excised from the member which was not hit by any cause, then a chisel should be used to cut into that member into this point where the disease is located, so that the patient escapes death or malady which is greater misfortune of the member.
And the sign of the one to whom this happens, is that the member becomes black inside where it has been burned or if you place the blackness close to this point within that member which is burning it and absorbs everything in its body; then make a cut here for this.
And similarly, if it's caused by the impact of some venomous causes such as from a scorpion in the sea or from murex or from earthworm and similar.
And if the corruption or impact is in the end of the finger, then you should cut the finger and do not give space for the corruption to enter my hand.
And similarly if you reach to my hand, then you should cut that of the root of the forearm, and do not give space for the corruption inside where it could spread in the arm's artery.
And if you miss that, then cut the arm into the side at the joint.
And if the corruption passes elsewhere around the side, then in that case it is death for the patient; and to administer another cause there at this time of treatment is a great virtue.
And similarly do for the chest when you miss the spot of the disease in the chest, then you should cut it into one of the ribs.
And if it spreads in the area below the chest, then you should cut the whole chest. If it rises within the thigh, then you should cut the leg into the joint of the thigh.
And if the corruption has already spread over the thigh, then there is no help but relief, and leave the patient to death.
The method of cutting the member or sawing it is that you hold the ligament in the part where you wish to cut, and leave which one you want to cut on. And stretch another ligament over the area; and extend the assistant with two ligaments at their parts, and extend the assistant with another ligament here; and you separate the flesh which is between two ligaments inside so that all the flesh is uncovered; then proceed to cut or saw it.
And cover so that a cloth of all parts is placed by itself so that it does not touch the area, and bring to the patient the injury correctly adjusted and the abscess cautery.
And if bleeding occurs when you are working, then you should cauterize the area moderately, or place on it some powders that strengthen blood; and later return to your treatment until it is completed.
And later has the limb treated with ligament at his convenience, and treat that so that it is healed.
And I advise you on what happened to someone in his chest, this is the kind of accident that I and you should be aware of, which occurs to him blackness in his chest as if it was assembled from burning with fire.
And that corruption occurs first in his finger inside, which stretches across the whole chest.
And then that man prepares himself to put pus because if the treatment does not go well across his body due to its intensity and his suffering from pain and heat of him, he should cut that chest into the joint, and it gets healed.
Long time ago this kind of corruption occurred in his hand's finger area.
And then it reaches me, and so I consider to reflect this excess regarding what has been applied on his hand with the medicines, towards the transformation of the body in him; and the excess does not recur but begins spreading into another finger that starts from the hand.
And he asks me to cut his hand, and I don't want to do this fearing the recurrence of that excess, rather you should fear cutting your hand's death, for the virtue of the patient was about suffocation.
And when he left me, he returned to his land and came back to me that this man prepared himself and cut his whole hand, and it got healed.
And I have not added this story merely for support on what can happen from this illness, and it has significance which is explained and according to which it should be treated.
Regarding the care of colons and the quality of enemas with medicines.
When gangrene occurs in some fleshly limbs and the space of the gangrene extends until it collects pus, then it bursts and perforates, and pus escapes from him, and leaves the area empty as if it was a vessel, and the cut that is made here is compared to a cloth, and it does not reach deeper corruption, nor it infiltrates into bones or nerves or ligaments, it is called a sinus, and it is not named fistula.
However, if the space is prolonged inside where corruption begins in some member, then it is called a fistula and does not heal.
The treatment for this is to incise the whole area just as it has turned, especially when it has become subtle and been made like a sheet, making sure not to stick to the area due to its corruption.
If you hope that the incision will stick and that this corruption has not been achieved through subsequent consequences, and if there is a passageway on the incision, then your treatment for this is with a suppository.
And you consider the sinus, and then if it's large, and the arm that you use smells of fermentation, then you suppositories with this Egyptian remedy made from oil and vinegar mixed in equal parts, and they should be adjusted in a container, and placed over the fire until the medicine boils and spreads to a suitable thickness.
And you take from the patient what is necessary and dissolve it in water and honey; suppositories are made for this to clear out the sinus, strengthen his opening, and let the medicine stay in him for the duration of two hours.
And you extract that from the spice; do this for several days until the sinus has been cleared and his pus has been reduced.
And sometimes it is suppositories made from ash water when you don't have this medicine at hand; and you take the ashes of garlic, put them in water; then boil that and make suppositories with it until you are convinced that the sinus has been cleared.
And if the patient does not tolerate the Egyptian medicine or ash water, then suppositories are made with water and honey where they mix in vinegar that has been strained; suppositories are also made from vinegar and honey mixed together, for the property of honey is to modify and clean, and vinegar makes the sinus adhere, especially when there is excess of coagulating properties and dryness in the vinegar.
And when you do this for several days and you are convinced that the sinus has been reduced, then make suppositories with whatever causes meat to be born in him.
And you take from a dyafinicon salve and dissolve that in rubbed oil and vinegar; or you make suppositories with various medicines and other ointments which have the properties that I have already written about in the treatise on ointments.
And if the opening of the sinus is narrow in which no catheter can be inserted for suppositories, then you gradually enlarge it with a small iron instrument, and pause while covering your fingers with Egyptian salve or basilico salve until it's enlarged.
And similarly if the opening is wide, then you stitch up his lips with suture and leave him the quantity in which suppositories can be added.
And if the opening of what flows from his arm is elevated to the sides, then you dry it in the lower pus spot that's in him so that his arm can flow into it; which when his arm is constricted in the bend of the sinus, the meat will be generated in him.
And if it's not possible to dry the sinus inside the area around the lower pus spot as you wish, then pierce it and prepare the member for this operation so that his arm flows slightly according to your skills without any cause being kept back in him.
And that which is over the opening of the sinus, which you enlarge constantly so as to allow what has grown in him due to his arm. And so that you know whether what flows from him of his arm is much or little, or if it's digested, or not digested.
And also you consider the place of that sinus, if in him the patient feels pain or not, and if it's within the abscess.
And as your treatment is prolonged in such manner, you see the substance that is being discharged over the opening of the sinus already adheres, or begins to have adhesion, then you remove it or wait another day, and when you remove the dressing, you change the cloth and renew the salve.
And if there's a long space near the sinus that contains subtle pus, then don't lose hope in the adhesion of it, for his recovery depends on this; which is common among some individuals who take time to regenerate flesh in their various sores, and among those where the opposite occurs.
And if there are several days sitting with undigested arm from the sinus, then you know that the sinus doesn't adhere; and if the adhesion of the sinus is delayed and is the cause of prolonged treatment, then adjust in drying of the medicines, and if the medicines are wet by their substance and by its virtue, they become dry as well, just like dyafinicon salve, when there's excess of addition of zegi.
And behind the one being treated, what you should do is take stramonium ointment and dissolve it in roasting oil, then apply this against him on his substance, and place that near him, use that.
And assume this action when there is no bone, apply stramonium ointment, honey when it's inside the wound let it swell, use this; or take myrrh and aloes and prepare them, mix all and crush over the honey when it's under the fire, then place that near on linen and strengthen that. And place that on the honey where you have put it to swell, and crush that onto linen and strengthen that.
And sometimes, these remedies are applied using the language and knowledge of aristocratic medicine (and this is heavenly lily) and flour from garlic and centaury, use those simple ingredients or adjust them, mix those and sift them over the honey that I recommended; and use this.
And if the wound is prolonged and not healed by this treatment, then you should know that the corruption is in the substance of him/her, and it spreads into the bones or other hard parts or ligaments; then you treat with tubercular disease, as was described above.
Regarding the treatment of cutaneous and nail injuries, including cutting digits and making cuts.
Panniculitis is an abscess that affects the nail bed of a digit on either hand or foot, and it often spreads to other digits. If this condition persists and proper treatment is delayed, the abscess might become infected and need incision. In such cases, you remove the pus with a knife, if it's not treated it might lead to corruption spreading into the bone where its smell is fetid. You then cut off the end of that digit, and the color becomes darkened.
And so when you have applied that which we mentioned in the division and if your treatment does not show improvement, then proceed to cut out all excess tissue that has accumulated under the nail. Then cauterize the wound near there; let the heat of this cautery aid in healing.
If the bone is healthy and the nail is intact, and the growths under the nail are already enveloping the surrounding tissues inwardly, start to prick them and guide this process. Then proceed as follows: place your sharp instrument at the angle of the nail that you're pricking into the flesh, push it further in, and cut through the flesh with ease, then apply whatever remains of the medicinal burning corrosive ointment until all is completely removed; and treat with the salve when healing has occurred.
If corruption has already spread into the bone, then proceed as follows: you should cut out the bone and remove it, because there is no healing when the bone inside him/her is corrupted.
And if you notice the corrosion and corruption spreading into the digit, then proceed as follows: cut through it at one of the joints according to where its memory is felt, and treat that area with salve when healing occurs.
If there's an impact or rubbing under the nail leading to intense pain, then proceed as follows: begin by making a small incision at the beginning of the affected area on the hand, and then dry out the nail with a sharp blade across the width upwards from that point, be careful not to allow the drying to reach into the remaining flesh beneath the nail; this might cause intense pain in the hand and result in the formation of excess flesh in that spot. Then treat that spot with something that alleviates pain.
This refers to an adjustment made by someone familiar with body parts, where in some men, the flesh is hardened everywhere, or it gets thickened in their bones, or even thickens under the nail.
Such conditions are native to the joint's anatomy, or they manifest in specific spots of the digits. This condition that appears in certain joints is not harmful, whereas this one that appears at the joints tends to be painful.
And for those that are naturally fleshy, the drying is mild; you should cut through their anatomy with a sharp blade.
For those that are naturally at the joint's anatomy, healing is difficult; therefore, protect it from any excision.
For those that are naturally at the digit, proceed as follows: when you cut from its beginning, remove the flesh of it with a round incision into the bone, and then use one of those saws convenient for this purpose to cut through it; afterwards, treat that area once healing has occurred.
This refers to consolidation that occurs between the joints or due to the inherent condition of the body, causing swelling or thickening in some people, or as a result of wound healing or burning from fire, or through similar means. You should proceed by removing this consolidation until the digits return to their natural form.
And place them among the patient's cloths in roasting oil to prevent them from being slightly consolidated, or separate them with a thin sheet of lead underneath if they are consolidated accordingly.
Similarly, if consolidation occurs in some digits on the palm, then you dry that consolidation according to its preparation and aligns it with the shape of the limb.
Regarding cuts or incisions, they are varicose.
These cuts are varicose veins, which are swollen, full of melancholic excesses and veins that appear in the limbs. The most common occurrence is in the joints, especially in those who travel, work or carry loads.
When you are to administer bloodletting from the heart for the black plague, perform several instances of vigorous expulsion, and then drain the patient of blood from the basilic vein.
The cure of their illness is carried out according to two methods: one is that it involves incision and the evacuation of that black pus, and the other method is that the vein is raised and all of it is extracted.
The section of their illness is carried out in this manner: when the belly starts with water and is gradually poured into it so that the large pus is resolved, which becomes liquid in the belly, then strengthen the belly of the patient at the waistband under the place where the black pus comes from below the thighs up to the place behind the knee on one bend, and then dry out the vein in a spot or two, or three with a wide section, and raise the black pus with your hand at that place under the belt in front and back, when you have reached the desired amount of pus which is sufficient for treatment, and this tolerates the effectiveness of the illness.
And similarly instruct them, commanding that they refrain from eating any food that may generate black plague.
And continue the cure with bloodletting when the veins are filled and you notice something in the patient.
The elevation of their illness is carried out in this manner: you should massage the belly of the patient, if there are movements of pus beneath the skin, then place them in hot water and immerse the belly with hot water until it turns red and the veins become prominent; or it may be exercised by vigorous activity, if hot water is not available, until the body becomes sweaty.
And then dry off the belly in the right direction of the vein by section lengthwise or at the back of him, or in the lower part of the pus you should have his knee, or at the back part of him you should have his foot.
And then open the belly with cuts and scrape the vein from all parts until a sensation appears, and you should notice the patient's response to that prayer turning towards blackness.
And when you have lifted out of the belly, you let that white thing be a string.
And then you place his legs in that row so that they are elevated and lying on the belly, and hang that on a stick or near the lion.
And then dry another section close to that section for three fingers, and scrape the belly from the part above the vein until it appears.
And then raise that and cut it in the last section which is under the foot, and remove that and raise that until you can pass through the second section, and remove that from the section that was above that.
Do this until you have removed that from the section which is very high or any other of all sections, when everything has passed; then cut that.
And if it does not obey to your extraction and raising, then insert a needle with a thick double thread, tie that and remove it, or insert his leg in water and move your hand all around until it is submerged. And remember not to cut it deeply; for if it is broken, it will make it difficult for you to raise that thing again and cause harm to the patient because of that injury.
And when you have lifted all of it out completely, then place your hand on the affected area with wool submerged in oil and rubbed oil and non-rubbed oil, and cure that until it is healed.
And if the vein is contracted without having twists to which it is wrapped around parts, and does not follow rectitude as we have said, then you should cut on that all part of the twists in him and at the parts where it is wrapped around, and then hang that with threads so that you raise that completely.
And remember not to cut your section that you do not injure the vein and do not torment that; for it will be difficult for you to raise that; use your caution in that.
Shape of the incision on which the vein is sealed:
It is not as sharp as ordinary needles nor does it have a pointed end so as not to harm the vein; and it has enough flexibility like a lion, for if it were too subtle, it would cut the vein due to its subtlety; moreover, it has the necessary excess in size as we said.
Regarding the removal of the leg vein.
This vein is formed in the thighs on low, sandy grounds like Al-Ategy in the lands of Arabs and in the dry and sparse lands of little capacity where neither grass nor bushes grow.
And elsewhere in the body, it is formed in other parts besides the thighs.
And the formation of it is of decomposition that you see on the belly as if venom inside the body, serpents and worms and maggots and parasites generating between the belly and flesh.
And the sign of the possibility of its occurrence is when that vein comes into action in the belly inflammation; and then there is swelling at the site; and then it starts to emerge from the site of that swelling, as if from a root plant.
And when you see the end appearing, then weigh that over it with a piece of lead whose weight is equal to one of a horse's load. Within two horses' loads, and move it around so that the lead hangs freely from the chest.
And as many times as it hurts the patient somewhere outside, you encase this with lead and place it there. And if the pain is prolonged, then you incise a part of your body and cover the rest; do not incise there until it is free from the pain, for if you incise where the pain is concentrated, it contracts and enters into the flesh, causing pus and inflammation in that area and a bad ulcer.
So it should be treated gently and extracted little by little, until it is free from behind the patient's body, without causing any damage to the body.
And from this vein, it gets stuck in some people that is along their length of twenty palms and more than ten, already I have experienced treating one that was about twenty-two palms long.
And if it is treated when it is being medicated, then insert the needle into the patient's artery and puncture that long artery in their body, until all what is inside the matter is evacuated. Then administer putrefaction to that area for several days with medicines; afterwards treat that according to the treatment of pus formations.
And this vein has many times raised ridges, especially when it appears at the junction of the chest or on the chest, and causes the patient's openings to rise, and it gets stuck from any opening branch.
And so treat that in this way as we have said in the division and with what was mentioned earlier.
From the section on worms generated under the skin, it is called Bovine Sickness.
This sickness is named in some lands as Bovine Sickness because at times it affects the backs of cows and there are worms few, one being native between the spine and flesh, which travels throughout the body upwards and downwards, and its feeling is shown through its animal movement from member to member until it breaks the spine and spreads out.
And the generation of it is through the putrefaction of certain fluids like what happens with worms, serpents, earthworms and roundworms in the stomach.
And it is met by the mischief of it, when it goes through the body and rises to the head, then irritates in him and enters into him, destroying the gallbladder, and there are many ridges happening.
And when you want to treat that and extract it, then don't do so unless you understand its movement and appearance in the feeling, and thus find what is above him and what remains with him symmetrically and tightness, and afterwards dry yourself and remove it.
And if it is embedded in the flesh and you don't feel it, then place a cautery with fire on that spot while it's inside, and the main concern to be feared is corruption of it which damages the area as we have said.
And if it penetrates to the head close to the gallbladder, then press with strong tension on the eyebrow area, and afterwards dry yourself off, and remove it; note that when a patient uses the transformation of their body through medicines that expel bad putrid fluids, and beware not to eat foods causing putrefaction.
From the section on Nafir Sickness.
This sickness is called Nafir in our land, and it's pain that occurs in some limbs, and then spreads from member to member.
And I've seen this second one too, which I will recount to you. I was called to treat a sick woman in a village, and I found her arm and saw a small swelling on the funis vein of the arm. After about an hour, I noticed that this swelling moved like a worm climbing up to this point, but much more subtly than before, as if it were living silver moving from one place to another.
And then you feel the pain at that location and remain in the muscle, and stays here for about an hour.
And it moves on the other side through to the other arm.
And he told me that it moved through his entire body just as I saw; and I was too amazed by the transformation of him and the speed from member to member. And I had already seen this before in my own gallbladder according to that manner, but I have seen movements causing pain being transformed from one limb to another. But I didn't see it like this in the gallbladder as with the woman.
And I don't consider it to be this way but rather due to the fact that the woman was pregnant, with her hot body and visible veins, and here appears that flowing sensation of movement.
And it is necessary that this backward flow not appear in those who are hot and have moist bodies with swollen veins.
And when you wish to treat him/her, and the patient feels pain, then it doesn't seem like your usual treatment as we have said, so press on that area lightly and dry yourself off there while that sensation of movement settles in, then cauterize the spot.
And if you don't find it in your own gallbladder, then treat that by eliminating from the body and with what expels wind, and prescribe those with stinking pills and herbal pills and similar remedies.
Extraction of arrows.
Arrows are diversified according to species and the parts of the body in which they lodge. Their diversity lies in some having large points, small ones, concave ones, and dull ones; all are solid. There are also those that have three angles and those that resemble tongues or beaks.
And concerning the symptoms of poisoning: when it affects the person and penetrates through bones, and appears above the skull which gets swollen due to excessive heat leading to loss of vision, dizziness, and chest pains, swelling, and irritation in the tongue, as well as abdominal cramps, vomiting from anger, and a faint feeling; if words are removed or speech is lost. It can also appear at the site of injury with a white, powdery appearance resembling moisture, and appears somewhat moist like the skin's texture.
And if you notice these symptoms, then refrain from treatment and extraction of the arrow, unless it has already done so.
The symptoms of the arrow when it is in the heart are that it is close to the left nipple, feels like being pierced by a hard object, not by sight. And if the movement of the arrow resembles the movement of dust and its course is blackened; it causes coldness at the extremities and perspiration, fainting; and you should know that death descends upon one completely.
The symptoms when the arrow has lodged in the lungs are a frothy blood spill at the wound, and the vessels near the throat become swollen. The patient's skin changes color, breathes out a large amount of air, and gasps for air.
And when the arrow is lodged in the diaphragm, which is located at the feet, pain is felt near the small ribs, it causes a great intense pain and sighing, and it affects neither the strength nor the movement of all the muscles.
And if the arrow is lodged in the stomach, it causes some indigestion leading to discomfort in the area of the wound.
And if the arrow is lodged in the abdomen, and it penetrates the wound area, or the fabric, or the organ that gets ruptured; there's no hope for treating its removal from the arrow.
And if the arrow hits the bladder and causes urine to be expelled outside, it brings about various effects leading to symptoms appearing externally. And if there's pain in the area around the wound, then you should know that this is fatal.
And the other limbs such as the face, neck, chest, shoulders, and those that resemble them of the body are to be saved according to their most critical positions when the arrow does not hit a vein or artery and is not poisonous.
And I advise you that which I have seen about these arrows, so that you may understand the significance of this for your treatment.
This is why: if someone gets an arrow in the eyelid of their nose and I extract it from the other side, leaving the ear's wax intact, they recover and no harm occurs to their nose.
And extract another arrow for a Jew which got pierced in them in the wax of their nose, leaving the eyelid intact and it was already concealed, so one could not obtain from that anything but a small tip attached to its shaft; it was a large arrow among arrows sharp like those of the Turks, made of iron without ears.
And if it's for a Jew, and no harm occurs to their nose in an unfortunate incident.
And extract another arrow for a Christian who got it in the chest, which was an Arab arrow, and that's one with ears. Then I incised into that between two guides, already submerged in his chest; then I sharpened that, and proceeded to remove that arrow, and the Christian recovered.
And extract another arrow from a person who got it in his abdomen, thinking that he would die because of that; and therefore, after thirty days had passed without any change to his condition, I incised on the arrow and probed around it, and then he recovered, and no harm occurred to him due to this incident.
And I have seen a person in whom an arrow was lodged in their back, and the wound has solidified over them, and after approximately seven years, it penetrated the surface of the skin.
And I have seen a woman in whom an arrow was lodged in her abdomen, and the wound is hardened inside her, it doesn't change in its position, and the woman doesn't suffer harm during any of her natural operations.
And there is another man to whom I shot an arrow on his face and the wound was healed, the arrow was removed without causing any further pain or similar sensations.
And I removed the arrow from the king's prince's man who was shot in the middle of his nose and he had already lost a small part on the right side; the entire arrow was hidden.
And I was called upon to treat him near the exit wound within three days.
And then I healed the wound from the arrow exit; and then I probed that place under the subtle test, but did not feel it; rather he felt it sharply on his right ear. And then I hoped that that point was at the tip of the arrow.
And I applied the substance in the place that is attractive and digestive, confirming to me that this location is where we should apply ourselves, so that I can see the place of the arrow, and thus proceed upon it.
And no incident occurred in the significant location where you achieved that place; and I continued applying the substance on him for several days without any incident. And while healing took place, and then the patient felt the arrow inside his nose after this period of several days, he recounted this to me.
And then I placed acute corrosive medicine on the wound for several days until it healed, and upon that spot, I examined it, and removed the subtle tip of the arrow which adhered to the shaft.
And then I adjusted the wound's opening with that acute medicine until it became visibly apparent to me the tip of the arrow, and passed this way for the period of time within four months.
And as the wound became enlarged, it was possible for me to insert my scissors into him, and refine this, without causing any disturbance. Then I did not cease to minutely examine and engineer upon that manner of instrument, within which began one day on those manners of tools hanging him with forceps being made, according to how their shape developed at the end of the handle, in which I extracted it; and then he restored this wound.
And some doctors thought that the cartilage of the nose was not restored, and I restored this along with the wound, it is consolidated, and he recovered his health entirely, and there was no problem in him for any cause.
And I recommend to you the quality of extracting some arrows, so that you may understand and appreciate this rule and meaning about what I have not mentioned, where the divisions of this art and the definitions of that cannot be understood in narration or are not comprehensible.
And the craftsmen compare much about motion; and on what is present versus what is absent; and finds a new operation and a novel tool that you should use in understanding the effects of foreign causes in the art when they happen.
And so I say that arrows are not thrown outside the members where they are stuck, but according to two manners: or by direction at the location where it enters; or opposite of the other side.
And that which is thrown from a location gives entry, or it's an arrow coming from a fleshly place and it is thrown and thrown outside.
And if you do not avoid the disturbance at the time when he eats, then consider that you should leave it for a few days until the flesh around it recovers, and he is relieved of his intake and discharge.
And similarly, if it's stuck in bones and you don't avoid disturbing him, then leave that for a few days and continue this with intake and movement every day, and it will be thrown outside.
And if you do not avoid disturbance for a few days, then consider that you should puncture in the circuit of the arrow along any bone through subtle travel where the location becomes enlarged by the arrow, and then extract it.
And if the arrow is already hidden in the body's location, and hidden from sensation, then you probe that spot with your hand. If you feel it, then pull it with tools suitable for its removal.
And if you cannot do it on him due to the constriction of the wound and its length of preon (bone), then here is not bone or nerves or vein, then you cut into the wound where it is enlarged and where it's possible to extract the arrow.
And if it's on his ears at which it is stuck from all sides by whatever you can perform; and engineer upon that, if you cannot remove the flesh in the fracture of the earlobes or in the twisting of them so that it escapes.
And when you administer the removal of the arrow in any place where it is, then you use your hand's twist and forceps to all parts within which that must obey; and with subtle subtlety that the arrow does not break and that it is made for a difficult extraction of him and that extraction.
And if you cannot over that of your time, then leave for several days until the parts that are in the circuit of you recover, and then proceed with that which is now relieved. If it causes you opposition in the flow of blood, then administer what we have said about treatment in its chapter.
And keep your skill in the operation of veins or nerves, or cords, and apply medicine in all possible ways to the removal of the arrow; do this with ease, calmness, slowness, and firmness as I have instructed you.
And so when you force the arrow back on its own that the patient lies according to the figure according to which you should place the positioning of the arrow in him, which is more beneficial. If this is not within your capability, then administer what is within your capability through the figures.
The arrows that are opposite to the other part or that have already proceeded with some parts from within to the external parts, or stretch the tip of the arrow through a sense of the part above the origin of the downward flow, often making it prominent; then you focus on this; and according to the amount in which they grasp the forceps, and then gently pull that one out.
If it is retained in the mouth, then you twist the tongue against opposition so that the arrow starts into the mouth, and expand as you insert, and then proceed to extract that one.
And if not, leave this for several days, and then proceed to operate on it until it burns.
And if the shaft of the arrow is in that place, then you push that one towards you.
And if the shaft is stuck and you want to administer impulse, then you insert this one, if it's deaf, press into it so that between the cavity of him and the tail of the arrow, and then push that one towards you.
And if the arrow is concave, then you push this one forcefully by entering it in that place, which relieves the arrow because of this.
And if the arrow is embedded deep, then you hollow out all the flesh in which it lies, if this is within your capability, and then treat that with what seems appropriate.
And if the arrow hits the feet, or in the belly, or in the bladder, or in the side, and it's close enough that you can touch this one to the skin, and is within your capability to focus on this, then focus on this and avoid touching veins or nerves, and extract this one, and then cover the wound if necessary, and treat this so that when healed.
Shape of forceps to which arrows are attached:
Let their extremities be like the beak of an eagle that they make as if they were saws when they take hold of the arrow so that they do not leave it.
And from those, special parts are made, large, few and mixed, according to the quantity of the size of the arrow and its weakness or strength, and according to the extent of the wound, and the constriction of it.
Like a ray, so that it alleviates its inside in the concave arrow and is pushed towards that one.
Regarding bloodletting from veins.
The veins for bloodletting from which blood is usually let out are .xxx (a placeholder for the specific vein or veins that are typically subjected to bleeding). Of which there are in the head .xvi (sixteen). So there are two pulsating veins which are close to the ears, they're called auricular; two herbs that are in both of the temples apparent; and two veins that are in the two lacrimal regions of both eyes and are called aspiciens; and the vein prepared in the middle location of the forehead, and the vein that's in the end of the nose; and two guidegi which are at the neck; and two veins that are above the lips; and two veins that are below the lips; and - these are the veins that are called algecile; and they're two veins that leave the tongue. The veins which are subjected to bloodletting in the arms are .v (five). The veins that are bloodletted in the shoulders are .v (five), which of those is a cephalic vein and should be pierced at the wild heart. The common people call it "the vein of the head", and deafly, it's a mixed vein made up of a branch of basilica and another branch of cephalic. They name this one the commoners' "vein of the entire body", and basilica is a vein placed at the domestic heart, which is called "citillecting". They refer to this as the "vein of the belly" for them. The veins in the arms are placed on top of the flexor, and it's that one where bloodletting occurs, which appears above the elbow through obvious appearance; the saving one, and this is the vein between the aforementioned auricular vein and the small one mentioned, it's two ramps.
In the arm and chest there are three veins; one of those is the one that leaves the curvature of the elbow in the wild lizard's leg; and the second is sophena, its location is on the chest that leaves the heart of the domestic lizard; and the sciatic vein, its location is on the leg that leaves the curvature of the wild lizard; and in the chest are other veins similar to those.
The youth of the veins that are close to the temples is in ancient cuts and migraines and headaches from the old illnesses on the head.
And the quality of feeling those is according to what I recommend you: it's when your head touches the pillow, and you rub your head on the back of the neck where both veins are in an ample fabric with good friction; it strengthens the body of the patient inside a bend that appears between them which are close to the temples at two lower points under the head; take this with what I've said, and if you feel the pulse of those as I've said, test that.
Close you take the surgical knife, and that is the one that touches it, close you insert those fingers into the vein between which the blood flows to the lung. And close you lift your hand to the vein and the artery up to their division points, then cut into the vein with an incision that is touching it. And let the length of the incision be equivalent to two fingers or slightly more than that; and bleed until you are satisfied.
And close strengthen with powders and leave it so that it will heal.
And already in the introduction of this treatise on the incision of those and their cautery treatment has been discussed.
The two arteries that are in the temples during childhood is old migraine and bad blood illness, as well as frequent conjunctivitis, acute overflows of excesses in the veins throughout the body.
And the quality of performing phlebotomy on those is according to what I recommend you: tighten your head's neck muscle where both veins appear due to a clear manifestation, and demonstrate their pulse as I instructed you; and then you test that.
And close you raise the artery above the vein up to the division points as instructed by me, and insert the blood extractor in a touching position with your fingers, then lift the vein at that spot; and cut into it just like you did on the other veins; and let the bleeding run according to the quantity of your need.
And close release the constriction of the head, place your instruction over the vein for an hour, and then place on that spot some powders while strengthening it with firm pressure, and leave it so that it will heal.
And already the recall of them, and their incision, and extraction have been discussed in the beginning of this book.
And thus the youth of phlebotomy on the frontal vein is similar to phlebotomy on the cephalic artery in old ailments of the face and migraine, fever, inflammation and fetid ulcers.
And the quality of performing phlebotomy on them is according to what I recommend you: it's that your head tightens with a bend where the vein appears; and then take the instrument called the blood extractor which has this form:
Pause the needle tip which is at the top of the blood extractor over that vein and hit it on it with your shoulder or another cause in the way you do, let the blood flow according to the quantity you want; and then release the puncture of the head and strengthen it so that it will heal.
Sometimes cuts are made during phlebotomy on the neck, but do not let the phlebotomy have a sharp tip like others, before it is at an oblique angle, and perform that phlebotomy horizontally, where the bone is close and hard would break in it if it were too delicate.
The youth of the two veins that are in both eyes through inflammation from tears and pus in the eyes, and for the ailments of the face.
And the quality of phlebotomy is that your head tightens its neck with a bend, and then perform phlebotomy on those, and stand over the patient's head.
And let phlebotomy be performed horizontally along the length of a few with small phlebotomies, where in that spot there is no flesh; and if the phlebotomy is delicate, its soft end would break.
And then let the blood flow as much as necessary for you, place your hand on that spot, strengthen it overnight, and then release those.
The phlebotomy of the nasal vein is associated with acute fever and intense heatiness, as well as facial ailments and migraine that occur in the face, especially if they are old.
And the quality of phlebotomy on them is that your head tightens its neck and you place your nose with your left hand near your head, take the delicate long phlebotomy and put it in the middle location of the nasal bridge according to correctness, where the vein doesn't manifest here, and as soon as blood begins to flow.
Make sure to finish your hand with the small phlebotomy gradually and let the blood flow according to your need; then release that overnight, for that will be restored quickly.
The youth of the bloodletting procedure for both parts leads to contraction and the onset of leprosy, as well as ailments from malnutrition and indigestion, and bad corrosive ulcers, such as those caused by scurvy.
And the quality of this bloodletting for those is that the patient supports each in their back with a pillow; and the physicians are above the head of the patient, and the patient is lying on one mattress.
And when performing bloodletting to the long vein, do ample small bloodletting gradually; and remove the amount of blood according to time or according to what is necessary; and make it seem like another vein.
And when returning the mattress and strengthening both veins through gentle stretching so that the patient is not burned, let it stay within until after the plague is healed.
The youth of bloodletting for the veins in the gums, corresponds to small abscesses and pustules in the mouth and gum decay, as well as bad ulcers and cracks, and bad ulcers that occur in the nose and in the patient's circulation.
And the quality of bloodletting for those is that you make the patient face you, and strengthen their neck with a bend, then move the lips around and observe both veins, one being on the right side of the lip and the other on the left; and each demonstration is by the darkness of each from both, and this more so when in circulation within those veins there are small dark ones; and then you make an incision for each at a point inclined inwardly.
If you have any doubt, or do not know which one among those is, then you discern by making an incision in the largest of those, and from the evident pus of those.
And make it resemble the two veins that are on the lips above.
The two veins that are located in the front of your tongue are for the bloodletting procedure known as cephalic, before the burns found in the throat, for tonsillitis, and for ailments of the mouth.
The quality of bloodletting for those is to follow the patient between your hands in front of the sun, and raise their tongue from them, observe their tongue, from one side of their vein and the other side of the vein, and the color of each declines into darkness.
And then make a bloodletting for each; and be careful not to end your hand in bloodletting those ones, because those are arteries.
And your veins that are bloodletted in the armpit are in those that usually flow throughout all men, and bloodletting for them is done according to two ways, or place it on the bloodletting with a mirtil or olive in gradation; or cut it with a bloodletting knife, and call this one needle, and this is its form:
The shape of it is as follows: the part that you are considering, and you adjust to open the veins that are curved, full, and with apparently large ducts, and those which contain large granular blood.
And this bloodletting is of less width and has a finer tip, it is suitable for bloodletting veins with fine ducts that contain subtle pus.
The youth of bloodletting for the basilic vein, which is one of three veins: you remove the pus from the throat and neck, and from that which affects the feet and belly.
And the bloodletter should know when performing that bloodletting to hold it and be above the fear in that area, where your hand has an artery, and if he misses and adjusts in the puncture of the bloodletting tool, it will cut that artery and cause flows of pus, so beware not to perform that with a sharp bloodletting tool before cutting with the needle.
And if the basilic vein does not appear through a clear manifestation, then beware that you leave it and try another, or search for one of its branches; or bloodlet it at the end of your arm where it is evident; and cut that with the bloodletting tool just like we have said.
And if you want the bloodletting of your wrist, then look in front of the constriction of your arm where you know the location of the pulse, and prepare to press on it with strength; and lift your arm and cut the vein at a concave section with the bloodletting tool just like we have said; and be careful that you do not strike the pressure for some space in the area of the artery.
And when you press, with strength on the mattress, a swelling appears in the area that you have pressed with strength, then that swelling is an expansion of the artery, and therefore avoid that one.
And if the blood flows in the bloodletting as hot metal from a child, then know that it is the blood of the artery; and when you observe this for a long time with your hand on that spot, then hold your hand in place again, and if the blood stops flowing, where hardened lumps are stopped, then strengthen your arm and leave that one.
And protect the patient from their own sweat, and take care of their over-anxiety and do not allow that for a few days until they are healed.
If the disease is not eliminated, then you must provide medicine to that, so when you do this; you cut into the artery if it appears to you; where the end of the thing becomes constricted and the disease is removed. Or you take a pasteurized blood clot, make it, and take one heat and strengthen that on the place of the vein with the strictness descending gradually and dusts within another day.
And then if the disease is eliminated, it's good; and otherwise, treat that with what was mentioned before in relation to recalling the location of the dusts that contain the disease's flow.
And the elimination of the disease in certain positions around the small area of the wound and the possibility of muscle contraction of the arm is difficult.
If it's the dark vein for phlebotomy, it's youthful to extract the disease from the head's ascending part and the lower part of the body; thus since it consists of branches of the basilic and the cephalic, as we have said.
And when performing phlebotomy, take care of the one with anxiety in the phlebotomy of the patient; otherwise, that is a nerve; and when you adjust in the puncture of phlebotomy and find the nerves, it will happen to him dizziness, and his healing will be difficult, and he won't be fully cured. And this nerve can be seen by feeling; and if it's hidden from some people and is subtle and not shown, then when you perform phlebotomy at that place where you are performing phlebotomy on the antecubital area, avoid the nerves in your strength.
And if the vein is between two nerves, then you should cut the vein longitudinally.
The youth of phlebotomy for the cephalic vein is that you drain the disease from the head and restore it to the patient's nostrils.
And in this manner, if you want to make phlebotomy punctures at olive phlebotomy or at mallow phlebotomy; which is the blood saved from all veins, without leaving your artery or nerve.
However, sometimes it's difficult to find in some people when phlebotomy isn't done on the first percussion, just don't miss the abscess there.
The first of which is to understand that phlebotomy should only be administered for the preservation of health and with hope for recovery and caution against potential illnesses. And it must be performed on one of the veins located in the groin: cephalic, dark, and basilic veins; phlebotomy must be done at the beginning of spring, after fasting during springtime and autumn, and near the time of eating when noticeable signs of recovery appear.
And phlebotomy should be done and then let it be three hours after the first pus has passed during the day.
Phlebotomy that is administered should be done when there's need and convenience or at night or during the day, at any hour and throughout time.
And note that infants should not be given phlebotomy until they are 14 years old, pregnant women should undergo it only after the fourth month during the seventh month, and elderly people should not undergo it if they have already passed the age of sixty.
And if someone wants to undergo phlebotomy for any reason, be sure that they alter their intestines before the phlebotomy with castor oil, if they have a clogged opening in those areas. This way, the veins will not draw excess fluids during the phlebotomy of the intestines, which are cleaned out and do not affect the main limbs.
And do not make phlebotomy for those with severe hunger or drunkenness, neither for the sake of illness nor for excesses that cause suffering to them, nor for diarrhea, and generally avoid phlebotomy around colic pain, vomiting, abdominal discomfort, sexual activity, labor, exercise, fasting, or any reason that dissipates their essence, whether it is bodily or animal.
And when considering phlebotomy, take into account the impact on moods beforehand if the disease is heavy, with foods and drinks, and with medicines if it's feasible for you.
And be aware of any cause that might prevent them, or engage in some exercise by which the disease could become subtle.
And pause phlebotomy for you during your feet, around the time of the third hour, as we have said.
And ensure that each of those feet is guarded against all animal accidents throughout the day, such as anxiety, anger, fear, and all bodily accidents, such as labor and unnecessary grief or sexual desire like them.
And at their will, ensure that they are informed of the causes in the use of which there is a custom among men for aromas and fragrance, and for balsams and similar things according to the quantity of possibility.
And then let the phlebotomist proceed over a cushion that is as firm as possible, or on a different cushion than the one under which it was to be phlebotomized.
And then pull out his arm, and have him hold the phlebotomizer against his hand for two or three seconds; and quickly press on the artery with your finger and encircle that area.
And if it is a narrow passage, or if the narrowing is not equal, or if it is due to an excess, then prohibit the flow of blood; or if it is due to softening, then prohibit the blood's entry into the body.
And when approaching the narrowing, have that which was to be phlebotomized press their hands between them as soon as the veins are swollen and can be felt.
And then the phlebotomist applies a small amount of an ancient anti-coagulant on their phlebotomy tool. And then place their left hand's index finger over that vein, leave the location for where you want the phlebotomy, so that the vein begins to fill up slightly and your percussion stops when it is the vein you find that the heart's flow is escaping from; it is this one that is filled with air. When you pause the phlebotomist over that area, it contracts. And then the phlebotomist does not pierce the vein, and if they do, that one is pulled out.
And so, ensure that the phlebotomist is firm and diligent in all of these causes.
And then pause the phlebotomy, but if the vein is broken in a single place, then it's done; and otherwise, repeat this at another location over them, or with haste on their chest, if that spot isn't covered.
And if the spot isn't covered or if the patient sweats profusely, then you let it be for a day or two, and don't press on the artery, because forcefully wiping out pus could lead to an abscess, nor should it be soaked in water.
And then repeat the phlebotomy if necessary.
And if the wound is small and blood flows subtly beneath it, and you fear that not enough blood will flow, then repeat the phlebotomy at that location according to rectitude and adjust in the opening slightly, and do this with haste before the spot becomes an abscess; when a spot becomes swollen in elderly individuals, you make fewer incisions.
And if you notice it has already become an abscess, then do not repeat on them, for there is no excuse for any of your actions; pause over that part of the opening containing some oil crackle, which pleases the body with blood. And it is better in this location than oil and other oils.
And similarly administer oil cracks in every phlebotomy where you prevent the body's blood flow, and do this by administering a tyropanum extract and calming it when it is paused over that spot, because the blood becomes diluted and churned as it thickens.
And if in the location of the phlebotomy a large abscess is formed, which happens at many spots, especially at that spot where it has not been bled just that single place, or at the site of the vein incision when there are few, then you wipe over it with an oil-soaked cloth dipped in water and salt for a moment, then pause on that location. And then you wash over it with an infused cloth in water slightly scalded, and press that for an hour, until it dissolves.
And have them do this by activating the blood stream from that vein either through their own body or another vein.
And if there remains any darkness or greenness in the location for a few days, do not notice this; and if you wish, pause over that with an extract of aloes and myrrh, or a substance from mint juice or calamus or similar.
And if there are many spots at abscesses and prominences you need to perform a phlebotomy on the basilic vein.
And then place your hand over that area, and if you find softness you should apply your compression over that. Then that prominence is bad and harmful; then consider pausing with an extract of what we have said, because forcefully blood will flow from the blood vessel artery.
And apply plaster in the place that is stuck, so that the area can endure, and then take care of that with the other remedies until it is healed.
And know that you should remove blood from every human according to the amount of their virtue and according to the prevailing color over the blood as it appears.
And if the blood is black, then you should let it bleed until it turns red. And similarly, if you find that it is thick, then you should let it bleed until it becomes thinner; and similarly, if it is sharp, until its sharpness subsides.
And when considering that someone is full and robust who needs the extraction of blood in one place, you should expand the phlebotomy on the vein and make the phlebotomist large.
And for those who are frail, do the opposite of that, and know that you should bleed them in many small parts, and have the cut be straight.
And the best thing to do in phlebotomy of veins is for it to be transverse sectioning, not piercing.
And this method of phlebotomy protects against blood flow and nerve damage, and is more commendable and safer than phlebotomy according to latitude and longitude.
And at which it is customary for apoplectic attacks to occur, you should perform phlebotomy, and before you cure that with phlebotomy, use a little of powdered garlic or simple oxymel; and draw blood from the patient in three or four stages.
And if it is caused by excessiveness, before phlebotomy take an infusion of frankincense or scented honey, with spices like pepper, cinnamon, ginger and similar things, or a scented and fragrant syrup;
And if apoplectic attacks occur, perform phlebotomy, and if the cause is excess blood in his system, before you make him drink water of meat and scented syrup with a subtle fragrance; use aromaticity for her, and limit his feet by that.
And use the other causes we've said in the division in the chapter on apoplectic attacks for evacuation.
And whoever wants to drain his arm and dissolve his blood in the second attempt, know that for evacuation phlebotomy is by means of bloodletting, and the virtue of which is coldness, it evacuates the blood little by little, according to the quantity of the virtue on consecutive days.
Whoever wants to drain his arm and expel his blood in the second round, and their body is strong, do this about seven or eight hours after the first phlebotomy.
Whoever wants to draw blood from their body in the opposite direction of the part where it declines, let them have been bled on the second or third day.
That body in which there is already excess blood and it has intensified and causes fever, let you expel his blood in one go and take a large quantity of his sweat; amplify the sensitivity before it occurs apoplectic attack, because you have kept all the conditions for phlebotomy; and place your hand on his wrist to sense the flow of blood, so that he doesn't die instead of an apoplectic attack. You should do this with three or four stages when the phlebotomist is ignorant and negligent.
And do not let it happen when you want to remove the arm and evacuate blood in the second attempt, as soon as you have closed the veins' openings and making the discharge of blood difficult, press under that with vigor and slightly bend it outward; this is too bad.
Have the patient lie within that after a second phlebotomy; or remain with it at the intensity of the bleeding caused by the phlebotomist, which is coagulated in the opening of the veins; or place your hand on that with thyme ash, or coriander ash, and press there lightly so that the blood escapes.
And if the vein is swollen, then let her lie down and don't touch it until the swelling subsides.
And if it is necessary to cause him to evacuate the blood again, and there is not an excuse, then you apply her on that spot or on another arm at another vein.
And the vein referred to as "arm thread" is phlebotomized in that place or on the basilica when they are not constricted or hidden, which is made of those.
And the quality of phlebotomy for them is that the patient immerses their hand in hot water until it easily reddens and the vein appears clearly.
And apply strength to that with bandage and mild compression; and perform phlebotomy according to the transverse direction, not longitudinally nor according to the length.
And if sensitivity is wide and your phlebotomy is such that you drain it there over the joint of the hand to a small extent.
And if blood flow is prohibited, then you immerse your hand in hot water and let the blood run in the water until you achieve your need.
If you were in the days of summer, then you are excused from immersing your hand in hot water, and similarly pause the flow of blood in hot water during winter.
And phlebotomy on this vein is safer than on all other veins, because you do not have pulsating veins or nerves left in him.
And phlebotomy of the wrist on the right hand is suitable for illnesses affecting the stomach.
And the quality of phlebotomy for them is that you strengthen your hand with bandage or with your own hand, since you have it on hot water, until the vein inflates and its presence is demonstrated palpably; then perform phlebotomy across there; and if you incise that all over, do not let it bleed.
And remember not to finish your hand during phlebotomy, because you could leave his fingers naked of flesh.
And apply your hand in hot water and let the blood run through there; if you do not immerse that in hot water, the blood will clot in the opening of the vein, and is prohibited from flowing.
And as the blood is extracted according to the amount of need, then you press on the vein with oil and salt, so that it does not become hardened gradually; similarly let it be done throughout the entire branch straight.
The young age of phlebotomy on that of the left hand is suitable for stomach disorders.
And do something similar in the bloodletting for him as you have done for the other.
And the youth of the vein at bloodletting is to the diseases in the lower parts of the body, such as abdominal pains, just like abdominal pains during menstruation, and retention of menstrual fluids, and also to the pains in red and inflamed thighs and old chest pains, and their symptoms are similar to these pains.
And the quality of his bloodletting is that he will dip his arm into cold water and perform a friction in which veins become visible; and place a metal rod over the chest joint; and locate the apparent bend of the vein, and from there its branches extend into the wet surface of the chest.
And so perform bloodletting over a larger area or from one side to the other, placing your hand at the bend of the elbow, which is better and leaves less wound.
And if you perform bloodletting on the chest surface, then you protect yourself from the nerves that are there over the chest surface, and place your bloodletting where you bleed through it, as if you wanted to incise it.
And so perform the bloodletting process.
If immersion in the basin is forbidden, then you submerge his foot in hot water and let the blood flow within that space where it is drained.
And if the bloodletting instrument misses in the first attempt, then do it again with bloodletting on his other side, where there is a vein; and don't worry about the patient's pain, but take care to avoid the nerves as we have said.
And similarly do it for the saphenous veins of the other leg in the same manner.
And for the sciatic vein, as we said earlier, place your hand on the bend of the lower limb's cavity.
And the youth of bloodletting for him is when it involves knee pain due to blood.
And the quality of his bloodletting is that the patient enters a bath and rushes to strengthen their thigh under the knee above four fingers along a long delicate bend, which does not appear otherwise.
And when it appears, then you perform bloodletting there according to each one's ability and according to the transverse direction, which is better; or cut that with a cut or drain that by drainage, where the place of him is well.
And it is in red men with swollen veins; and if you find that, but it doesn't appear throughout the sensation, then perform bloodletting on some of its branches, and that's which appears behind the heart and the ring finger of the hand.
And watch out for the nerves, let the amount of blood you want flow.
And then relieve the constriction and place your hand on the bloodletting spot to strengthen it, where it is slightly healed.
Regarding suction and the qualities to use those.
Suction tools can be made of horns, or from reeds, or from leather.
Suction is performed in two ways: one of them involves incision and blood extraction, and the other involves suction without incision.
And this suction that follows incision is done in two ways, which either involves fire or avoids the use of fire.
And among the suction tools that are administered with incision and blood extraction, there are fourteen locations in the body. The first is where a suction cup is placed, which corresponds to the anus and represents the final part of the head; the middle location is on the side of both shoulders, spreading across the chest; suction cups under the chin are left near the jawbone further away from the mouth; suction cups of two spoons are used; suction cups of alohoster are placed on the end of the penis; suction cups of two fire pans which are ten inches apart; suction cups of two basins and they are one foot apart; suction cups under the elbows, and suction cups of both thighs.
And suction does not extract blood but from small superficial veins in the flesh, and thus it lacks the virtue of those (bloodletting), like drainage with bloodletting; nor should suction be performed with fire or without fire on any disease where the entire body is drained.
And if necessity calls for suction due to disease or continuous conditions, administer it at the beginning of the month and at its end, in the middle of him, and at any other time.
And when it happens in any of those causes, especially if it's around the third or middle of the month, then command that suction be done soon after passing the day or three hours.
When it comes to the headache caused by the inversion of air in the neck, it is when that displacement occurs towards gravity in the head and towards what settles in the lungs; may this be close to the evacuation of the entire body.
This air flow is at the site of venostasis on the cephalic region.
And it's not customary to use that which causes inflammation or is in the state of mucus, which gives great harm to that.
And for this reason it's not proper to use those old remedies, and in the heads where illnesses appear due to coldness.
It's for those who continue to apply it over there that forgetting is made; and for this reason it's proper that you instruct the person using the suction tool to lift their hand slightly near the site they are applying it to, fearing the generation of forgetting.
The suction of alcohol is at the site of venostasis for the dark vein and the basilic: and thus it causes asthma, constriction, and splitting of the lymph nodes, as well as coughing, and filling up.
And it's proper for the alcohol suction to be slightly enclosed, if paused this way, it generates weakness in the body and in the stomach.
The suction of allagdahan causes headaches in the head and conjunctivitis, migraine, pre-focal points, and toothaches; it is at the site of venostasis for the basilic vein.
And it's proper to instruct the person using the suction tool not to press their hand at the point of incision in order that they do not puncture an artery and cause blood flow.
The suction on the jaw confirms alcohol in the mouth, and corruption of the gum, as well as symptoms that are similar to illnesses that occur in the mouth, they are at the site of venostasis for allic herbs which are found in both cheeks.
The suction that is performed on the two plates confirms catarrh, which is caused by filling with heat.
The suction of the two inner parts in the lungs confirms youthfulness to the venostasis from the venostasis of three veins, it is of the basilic, dark and cephalic ones; that one draws the blood from all those veins that are close to the flesh, and those small veins of other veins that are larger inside which lead the flow to the three veins.
And instruct the person using the suction tool not to proceed with incision, where the area is bare of flesh, and leave the patient's nerves and arteries intact.
And it's a suction against which is applied on piles, and causes hemorrhoids in the anus and the ulcers that are left.
And it's proper to instruct the person using the suction tool for a large suction, and with reed, where the area requires strong evaporation; and it should apply subtle traumatic suction and be incised in incision.
The suction of the inner parts through clear manifestation draws blood from the entire body, and confirms old pains in the lungs and the liver, and the bladder; they also induce menstruation and cause coughing and congestion. They are at the site of venostasis for two lymph nodes, and tracheobronchial, and bronchial cavities.
However, they weaken the entire body and cause fainting in old men.
And of the suction for trachea, youth is directed to the youthful suction of the two inner parts.
And the quality of the position of the suction points is that you place the suction at the beginning view and continue with well-seasoned continuation, do not prolong the position of the suction points, rather pause them slightly, and return those gently, and let the fluids go to the area equally for occurrence. And do not cease repeating this until you see the place already reddening and swelling, and that redness indicates blood flow.
And then you incise and continue with the steam little by little, and closely consider in the disposition of the body.
That person who has thin flesh and few pores, it's proper to incise once and not more, so the area doesn't become inflamed.
And instruct the person using the suction tool to expand the incision a little, and always use steam with ease.
And if there is thickening in the blood, it's proper to incise twice, where in the first incision the path for absorption of pus and moisture is opened. And in the second one, examine the acquired extraction of thick blood.
And if the blood is moving and viscous, then it's proper to perform incision for the third time in order to obtain the last bit.
And gradually, when we want to extract a little at a time or just a small amount of blood, up to our limit with an incision.
And if we want extraction of moving blood, we make incisions with a strong incision; and if we know that the blood is thick, then it's proper to make incisions through wave-like incision.
And the term for incision is simply until you reach the depth of the vein.
And if the vein is thick, hard, dark, and its pores are stretched, it's proper that the points for suction be moistened gently, more openly, decisively; in summer time, as well as with oil of aloes or oil of violet, or oil of almond shells, or oil from a cinnamon tree; and if it's during winter time, then use oil of narcissus, or oil of linden, or oil of chamomile, or blood oil, and similar treatments.
And if the excess is large, stop it, then use oil of turmeric, or balsam oil, or aloes oil, or nutmeg oil, and apply them.
If the suctioner has ample pores and is on meat, then it's prohibited to use oil, and you should cover those places with water or hot water from aloe vera, or water from cucumber, or water from mint, and similarly apply them to those areas.
And for the one where their dampness is from wet heat, wash his suction areas with vinegar, or water of myrtle and sumac, and similarly apply them to those.
And for the one where their excesses are large, wash his suction areas with vinegar old, or water of lemon balm, which is marjoram, or from decoction of nutmeg, or of chamomile, and similarly apply them.
And cover the suction so that it is protected from bathing; also cover that it should be given close to the warmth of the bath for an hour or two, and cover that he/she should sleep near the suction.
What is it that needs to be done in order to regulate the bloodletting before suction?
Consider the meal you are about to eat: if the suctioner or one who is due for bloodletting has a hot temperament with intense redness and inflammation, then take cooling remedies, such as vinegar salads and milk drinks, and quinces, and juleps, and similarly.
And for their meals, such as roasted meats, fowl, and seasoned meats with herbs, and similarly for them.
And for the one whose complexion is pale, take to drink almond oil baths or almond oil of quinces and spices, as well as vinegar mixed with rose water; and it should be recommended that they consume small quantities of drinking and eating, and avoid foods from fowl, pork, fish, rabbit and pigeons.
And for the day of suction and bloodletting, let their drinking exceed their food intake.
And for some hours before certain individuals undergo treatment with tyrian alizarin or musk medicines, such as powdered musk or alum, prior to suction or bloodletting or shortly after, so that their major limbs are comforted and their condition is alleviated; do not have them take that sweat.
Let the suction areas that are from scratching be suctioned on the abdomen, and over gout, and on the umbilicus, in the locations of joints, and the flank, as these limbs do not undergo scratching on themselves.
Do not treat those with itching rather than the pain from body ailments, such as suction on the breasts in cases of excess fluid from the body's milk; and use that to dissolve the gaseous constipation within limbs, such as suction on the abdomen and umbilicus; for that hardens the limb and helps to disperse the pain caused by gaseous constipation.
And when they occur during pregnancy or in the case of worms, through the force of suction, a person's pregnancy is disrupted and expels the worm from its location.
Similarly, when it happens during suction on the abdomen and backside, expelling gaseous constipation in those confined areas.
These suction treatments are performed using urine as the only substance; some treatments are given with fire.
And some treatments are filled with hot water in cases of abdominal ailments.
This is done so that the suction is full and there is a large amount of pus, either hot water alone or water in which herbs suitable for this purpose are boiled.
The method of administering suction by fire: make the width of the opening as wide as two fingers, according to how we have formed it; the volume of the prong is as much as a palm; and place it in the middle of him/her, at the point where it is located on the circuit, as much as he/she is, let the handle be small according to the amount that enters him/her with one needle.
Make cuts from elderberry or citrus, with large margins, lion's thorn, and smooth ones, all so that they do not cut the limb to its proper position on him/her.
And in the middle of his/her back is where a crosscut from elderberry or iron is made, which is placed where the candle is lit over the fire.
And already this large suction is greater than that one we recommended; and the amount of leaching from it according to abdominal ailments and the condition of the person using it.
And suction cups for children and those who are exhausted are different from those used by young people and with large cuts.
And the quality of administering this suction over a limb is to extend the heat of firewood in front of a small candle made of wax, and place that over the middle of the transverse cut at the middle part of the suction cup, so that the fire may be lit around her/him without burning the patient's body.
And it should be placed over the patient's limb, and the point is on the handle that we said, within which when we have the suction cups and do not observe the point and cause the vapor to rise above that handle, then the suction cup will soon dissolve.
And properly ignite the lamp according to their manner, and repeatedly do this until you no longer need it.
In the case of wind that is given in pleurisy, it uses water, which has no cross or thrust flow, and it is not administered except when fully filled with water, and it is placed only over a limb.
And this is the shape of it: And this windscreen, the larger it is, the better it is, so that it can receive a large quantity of water.
Chapter 97.
Bloodlettings are not administered on moist members but only in those that do not allow the position of suction cups due to their smallness, like the palate and gum tissues which resemble them; or on naked flesh members, like the nose and areas resembling it.
And the quality of using those that you have found, which are in waters of boiled and pure water.
And let these rest day and night in boiled water until they cool down, making sure no cause of heat comes into their abdomen; and let the body be evacuated at meal times with phlebotomy and suction cups; and let these be rubbed on the thighs so that you turn red; and let them be placed over the patient.
And when they are full, and if necessary.
And if it is possible to use the suction cup on this spot with wind, then do so preferably in youth.
And if not, then wash the area with hot water and add cold water; and let it be rubbed and squeezed.
And if the body of the person remains under the influence of the fever close to the area where the bloodlettings are placed, and this results in residue, then immerse a cloth in hot water and wring it out, and place that on top so that the discharge is absorbed.
And if the fever is multiplied, then sprinkle sulfuric acid or similar agents on it from the causes of stypics, so that the fever will be dried; or place the ashed beans over the area and let them rest so that the beans adhere to the area, until the fever dries.
And if necessary, repeat the bloodlettings, whenever it is possible to change those.
And if bloodlettings are not allowed to be suspended, then rub the area with recent fever or place a needle in those spots so that the fever starts to come out; and let them be placed, such that when there is any fever it stops immediately.
And when you want them to come out, sprinkle a little of ground aloes, or salt, or ashes over those, and let it happen immediately.
So begins the section on the restoration treatment: for recovery. This chapter is about necessary interventions in the art of medicine; it's about restoring fractures and accidental displacements in bones.
Oh, child, know that doctors and laymen and those who in time will neglect the works of the ancients or won't read even a letter from them.
And for this reason, this method of the scientists on earth is kept private; and I haven't forgotten about this even after all these years; and I didn't include what I have mentioned merely by reading the works of the ancients or studying their understanding, but rather through a long process of study from those sources where I extracted the science.
And direct towards experimenting and studying throughout my life.
And I have described in this chapter all of my science and the things that I have experimented with; because I will briefly present this to you others and relieve myself from the occupation of lengthening; and shorten this at the end of shortening; then show this at the end of declaration; and form it into various forms of disturbances that are administered in that, as shown by declaration, as I did in two previous chapters.
First Chapter.
Summary and collections from existing fractures in bones, of which a prior mention is necessary before we begin recalling the fracturing limbs and various ones for each. Let us therefore say what the summaries of this chapter are about in the preamble, and the chapters that guide the minds of those who start off with their crafts and stand on the truth of these; it is you and those who are eager to know or learn this noble art from you.
And let us say that when a fracture or dislocation or twist or sprain occurs, then you should immediately take to phlebotomy at the beginning or remove it, or at any time, if no contraindication exists, such as excess of vitality, or where it occurs, or even in decrepitude, or it is the time of strong heat, or strong rubbing.
And let them be satisfied with food made from herbs in hot water and meat of rabbits and crab meat; and avoid large meats and fill up only with vegetables and all foods that fill the veins of fever, ensuring you are safe from the formation of pus, and if you do not fear the discharge of material into the limb.
And then return the thigh to its original position at which there is usually a custom for it.
And when the broken bone begins to be restored, let the thigh be fed with nutritious food that is hot, large and heavy in which viscosity exists, such as foods made from cooked wheat in water, rice, carrots, fish, beef stomachs, onions, fresh meat, large and similar to those, and under this regimen, a slight coagulation of pus from the fracture takes place more smoothly.
And know that when bones are broken in men during the first year and in the old, they cannot be continuously healed according to their nature through the drying of their body parts.
However, nature adjusts and binds over the broken bone of every part in a manner similar to glue where it thickens and adheres, strengthening within that which is consolidated and bound at times when strength and firmness end, like fire at the beginning, during which any cause does not prevent him from doing his work.
And for this reason it is necessary to place the limbs of the patient, foods in which gravity, viscosity, and thickness exist, as we have said.
And know that the species of fracture are various according to the diversity of limbs, a fracture of the bone in the chest is different from the fracture of the bone in the head; and the fracture of the foot bone is different from the fracture of the bone in the thigh; similarly all other limbs are different among each other.
And I will recount a memory of every species of fracture, detailed in its chapter separately from the others.
Varying degrees of self-fracture within oneself. And the species of bone fracture within them are varied; some occur when it is made in their stars. And sometimes fractures are made according to the length of the bone: these are the fractures of the hand and stars both with and without preparation, as when preparing for writing pain occurs, and there is a fracture by impact and disruption in the head, and there is a small crack fracture.
And for every species, there's an appropriate disturbance in the restoration of it according to what comes from the distinct memory of each one in their places.
Varying signs of bone fracture. And for this reason, bone fracture is known: it's the distortion of it, and that elevation and continuity of it to touch feeling, and those when you press it with your hand.
And when there is no apparent distortion or it's not felt under touch when you press the bone with force and the patient does not experience much pain, then there is no fracture here.
It's possible that there could be distortion or a small crack, you should notice when your hand touches it and under compression of the whole body; it's important to have a pause on them with medicines whose memory comes at that moment which suits the location; then strengthen it through subtle constriction.
And know that when it's arched and doesn't split into two or another as doesn't happen in their stars, then you should realize that starting from your time to correct it until the time when the heat has affected it.
And if heat from the cautery has affected it, then smooth that over some days until the heat subsides; and then restore that according to any means of lightness and skill you can use.
And know that the restoration and repair of it is much lighter than when it occurs in their stars.
And then strengthen it according to what will come from the memory of it.
And if in the bones there are stars (stages), then it is necessary to extend this broken limb from two parts, whether it's a hand or a foot; or with your hand if the member is small; or with two strings or with one string and a hand.
And when you place your position at which you pause the member location evenly according to its natural figure, while the parts are extended from the broken limb, then force yourself to return those additions in order and with any skill that can be done in their locations.
And watch that when you do your operation or injury, it doesn't happen upon the patient above them by your force, and make yourself according to your ability to apply one bone against its companion in their best forms.
And realize that in that moment you touch it with your hand, and if you notice any different cause here, correct it and adjust it according to the amount of your virtue.
And avoid excessive extension and compression, as some doctors often allow certain conditions to lead to heat from the cautery during their operation, or cause strain in the limbs as we have seen through their operations of those common conditions.
And the quality of the constraint of the broken limb is what I recommend; and you should know that limbs broken are diversified in their size, in their greatness, and in the form of those.
And for those who are small like the arm and said easy to resemble them, then it is required that the covering be of very thin cloth.
For those who are large like the thigh or the chest, it is required that in those there be a covering that is both tight and durable, such that the elasticity of that material connects the large member to that area from all sides with tension uniformity, so that nothing enters into them.
And start by conducting your process of evacuation, place a comfortable support under it, about the site of that fracture in three layers or four according to the size of the limb; and strengthen your hand slightly on the membrane.
And proceed to that area above the site of the fracture, and strengthen moderately so that you do not cause your tension at the point where you have strengthened the site of the fracture. And proceed to slightly extend the membrane at the site of the fracture, gradually soften the tension little by little, until you take hold of that area from a large part.
And proceed to take another part and envelop that other area over the constricted site, with a membrane; then move towards the membranes up to where they are from the fracture; and in your operation focus on the tension of the membrane and its softening as we discussed for the first membrane above.
And proceed to pause between the layers of leather or cloth that is equal in elasticity to the fracture, if there is elasticity in it; and if not, do not cause any delay in it for any reason.
And proceed to pause on the other part, and properly adjust over these membranes that have been made in a decent manner just now, if there is no inflammation or abscess at this location; then pause where is that abscess and where is the inflammation; leave it for a few days; then strengthen over those stars.
And may the stars be of the same length, and skillfully formed; or they could be made from wood; or from palm leaves; and let each star have its width according to this shape and this figure:
However, ensure that the star placed over that fracture is a bit larger and slightly thinner than the other stars, with the length of the star according to its size in terms of magnitude and proportion; then strengthen on the stars on another part according to your first tension; then lie properly decently as we have said about tension, so that your tension is more at the site of the fracture, and the longer you extend from the fracture, the more it heals.
And ensure that the threads are medium in size and subtlety, and be of many; if the threads are thick, like I have seen with the operation of some times placing those thread cords of a thickness similar to the tortoiseshell, and this is a great error, when the tension exceeds equality.
And thin threads are not convenient, because you will not achieve the tension that you desire for those as you wish, and do not allow there to be more than one finger's width between each thread.
And if the patient is treated by placing the extremities of the stars near the tension in the sensitive areas, then pause with those on leather or silk wool so that they do not cause injury.
Some fractures are treated with plastering, and a disruption occurs in the chain, and I will come back to this in memory at the capital according to singularity.
And know that not all broken limbs are treated with stars on the first day; this is because when the limb is large, you may not be able to pause over it with the stars until about three or seven days or more, according to your confidence in avoiding abscesses.
And this is the way of plastering on which the ancients worked, those who are placed over fractures and dislocations and twists.
The method of plastering as briefly described for the restoration of fractures, suitable for complex situations and mainly for women and children, which is what you need on something that does not receive heat or friction: this involves using powder from flour mill residue, it's the floury part that comes out when there's movement in the walls of the flour mill.
And do it like this, otherwise through it with egg white, and pause the thick or subtle preparation; then use that accordingly.
Another method of treating broken bones, dislocations, and twists: use assafetida, lapdanum, acacia, nutmeg, and myrrh, all finely ground to one thousand granules, each measured in two horses' loads; add half a load of frankincense and aloin; twenty loads of alcohol or the album from an egg if the patient's body is burned out. Then use this plaster, which has good composition and restores broken bones lightly, and strengthens them for strong people.
Another method of plastering that restores fractures and twists: prepare by combining myrrh and white vinegar in one horse's load, frankincense and aloin in five horses' loads, acacia in six horses' loads, and Armenian balm in twenty horses' loads.
Grind the three ingredients in a mortar with rubbing motion, sieve them, and mix them with water or egg white. Then administer it.
The method for applying plaster to joints and bones apart from their places, and pain happens in those areas as well as cracks and fractures: take woolen thread, immerse it in hot water and oil, and then place it on the area.
In this plaster, it is not simply for restoration, but to drain pus and expel pains properly.
Another method for a restoring plaster for broken bones: take leaves of wild figs and leaves of wild opium poppy; crush all together to make a plaster from them.
A shortened plaster application method for the restoration of bone fractures and when you want resolution of pus remaining: take rhubarb, chamomile flowers, violet flowers, corn flour, and a half-part of each. Grind them all and mix with wine, if the member hasn't been cut.
If it has been cut, then use it as water from colandered wet water or as water, using it.
Another method of applying pus for faster resolution than this first one, when an abscess occurs needing bone restoration: take rhubarb and seeds of rue, and garlic, sweet clover, basil, chamomile flowers, all in equal parts. Grind them all and mix with water from sauz or double water, or wine, according to the quality of the member and the color of it during rest.
Ypocras does not dissolve in his free spirit that it is laid over the fractured limb needing restoration, but instead has beeswax and oil made into a paste, rather than any other cause; and I recommend that it should be midway between coarseness and fineness.
Gualia is seen that it should be laid over the broken limb for its restoration and the causes in which dryness from quality is like this such as myrrh, ashes, and similar to those causes that we have recommended.
A method for applying plaster that relieves injury and pain: take a mixture of honey, ashes, skin of roasted human or dog fur, and rhubarb, salt in equal parts; grind them all, sieve them, mix them, then make the plaster.
The amount according to which you know that the pus is draining and soon becomes less, is that you consider if there has been no pain or swelling, and if the bone is not broken it does not move from its place, then do not disturb it for several days. And if there is severe pain or swelling or inflammation at the spot, then you should remove it immediately, and keep the plaster on your body.
And take linen and sea sponge that is wet, immerse it in strong water, then wash the area with it until the swelling stops and pain subsides; and later let the member rest for an hour; then place your hand on it covered by wool that has been immersed in hot water or oil, or rubbed oil, lay it over you for a night until you are sure of pus being drained, and allow the swelling of the limb to rest, and make sure the pain of it is relieved.
And then apply this thin strip again and make the plaster small so that you don't strain it with your initial tension, and apply it inside until it heals.
And if you notice that the pus and swelling and pain and inflammation and all accidents have completely subsided, and you no longer need plaster or bandages, then proceed with this just as you did at the beginning equally.
And if there is no cause for any of those things we have said to the limb, then do not disturb it but leave it alone for about three, four, five or seven days. And some scaldings of all this is left for twenty days according to how you perceive the ease of the limb as we have said, until the fracture adheres and it comes together with the coagulation of flesh over that.
And then adjust the bandage more than your first bandage totally, and adjust to the swelling of the thigh meat, according to when you have recalled it.
And if you notice that the place of the fracture has already dried and weakened more than it should, then know that the nutrition is prohibited from reaching there; and bathe this area with hot water for all days as you were doing; do this throughout three days; relieve the bandage a little, and through this operation reach the limb's nutrition, it gets healed slightly.
And as those who restore the bone of the limb do another round when it is not restored at the beginning, according to how it heals and is restored according to its curvature, this is an error according to their operation, great fear, and if this was a tailor they would have expanded the old in their writings and treated it accordingly.
And I haven't seen any of them do this, so it's more reasonable that this doesn't happen.
When it comes to a second point: About fractures when they occur in the head.
The types of fractures are blows, and their appearances are diverse, with their causes being different. Some fractures occur due to the impact of force on bone tissue, where the force penetrates all the way into the bone cavity, which leaves the bone intact, similar to how it would in a stick, and this is why this type is named 'ascial'. Or when the force impacts a part of the bone, then it impacts the flesh without passing through its inner layer; and this kind of fracture is named absolute levation.
And the severity of these two types of fractures is either large or small, and for those that are compressive or traumatic. The cause of which is an impact against stone or hammering onto rock, resembling them in appearance.
And this fracture is penetrating, bringing the bone close to destruction, which leaves the bone intact. Or it occurs within the bone surface, and the severity of these two types of fractures is either large or small.
And this type of fracture expands in the bone, in the delicacy of the hairline, and that is why this kind of fracture is named 'capillary'.
And this fracture is made by hammering or through the impact of stone, resembling it in appearance, causing some layer of bone to enter into its parts internally, and occurs at the concave area such as in the seams on an ear when they are impacted and the entrance part of them goes inside.
And most frequently this is done like that in bodies with moist bones, such as in children's heads.
And for all these types of bone fractures, they are separate like stars. And I will speak about this in detail from all this in its place.
And we must know all these types of fractures through diagnosis about them and through examination of their tender spots and inspection of the rotten flesh that is on them.
And the capillary type is known by what is revealed above the bone, it is cleansed and marked on it, where the fracture appears black.
In the treatment of fractures, consider the patient's condition and circumstances, if through them you find clear signs about illness, such as vomiting from anger, expansion, loss of understanding, abortion, fainting, acute fever, sneezing, sweating, and other symptoms similar to them in major conditions, indeed it is not healing.
And if you find non-ordinary events, you hope for health, then you begin treating the patient.
This cause is that if you have received the injury in the state as it was injured and this happens during the winter days, then you should examine on the bone's surface until day fourteen of any condition.
And if it's during summer days, then you should examine on the bone surface until the seventh day because whatever is destroyed by the heat of the body in the bone will have rotten and for these events we've mentioned to occur.
And if the fracture has already penetrated the bone covering the brain, and it is in small parts that are compressive and traumatic, then you should insert and grind the affected part according to what I will instruct you.
And you examine the head of the patient injured, uncovering over the bone according to custom and your ability as per the appearance of the injury, making it lighter on the body.
And if it happens to you that you need detection of the bone, pus or abscess flow, then you oppose towards this as is suitable and according to your ability. And here you must use what suits you, which means soaking the place with infused water and rubbing oil, so that you allow the injury to rest within until the abscess is sedated; and be sure of blood flows; and proceed from around the bone and in its removal.
And this should be according to one of two ways of operation.
And one way is that you insert the bone with an incision straight through, and this is its form: Then administer another incision tool like this, slightly smaller than the first one; and here is how it looks:
And you should administer more of the slightly larger instrument compared to the second one.
And you should know that you need various numbers of incision tools from which some are slightly larger than others; and some among them are shorter than the others, having their tips sharp or made of iron or steel.
And use them with ease when impacting on the incision tools, so that you do not crush the head and hurt it.
And if the bone is strong and hard, then you should penetrate through its circuit before administering the incision tools at the grooves which are named non-deep grooves.
And they are not simply called like that if those do not reach the end of the bone at that point, so that on the groove there is a rounded tip or margin similar to an edge that is left with its sharp head resembling an edge or small circle. You should prevent this from being submerged and passing through the thickness of the bone.
And it is convenient for you to take a large number of these grooves each of which will suit the thickness of every bone within which it is present in all parts of the skull, so that its tip will be sharp, and the quantity in length and width should be according to the quantity of thickness of this bone.
This is the method for three types of bone fractures: when drilling in the break circuit of the bone, you stop the drill on the bone and rotate it within your fingers until you know that the bone has been penetrated; then move the drill to another location, pause where all extraction reaches the thickness of the ray or around there.
And proceed by inserting the scalpel where any tear is in the bone; make that fine pus above it as you lift off, just as we have said, while drilling through the bone or with your hand, or with some other tools with which you will be equipped for this, as you use forceps and fine tweezers.
And know that when using the scalpel, it should not touch any muscle.
And when you have drilled through the bone and separated it from the muscle if it continues on him/her, extract that piece. Know that for this purpose you should use other instruments similar to a scalpel but that are thick and fine, while being cautious with any pus or fine pus compared to other scalpels.
And if there is some part of the bones that fits and sticks, then take it with ease from the tools you need for these instruments; then treat this wound with ointments and remedies as we have said.
And the other method of operation is light, far from pain, as Galien and the surgeons used with great skill; this is how they describe it: it is necessary for you at the beginning to start uncovering the part of the bone in the location where the fracture is most intense and obvious. When you have uncovered that part and placed your hand on its end of this instrument which moves smoothly, here is how you should do it:
And it is that the round part is strong and does not damage any muscle, while the acute part is two lengths ahead in depth for you before the length, just as mentioned; so that the round part fits well with the muscle on its sharp edge incident into the bone.
And proceed by tapping on the edge of one part with a slight force until you penetrate all the bone as smoothly as it has been rotated, and be sure about the operation that it does not occur in any way you fear. If the surgeon was like every other person and the most ignorant of them; certainly, if they were asleep.
And when there is some cause attached to the bone of the patient in certain locations on the bone, you will penetrate that part with the tip of this instrument which has a sharp edge, and remove it easily from him/her, so that it is removed of his/her muscles and skin.
And if the bone fracture does not penetrate into the skin, and that which is attached or left of the bone is its skin, it sticks in it unevenly and finely, then know that you should remove that unevenness and drain those fine lumps with thin razors that you have prepared in quantity for various amounts so that you can administer from them in every location whatever is suitable for each one and the right pus according to how you are performing your operation on this broken bone and its figure.
And know that in your ration you should apply the thickness of the bone to its beginning with the pus from those razors, and proceed using near the fine pus of it, and do not stop doing this until you reach administering the thick pus and the fine pus of all.
And in any other small capillary fractures and subtle fractures, know that you should provide treatment according to how you lost it for correcting it.
And it is the reason why they have not been improved on all those who have studied in that art. And stand by what we wrote, showing large fractures.
And if the skin is stretched when you remove the bone, know that take linen according to the quantity of the wound, immerse it in boiled oil, and place it on the opening of the wound; then take another folded or tripled linen and immerse it in wine and boiled oil, place it on the first linen, do this gently over the pus without pressing too hard as you might injure the skin. Then apply a thin layer of fat over that, and do not press it further than what is needed for the wound's size only.
And leave it under this treatment for one or two days until you are sure of the pus being drained; then remove that and proceed to administer medicines that promote healing without excessive drying, such as linseed oil, corn flour, powder of onions and aristolochia, and other similar substances.
And it is that you should use these medicines in the form of a powder to be spread over the wound, as when they are dry; universally, administer all remedies whose properties cleanse them and do not irritate.
And keep according to your wisdom so that the wound in your treatment becomes clean; and it should not be in the greasy part of the ointment or any other place; nor let you add toxicity to this; for when applied over the skin of the brain, it corrupts it and poisons that area, leading to an evil malicious effect on the body near this maliciousness.
And it happens in the skin of the head, similar to how things are distorted in the bone and more so when your treatment is neglected, there appears a darkness on the surface; therefore consider this if you experience any accidents as we have described, know that they are harmful to every part.
And if there is no resulting darkness but rather due to the medicine that has been applied upon it, and it results from the effectiveness of that medicine causing that darkness, then you should take a portion of honey and a part of burned oil. and place those lines on a cloth, then apply that onto the chest; and apply it with the spices of cure as needed until recovery occurs.
Third capsule.
Restoration of the nose when it is broken.
Know that it is not a break in the nose but two parts at once above each other, or one of those occasionally broken, by which there are two bones, and where your part leaves cartilage, not broken, and does not hit it but only friction and distortion without obstruction.
If one of the two parts is broken, then you should introduce your little finger into his/her nose, and make that fracture equal inside with your indicated finger, and outwardly on your finger tip, so that it returns the nose according to its natural shape. And do this as easily as you can, and watch that your operation does not cause harm to the patient.
And if the fracture is in the upper part of the nose, and your finger does not reach there, then you should make it equal at the tip of the bone where there is a slight thickening.
And if the fracture is in two parts, then you should imitate this.
And restore him/her during the first day of the fracture if possible; otherwise, you should wait about seven or one-third of the time for the pus to drain away.
And insert a piece of cloth in the tip of the nose for him/her, if the fracture is in one part, or two cushions, if it is in two parts, and place that cushion thickness filled with as much as fills the nasal passage.
And follow some of the ancient restorers who recommend that cushions be wrapped in silk, and are worn all day but not seen by me; rather you should have them wrapped in albumen scrambled egg powder with bone flour; then let the cushion lie in between until the bone is set and the cartilage hardens.
And sometimes broken bones are inserted into the nose instead of cushions, risking excess pus wrapped in lion's hair cloth; and if you already have a broken nasal bone with excessive pus, so that the patient cannot breathe properly.
And this is not necessary for you; if you want to, do it like this, or if you prefer, use cushions.
And if any other pus-filled cauterization occurs, dress the nose with cotton or with a cloth soaked in strong vinegar and oil, or with honey.
And if it does not produce cauterization pus, then you should apply the paste outside with flour of sassafras and powder of coffee leaves soaked in egg albumen; and place a lion's skin on top of him/her, and do not injure the nose by any means.
And if the bones of the nose are broken in small fractures or are constricted, then you should cut over those parts, and remove them with instruments that fit those; and place the incision open, and cure it with what heals and consolidates, and with bandages that suit.
And if there is inflammation inside the nose, then you should cure that with cushions and administer lead tubes until it is completely healed.
Fourth capsule.
Restoration of the jaw when it is broken.
When the jawbone leaves you is broken and the fracture of it is not accompanied by inflammation, observe that if the fracture is only outwardly, and is not split into two parts but bent inside the parts, then its intelligence is slight.
And when the fracture is in the right part, introduce your left hand into the patient's mouth; similarly if the fracture is in the left mandible, then introduce your right hand's index finger; and push that fracture's bulge inwardly with ease to the outward parts of the parts from the bone side; do this appropriately equaling that.
And if the fracture of the jaw has already been divided into two parts, then you should administer extension to both parts according to rightness until it is possible to equalize him/her.
And if there is inflammation of teeth leading to disruption, then strengthen those from which you expect them to break at the tip of gold or silver or ivory; and place a cushion under the broken jaw, and place padding under the cloth double, and place padding under the large star-shaped bandage decently made, or a piece as long as the jaw; and apply that above according to how it is familiar to you and that suits application, so that it does not get destroyed.
And command the patient to rest and be calm, and place his/her lion's soup on pause in terms of food.
And if you estimate that it has been altered in some way, then do this and untie that on the third day; and correct whatever has been altered about him/her and dress that with bone flour, egg albumen, or flour of sassafras, as long as you have kept your lion's soup for him/her, and place padding over the dressing cloth.
And then, once this is done and the dressing is placed upon it, and the position of the bone is not altered, let it be left alone, until it is healed and strengthens the fracture; for this fracture heals in three weeks.
And if another wound occurs with an abscess in the cauterization, then administer what we have said about healed wounds during its treatment until it is healed, and renew that cauterization of the abscess.
And if the fracture is due to plague, then consider whether it's a separation of bone fragments or stuck together, then you should gently move those fragments with what seems appropriate in their removal from those tumors.
And if the plague holes are straightened, then you should enlarge them according to the quantity of your need with a syringe.
And when you have moved those fragments, and if the plague hole is not enlarged afterwards, then enlarge the plague hole; and if not, place one of the plasters that suits on it and cover it, until it heals.
Capitol V.
Regarding the restoration in case of a humpback.
Healed wounds involve breaking the furcula at the front part before the muscle, and this fracture is made in three ways.
If it breaks, separates or separates into two parts other than fragments; and this is easier for its restoration; if on the other hand there are fragments in it, then its restoration is difficult; or if the fracture is due to plague.
And during that operation, when the fracture is due to plague, you must have two ministers present, so one has the assistant and follows the broken furcula, and the other stretches out the throat at that part.
And when you have moved the fracture with your usual instructions until it takes on the shape of what it was according to its context, and is not in a shallow cavity or indentation.
And if you require more extension, then make sure to place some padding or wool at the patient's buttock crease, and choose its size according to your needs; extend and elevate the furcula and hold the pad with your hand until you move the fracture in accordance.
And if you cannot pull the furcula's end outward to its partitions, as it is directed towards the front, then ensure that the patient lies on their back, and place a cushion half the size under their muscles.
And the minister places his hand under the muscle at its divisions until the bone of the furcula is elevated as it would be in front of him, then correct and move that fracture with your usual instructions.
If you feel fragments of the furcula and they are stuck together, then ensure to cut over that area and remove those fragments with ease.
And if it is stuck in the bone, then you devise an incision from him with one of the scalpels that you have equipped for this, since you have placed the furcula on the tumor that serves the cervical; and this is the shape of that tool:
It is similar to a knife in which this forms the indentation; and its width depends on what you need from it according to the size of the bone or the shallowness.
The length of it should depend on what is feasible during the operation; there should be two ends like this sometimes, and one end should be broad while the other straightened.
And if the wound disruption you have incised when extracting a fragment from the bone is wide, and you are sure of an abscess cauterization, then adjust the two edges of the wound for suturing.
And if the disruption is small, or you fear an abscess cauterization, then use the wound with cloths and powders according to the size of the incision in the wound.
And if an abscess cauterization occurs, then apply a cloth soaked with vinegar and rubbed oil over it, and place it there.
And in conclusion, ensure that the knife does not penetrate beyond the broken bone; and be sure to see your patient every day, because when their swelling has subsided or you notice that the knife is no longer penetrating, then correct this and strengthen the healing.
And when you have the patient's buttocks on their neck, and place your hand under their buttock every night with a small cushion; so that at this point, the assistant of your hand from its elbow is elevated, and thus the fracture of the furcula is elevated to its position in the muscle; or let their arm be extended along the neck.
And do not move the ligament unless it happens in the most important or inflammatory place, within twelve days.
And then renew the plaster if you have seen the patient's face at that point, and adjust in the constriction and restore it smoothly until the fracture of the sternum is restored and coagulated.
And it is strengthened and comforted according to the month in twenty-eight days, and some people perform certain procedures within that time period.
Chapter VI.
On restoring a fracture of the shoulder.
The spatula tarta is broken in the lateral area of the patient, and it is not broken from the patient but only from the margins.
And when the place of the patient is broken - and it breaks in the middle of the place of the patient - and it is not known except by touch, then according to its figure, you prepare for the treatment of that and reduce it according to its natural figure in every manner of skill where that is possible.
And then place on the spot powder of almond meal and stop bleeding; and then place a powdered piece of double cloth; and then place on the patient's forehead the tip of a delicate table according to the quantity of the spatula or even a little more.
If you leave the tip of the spatula is curved in some parts of its location, then you fill that curve with bleeding stop, and then adjust the tip according to equality.
And then strengthen on top with humid material about the constriction, and adjust the tip within so that it does not swell in its location.
And consider the ligament in every day; and all times when it is softened, apply another treatment and strengthen it and adjust the tip if it swells from its location.
And keep the patient on their side like this.
The spatula is restored within twenty days or in thirty-five days.
And when this number is completed, then you dissolve the ligament, and you know safely that from which bones it began not to be feared nor its dissolution.
And if you proceed from the bone of the rib and place the codex on it, then you cut on him, and stop the bleeding, and do as we have said in a fracture of the sternum with an inflammatory lump, should it happen here.
Chapter VII.
On restoring a fracture of the leg.
The leg sometimes breaks in the middle of its location and it's hard to fix it; but the ends of it must not be crushed or broken.
Of the injuries when it breaks in its middle, it declines towards the inside parts and happens to him great pain, difficulty in walking, coughs, he feels faint and vomits; it is declared in the cavity of the broken bone and cannot be hidden from the feeling.
And the restoration of it is that you place the patient on their back, and place a cushion between his shoulders; and then press the muscles of him, adjust his back with the hands of two ribs, refine in your operation and find an equilibrium according to every manner possible and suitable for him, so that the figure of the bone returns as he cures.
And then place plaster and stop the bleeding and place on him a thin table cloth of saffron or lime and they are similar in weight, as you wrap that with cloth; and then refine this around it over the broken bone so that it does not swell; and apply lubrication according to roundness on the back for some times, and strengthen that around its constriction; and then consider the swelling at all times, and when it is softened, strengthen that.
And if necessity arises to cause that she collapses or pressure, or pain, or inflammatory lump that happens in this place, then you untie and remove that and remove the plaster and correct whatever happened according to the method of treatment; and then reduce the plaster, if you see her face; and adjust to its constriction so that it is cured.
Chapter VIII.
On restoring the ribs when they are crushed.
You should know that a fracture of the ribs only occurs in areas that cover both bones; and at their ends on the front side, it does not cause this friction with them but because they are cartilaginous. And the awareness of it is not hidden from the feeling; you should inquire about him with these words.
And the restoration should be done like this by adjusting the fracture with your hands according to possible manner, so that it is adjusted as he heals; and then plaster him and strengthen the broken bones with a tip if you need that.
And if the fracture of the ribs declines towards the inside parts, then it happens to the patient with severe pain and puncture, like punctures that happen in those who have pleurisy, because the bones put up skin; and it happens to him difficulty in breathing, coughs, and vomiting from faintness; and this is difficult to heal.
And already the Greeks were skilled at that with internal treatments.
And from them they say: it is necessary to consume foods from the body that produce swelling and wind, so that the abdomen becomes inflated and stretched, and the fracture is pushed towards the outside parts.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors. If it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. And if you need to return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out. You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands. If we were to do this operation ourselves without proper reason, it would not easily generate a pus-causing cautery wound; but if it does happen, then help with this immediately.
And they would say that it should be placed over the wind area and close to where the air is strong; it's similar to reasoning, but rather, it's feared that the wind carries excess away from the body due to weakness.
And they would say: let that place be covered with wool that has been submerged in oil, and place powders between the ribs where it is filled, so that its stickiness matches when you wrap that according to roundness; and let that area of the patient be treated with the cure for dyspepsia and medicine.
And if it causes intense constriction in the patient which they cannot bear, and if they puncture their veins with a needle, we fear for the patient. In that case, let them cut over the area, expose the broken rib, then place something under that tool that is used before, and then insert the needle with ease, removing it afterwards.
And they should adjust the two edges of the wound if it is large with stitches, and treat that area with bandages until it heals.
And if there occurs an internal abscess, then you should cover it and press powders in oil into the affected area, and place your hand over that spot, so that the patient's condition improves with what heals inside the abscess.
And it should be raised on a pillow under which he sleeps, until he is healed.
Head IX.
Regarding the restoration of fractures in the second and third vertebrae.
Some fractures can occur in the bones of the collarbone, and similarly with their ligaments, as well as the vertebrae of the back. And when this happens with someone and you want to know if they will recover or not, consider that if their hands are already softened, lifeless and dead, and cannot move those hands either upward, downward, or strengthen them; and when you stretch those hands against your words or stick a needle into these areas and do not feel pain in those areas, then you know that they are not healed. And during months of such conditions, it is fatal.
And if you move those and feel a constriction in those areas against your words or make a puncture, then you know that the neck of the bone is saved and that the patient will recover with treatment.
And if you see similarities to this in the vertebrae of the collarbone and want to know if they will recover or not, then consider their feet.
And if you find that they are already softened, it is akin to what happened with their hands, and when you lay them down on their back, there is a sense of wind and weakness in their will. Some days, the person may be laid over their stomachs and want to urinate but cannot; then you know it's fatal, and thus do not waste time treating them.
If no cause is found for those conditions, the cause is better and more likely to be less severe.
And the treatment for this is to perform a procedure that helps relieve the inflammation of the oil-based cautery wound you make on the swollen vertebra, or with poultices made from dog fat; apply this area several times a day until the inflammatory reaction of the cautery subsides.
And then apply one of the bandages that soothes and persists, place strength on that with liniment; and command the patient to take rest and calmness and not sleep on the side where they find pain until they are healed.
And if it occurs that the ligaments of your neck are torn or any cause that has separated from them, then you should allow it to heal over the bone and remove that part of the bone; and adjust the two edges of the wound, with stitches if it's large; and treat that area with some kind of ointment until it is healed.
And if it's fractured in the middle of the bone, which is at the top end of your tailbone, then you should insert that tool from your right hand into your buttocks, and align the broken bone with your other hand according to what is possible through the second equation; and then apply this bandage and sandpaper over him, if you need those items, and strengthen that area.
And if you feel torn ligaments in him/her, then you should apply this to that area, stay there, and treat the wound with the appropriate treatment until it heals.
Head X.
Regarding restoration of the broad one.
The bones of the broad ones are broken, and if they break, then the fracture is merely communication at the extremities of those areas, and extends longitudinally within them, declining towards the inside. It happens to the patient pain in that area and puncturing, and the change becomes numb when it's a fracture.
And the restoration of this involves placing your hand over that area, within which is the figure of the fracture.
And if the fracture is only in the extremity of the patient, then you adjust it according to what you are accustomed to doing by equating both parts so that they match their natural figure.
And may it be if the fracture is in the length or already descends to the parts below, then you have the patient lie on their stomach so that you can prepare for the restoration of that fracture. And when you have adjusted that [fracture], pause on it bandaged, and then place your hand over that rib or bone tip, and press with strength on the area where you are not afraid of puncturing a fracture or moving the star.
And adjust the cavity so that it fills this space in which that bone will take its shape according to equality, and command the patient to sleep on their elbows or their side.
And if it happens that you have a pus-pustule (caut), then stop the extension and restoration of the patient within which the pus-pustule is sedated, and pause over where the patient is lying according to what precedes; and then return to the restoration, and strengthen it as usual.
And if it happens that they are fractured or broken in the jawbone, then you treat them.
Chapter xi.
On the restoration of fracture in the helper.
The helper is that which is between the shoulder blade up to the head of the shoulder.
And if it is broken, then the restoration of him/her is in one of two ways, of which you take wood flat on the middle hardness according to this form:
And if they are located at both extremities two ligaments, and then it should be suspended from the elevated place.
And let the patient lie on one pillow; and then stretch out his/her broken arm over the stick until it reaches to the nipple in the middle of which the curvature of the stick is attached.
And then suspend over that something heavy, or the cook extend it to the parts below; and then place your hand on the area where the fracture is felt immediately, so that the fracture returns as usual.
And the other way is that the patient be reclined on their neck and have their hand from their collarbone supported by the ligament; and then command two attendants, one of them has what is above the fracture supported by their hands; and the other has the body below. And each should extend to their part.
And if you want the extension to be stronger, then strengthen over the fracture by the ligament and over that by another ligament, and each of the two attendants should extend to their own parts.
And if the fracture is close to the extremity of the muscle, then you should pause half of the ligament over the nipple and the other part of the fracture is taken by the shoulder blade.
And similarly if the fracture is close to the shoulder blade, then you should pause the ligament over that area and over that shoulder blade.
Adjust that easily and completes the task, and then when it is adjusted according to usual practice, then strengthen that if there is no pus-pustule (caut) occurring.
And if it happens that there is a pus-pustule (caut), then smooth the fracture within the seventh day, and place wool thread sutured in vinegar on it for seven more days until it heals the pus-pustule, and then you should strengthen that.
And the method of strengthening that is placing plaster on the fracture, and then placing a wrap of new cloth over the plaster; and adjust the arm to the helper, and place your hand open over their shoulder blade.
And place the cloth and strengthen on the helper arm for that the arm is in the place of the stars (rib), if not prohibited by any cause from breaking the bone.
And then use the stars (ribs).
And you should place that star (rib) over the fracture which is more ready and stronger than the other stars; and place between each star the width of the hand, and let the length of the stars according to the breakage include three fingers of all parts.
And then strengthen on the ribs over the fracture which I said at the beginning of the chapter.
And you should have your hand over the place of the fracture much stretched out. And when the stretching is as far as possible, the fracture will be less (less severe).
And if you know the position of the stars and the hand as we have said when restoring the limb to its original position, then do this.
And if you fear a pus-pustule (caut), then you should smooth the hand and stars within the seventh day as we have said.
And then consider the ligament in all parts for three days so that no pinch or swelling occurs at the place of impact; or prohibit food from reaching the limb due to excess of pressure; and therefore correct all this as we have said.
And if you are confident that there will be no cause from this, then do not loosen the ligature but three days or more.
And let the patient's sleep on their back, and their hands are on their stomach.
And place your hand full of wool on the helper in equal measure, and consider throughout the night or day that the figure of the broken limb should not be distorted nor dissolved, or that the ligament should be soft; therefore correct this entirely according to your skill.
And place the food for the patient according to the order we have in front of us, ensuring that the food is subtle at the beginning so it can strengthen; and then when the food grows for him.
And according to the custom of strength and the movement of their limbs, it should be strong for 40 days; then when they are released and given baths with medicines that correct those things.
And if the fracture is laid out, then you do not release from that ligament and the stars within to one day or within two months.
Chapter XII.
On the restoration of a forearm fracture.
The arm is composed of two bones which are called the ulna and the radius; among them, one is small, which is called the thumb side, and the other is large and is on the side opposite to the small one.
And when the larger bone or the smaller one is broken only, it is called a simple fracture; and at times it may be broken simultaneously.
And when the smaller bone is broken on top, then the restoration of that is easier, and the healing of that is much easier.
And when the larger bone of his side is broken, the fracture of him is bad, and the healing of him is difficult.
And even worse than that is when both bones are broken simultaneously.
So if the bone that is broken is the smaller one on top, then it is convenient for the doctor to restore his, which allows a small extension in facilitating when that will be equalized.
And if it's the larger bone that is broken, then it should allow a more vigorous extension when he pauses.
And if both bones are broken simultaneously, then you should force the stretching movement much more when you pause.
And when you pause the shape of the hand, restore his and extend his movement over a cushion, with the wrist of the hand above all other positions; and let the ear position be higher than all others, and let the patient's buttocks be on one seat lowered.
And place a cushion in front of him at his height or alignment, so that the buttocks don't push too hard.
And next, let the attendant extend his arm on the side opposite to his own hand or ligament, and another attendant extends similarly above.
And next, let the doctor equalize the bone as it reduces according to the best figure that can be achieved.
And if there are protruding pieces in the bone fracture, then you must reduce all matter to its place with your strength.
And if there appears in him a separate protruding that pierces the ligament and is not within your hope for restoring him, then you should operate on him and stay as with the manner which we have described above.
And if the fracture is in the thigh area, I have already explained this unique chapter for that, and thus you take care of him.
And if it happens that there's an abscess during the beginning of your restoration, then you lay out a cloth with a greased cloth and white wax bandage, and make it medium between specificity and subtlety, and strengthen the cloth on that with subtle compression so that the abscess can drain; and then keep the bandage in place and pause plaster made from powdered clay mixed with olive oil, and place stars nearby; and let the star be placed over that fracture closer and more forcefully.
And know that the number of stars on the arm is found in the major dispositions, or whether the fracture is in one bone or both bones simultaneously.
And next, pause your compression on the place of the fracture more strongly and more forcefully, and when it's more suitable for the extensions above the fracture or the lower parts of him, pause the compression a little wetter according to the recall of him in the beginning of the chapter.
And the cloths that wrap around the fracture should be wet and soft, not hard or abrasive, and the oil on which it is strengthened should be of its own proper middle between subtle and coarse, as we have recommended.
And consider the limb and the ligament for several days. And if any cause arises for which correction is necessary, such as when something happens to the member itself, then it should be that you submerge the member in warm water until that pain ceases.
And let the limb not strain as it rests, and then return the compression.
And if the compression has already softened and the bone has already returned to its original position and seems like that, then correct all of this with your strength.
And consider more if the nutrition is prevented from reaching the limb due to excess compression, then it should be that you soften that slightly and let that for several days until the nutrition flows back to that, and then strengthen that.
And if nothing from those causes that we have said happens to the patient, then it should not be released within about 20 days or so.
And next, let the hand of the patient be suspended by his strength of vigorous movements, and have him sleep on his back.
And know that this fracture is restored in 30 days or 32 days, or more gently it is restored in 28 days, and all of this depends on the constitution of the body and the disposition of strength.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
Restoration of the thumb bone fracture and digits.
Know that in the case of fractures in the thumb and fingers, it does not happen to them but is caused by bruising due to manual labor.
And when it occurs to the hand with a fracture or bruise, then one should have the patient lie down and in front of them place their hands according to equality, and then place your hand on that extended.
And the surgeon should extend the broken bones, and the doctor should adjust those inside so they fit well with good congruence.
And then cover so that you place the plaster and the wadding, if it does not cause abscesses, and also place hot stones according to the amount of the area; and you have already enveloped that with a linen bandage.
If the rupture is inside the palm parts towards the abdomen, then make an image of a bowl of cloth, and command the patient to hold that against their ruptured palm; have it firmly held by the cloth.
And if the heart's edge is on the cloth on which it lies, so that the heart may be applied to the palm; hold that firmly according to what you determine.
If the fracture is on the outside parts, then you should cover it with stones and another stone of the same part underneath their palm, so that the hand may be open and straight; and place the constriction, as the hand revolves between the fingers to perfection.
And if it happens to fracture one of the joints of the fingers, then when it is the finger tip, adjust it according to what you determine and then have it held against their palm; if you want, place a small stone in front so that the fracture may be elevated and not squeezed.
If the fracture is in the other fingers, like in the middle section, or on the index, or the ring, or the little finger, then adjust and lift it according to that one; or they are all lifted as a continuous sequence, which is better; or place a small stone above that, as we have said for the tip.
And consider, in your restoration and nearby, the position of pus from heat and opposition - during your operation - as that is adjusted when any cause of those occurs, according to the repetition of their narrative.
Chapter XIV.
Restoration of the fracture of the bone in the thigh.
The bone of the knee is broken due to bruising, and it is declared upon examination as it converts into the part in front and into the superior pus.
And the restoration of him is done so that the muscle is strengthened over the fracture and another muscle near the fracture, and the patient lies prostrate on his abdomen and face.
And then have the surgeon extend all the muscle according to its quality, when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
If it is close to the bone of the thigh, then have the muscle close to the fold at the knee part, so that the extension can cover them all, and another muscle near the fracture.
And similarly, if the break is close to the fold, then have the muscle be applied to the fold and make the extension to the remaining parts.
And then the doctor adjusts the bone on both sides of his own hands so that it reduces that according to natural likeness and the bone is joined by good congruence; then cover with plaster and bandage, if there does not occur a member abscess. If it happens that there is pus in him, then you let that pass for some days until the heat from the cautery subsides, and then return to your treatment.
The treatment of his hand should be done like this: cover the fracture with a hard bandage, and fold that twice or three times, and remove any excess; then wrap around the joint until it reaches the bone of the thigh.
And insert a long needle between the thigh and the joint near the fold at the remaining parts, and extend the ends of the needle from the inside joint part to both sides, and then rotate around the joint and thigh so that you remove any excess from the bandage.
And then place stones on the thigh at that fracture location, and place another stone over the bone of the joint.
And then fill the spaces between the joint and thigh with thick cloths, so that the bandage may be congealed.
And then start with a strong bandage in the middle over the location of the fracture with three or four coverings, and as you move further away from the location of the fracture, your bandage should be smaller and softer.
And then extend both ends of the needle to the remaining parts until it reaches into the chest cavity, and hold both ends of the stones from the other side so that the muscle does not move from its place.
And then let the bandage be over that, so that no damage occurs to the member from heat or cautery pus or swelling, and resembling those; and if any cause of these occurs, then you need to relieve him of his anxiety, and correct whatever happens nearby, according to our instruction on bruising.
If it is inside the bone of the skull which you place, then dig in such a way that you equalize that according to what is possible for you; and if not, do on it and keep that, and treat with whatever precedes memory until it is healed within.
In some cases, this fracture of the foot is strengthened by others that are adjusted to your stars, as we have said in the guide and for the arms.
However, in the restoration of this manner for the patient, no limpness occurs to the invalid; and if it is restored alone, another than what is applied to him on his other side, then it is necessary that that one limps from which he has been used.
Know that the foot is strengthened in about 40 days or a few months, and all of this varies according to the diversity of bodies and other dispositions.
Chapter XV.
On the restoration of the fracture of the ankle joint in the leg.
Know that the ankle joint fracture is more common, but it often occurs at various points of the leg.
If it occurs to the fracture, then it is merely a crack or strain in its parts, and this can be either acute or chronic, and everything depends on the sensation.
And the restoration of this is that it should be equal to what is broken in its parts among the said ones, so that it can be added and combined according to what is possible by equilibrium and ease of fabrication.
And place the plaster and press over that round star, if you need it from that; strengthen above with a compression to what is suitable.
And consider all the dispositions that we have recommended in other fractures, as well as the pus and similar treatments for those ones that oppose every accident to what is suitable within it until it is healed.
Chapter XVI.
On the restoration of the fracture of the ball joint.
Know that in the ball there are two bones of which one is thick, and it is named as the ball joint; and the other is fine, and it is called easy.
And it occurs to what species of fracture that which occurs to the two bones in the arm, and therefore its restoration is done like the restoration of the arm equally, and its operation is one.
And if there are three bones at once, the ball changes in all parts.
And if it is fractured only the finer bone, the ball is changed to the front parts.
And if it is broken the thicker bone, you lose that one, and these are the causes which are not to your advantage.
And then administer extension, equilibrium, and binding of the limbs according to that equality.
However, when the fracture of the ball is well separated and has stationary points, that extension should be gentle and more light, and rejoice with your strength.
And in the ball there is some reason for operation on the arm, and that is when you equalize the stars and complete your entire operation, then you will take weights of wood from your hand which are placed under these causes which are stopped in tensions, and made symmetrically into palm branches; remove those to which small stiffness exists, and do not use them with your hands, and make their length according to the length of the ball, and within the arm as far as possible towards you.
And then wrap around each band in two layers according to the length of it, place one over the ball joint part of one side and the other of the other side, and let them be within the arm at a location near the chest.
And then tie the two stars in three places of both extremities and at the middle one; with this structure, the ball is prevented from tilting to either side joint, it stays for good balance.
And already a wood stick has been administered according to the length of the ball; and it is placed in the ball so that it conserves this motion.
And mainly know that you should do this in fractures, and when it is healed properly.
And then consider every day the ball and study it towards the end of studying, and you protect it from pus or swelling or other similar causes; and if any cause from those happens, then leave yourself with whatever you do until it is healed.
Chapter XVII.
On the fracture of the heel, the bones in the chest, and the fingers.
Fractures do not occur throughout the heel; but some occur to the bones in the chest; and they rarely occur in the fingers of the hand, and it does not happen to them unless there is an arrangement.
And if there are fractures in the bones of the chest and sometimes those bones are elevated above each other, then let the invalid lie on their chest prepared like this so that they can get ready.
And then place one foot on that which is elevated from those bones, and press those, and apply pressure, and equalize those among themselves so they turn in the places.
And then place the plaster and fix it above, and let this be under your chest's belly with a small table underneath which have two cushioned heads.
And then strengthen that with the arm descending from the chest, as you have wrapped it in bandages and for other causes which you need.
And when three or four days have passed for the patient, then you release the ligament, where you will find equal bones, or that are broken or dislocated, and the operation in those is thus conducted as you know.
If any say they are broken, then restore those, and straighten them as I and you have been taught in the restoration of fingers of the hand. And place the broken finger in its original position according to the length of the finger, and place some wax under it; and let the patient lie on this table which is recommended to you, and strengthen that with proper bandage.
If that which is broken in the bones are two or three or more, then place over each finger up to its total quantity enveloped in lion cloth, and strengthen the table at the bottom of the bed, and standing on one of the table's ends let the belly rest on the patient's chest so that speech has good retention.
And it is convenient for you not to forget that you should not consider all the causes which we have mentioned in the other fractures of accidents, and apply this advice to every incident with what I said.
Chapter XVIII.
About the fracture of the hip bone and the thigh bone, and the knee joint in men.
When the hip bone is broken, then make it lie down on its back, and later incline that slightly towards the part of two, and hold it behind.
And the midwife places the hipbone on its side, and do this in the hip of her like what she expects; and the woman is bent down, and raise both of her child's hands little by little, for all this must be done while it faces the part of the hip like what she expects and the broken bone returns.
And place powders on her back, and when she wants to urinate, make it easier for her to hold the hip, and let her urine, then return that according to the way you mixed it at the beginning, and later return to her original powder.
And do this for seven days or roughly around those, until that is restored.
And if you wish, take an opossum pelt and strengthen on her thigh with a reed tube; and immerse the whole bladder into her hip, then blow into the tube with vigor while the bladder is inflated inside the hip, so that the fracture returns.
And let it be covered by her hip and stay for some days as we have recommended, until she is healed.
And when the thigh bone of a man or woman is broken, administer for its restoration and adjustment what we have recommended about the bone of the femur.
And what is straight does not hide in these nearby fractures that usually happen, mostly for the one who has some study and understands this my free explanation; because that fracture means to you in the major directions through the straightness in its restoration and in adjusting it, so understand well.
And in the knee of men when it is broken, take a gua sha tool, and place the knee in that; then let her lie covered with a cloth wrap around her, and she is wrapped up, then let her rest for three days or roughly around those, until she is healed.
Chapter XIX.
About the restoration of bone fractures when they are under bandage.
It is convenient for the one who happens to have a fracture under bandage, and especially if the bone is large such as the arm bone or the thigh bone, or similar to that, you take care of it and perform phlebotomy on it immediately if your conditions of phlebotomy allow it, just like what we have mentioned above.
And if the bandage discharges pus, then take care to retain it within you that you dust over its swollen area, if there is no other cause presented.
And then start restoring the fracture on that day, and do not extend this process if no abscess occurs.
If an abscess occurs, then let the restoration of her happen within the 9th day, until it has subsided, and do not approach her on the third day or later, for you will cause bad incidents.
If the broken bone is sticking out above the uncovered groove, then take care to reduce it and straighten it with your hands as much as possible and with little extension.
If extension is not prepared for you and the alignment of her is with your hands, then reduce that with your hands to this tool; and this tool which is made of iron, its length being 7 fingers or 8, and its width according to the size of the swelling; so for this it is necessary for the doctor to have three or four according to what you need in treatment in all kinds of fractures.
And it should be rounded, and with little roughness so that it does not bend, you must apply pressure on it during the operation.
And it should have an acute end with a margin at its ends; and the direction of her should be tending towards being thick throughout, and within her parts.
And this is her form:
And it's named in Greek "labre volenz atelarem", thus it's a small palette.
In order for her to lie still, elevate her extremity over the protruding end of the bone.
And press him into a hollow where the bone should return, and be equal to any equation.
And thus make an effort to equalize the ends of the fracture between them, and if the broken end is subtle, and does not take that length for good judgment, then when you elevate her extremity into the part of the bone where the instrument has the power of that.
May it be that if you cannot return the bone of all what we have discussed, then cut him at the point that corresponds to his in the knives which we said; or cut him at one of the saws in any manner that is possible for you.
And thus shorten what sticks out on the bone of roughness and small scars.
And when the bone is reduced, and the patient experiences violent pain after it, then you know that the bone has not returned to its natural place; and then do what you have promised the patient a youthful vigour.
When you have completed the restoration to the bone which you do, then immerse a cloth in stinging black vinegar, and especially if it's summer, do not apply ointment or any other cause on the wound oil, so as not to cause infection and decay in him.
And after administering stings at the time of your completion of bone restoration, leave the wound uncovered so that you scrape it with a razor and use bandages according to the amount of the wound.
And use all caution not to irritate the wound against the fracture, which doctors have often done in the past, and may cause death or illness on their patients from corrosion or severe damage, thus it is safe. And if your constriction is slight, soft, different from the constriction of other fractures.
And if the wound is large or a bad wound, and you fear certain bad accidents as we have recounted, and find pain in that place, then do not cover him with those stings, but make that bandage of hard cloths instead of stings and strengthen him against those.
And when about one or two days later the wound begins to heal in him, then you remove from under the cloth which you had placed over that with vinegar, and apply ointments, oils which according to our custom medicate wounds, as well as ointments tetrafarmacon and similar to that.
And it is advisable for you to loosen the bandage and examine the wound every morning and evening until it has consolidated and closed, and whenthe member is prepared in such a way that infection spreads from him to the parts left with ease.
If the wound passes several days and is not consolidated or can be removed from him the bandage, then you know that here are the remnants of small cuts for which you must keep the wound clean with cleaning. And from those remnants that are separate, remove them and extract them; those that do not separate from each other cause pain in the member when they occur, pierce you to scrape them as possible according to your ability.
And if you get pus or excrement on the wound, so it is inflammation, or another type of corruption and decay, then when you see one of those that corresponds to him from the treatment which precedes its narrative in his chapter, you must cover it with oil.
And in the oil where you should have the best speech and you make your presentation: when the bone is broken, elevate the member like the bone of the thigh and the assistant and similar to those of large limbs, and do not expect damage from him, nor the removal of him that discharges pus by this cause death; let it be left in there until it can fall about XX or XXX days. And then cure the wound if you see it, and if not leave that one.
Chapter XX.
Regarding the treatment of necrosis that occurs in the remnants of a fracture.
Cuts that heal cause this necrosis in the remnants of fracture treatment, especially near joints, and removes his body's figure from him; and strongly prohibits him from his natural operation.
Then consider if the necrosis is recent and administer medicines that have stung like aloes, honey, look at them, suck their throats, and vinegar, similar to those; as you take some or all of it, and dip them in stinging oil, or in white egg yolk, or in vinegar, place that on the necrosis bandage, and tighten those around him for good constriction.
And leave the constriction that do not loosen it for several days; then remove this and repeat another until the necrosis is reabsorbed; or strengthen over this lead plate descending, which lead has the property of removing everything that is swollen in limbs.
And if the necrosis is already converted into pus and removed, and it requires to be started gradually, then cut this from the more superior part of him, and remove the excess and protrusion, or cut this through some incisions until it is reabsorbed; and cure this so that it becomes healthy.
Chapter XXI.
For the restoration of fractures; when restored and closely follows their original nature in members that are subtle and flexible.
When a bone fracture is restored, and closely follows their original nature in subtle and flexible members, then such things do not happen unless caused by certain conditions: among which one is an abundance of fluid from the membrane and of disturbance to the action of the operation contrary to its natural course; or through excess tightness of the body's ligaments where nutrition is prohibited from reaching the member; or through excessive greasiness; or through unnecessary movement at inappropriate times; or due to weakness in the patient's body and through debility.
And the treatment for this is to help the patient lose and allow his body's warmth to spread so that the health multiplies within him; apply baths; and engage in strength training and cheerfulness with him.
And place the patient in such a way that the warmth reaches his limbs, so that the warmth attracts his body's nutrition, or continuous greasiness of his skin with hot water, where nutrition runs and returns to its natural shape.
Chapter XXII.
For the treatment of broken bones that are bent and the prohibition of the operation as it is suited.
When it happens to a limb already restored regarding the healing of its curvature and elevation in the broken bone and lump, and due to that deformation of the shape of the member, however, the natural operation of the member is not prohibited. Therefore, you should accept the word of him who exists that this member must be of new broken.
Some may have heard from the surgeons and restorers who have done this in our land, and this operation is reprehensible leading to great fear of its mark which is fatal.
If walking and lumpiness are recent, then it is fitting that they be soaked in hot water containing softening herbs such as mint leaves and roots, and clover, and the like; and it should be applied with a plaster made with softening plaster in this way as when dyallaquilon is well prepared; or to take tincture of mint root and let it swell with gall ink or with oil of cinnamon, and then cover it with that; or to take fatty figs and wrap them in waxed cloths, and the like; or to take ameliorants as those named consolidants.
And some times it should be dissolved by constant gentle friction applied with the most moist substances and administered with the full range of body movements at all times.
If the curvature has already set firmly and become hard, causing it to need treatment with iron, then you must let pus overlie it and allow the continuity of the bone to be dissolved, and have iron applied that is superfluous in the lumps by means of the metal under fine instruments, and facilitate its administration in this way through diligence and study.
Chapter XXIII.
Of speech on dislocation.
Dislocation is the displacement of some parts of a joint in its place, so that movement is prohibited, and its shape causes harm to limbs, causing great pains and injuries to the patient.
So when it happens to a dislocation, you must immediately attempt to reduce it, and not delay the reduction, for if it is delayed, the body gets fixed in that position and makes it difficult to reduce the dislocation.
And for that reason, you should not allow it to be overstrained or stretched during the process of immobilization, which causes various discomforts and sharp pains.
When this happens, you should take the lead in the manual reduction of the body and allow it to rest within that swelling; and let the limb be soaked with hot water and oil and then reduced with ease.
And each member should be treated with what was remembered to bring back its original position.
And I have already ordered the chapters on dislocation according to what follows from fractures; from above towards the top of the body and then downwards.
Chapter XXIV.
Of treatment for the dislocation of the lower jaw.
So, if the two lower jaws are not broken; and the dislocation of both is done in one of two ways: either they are partially moved from their places by a little movement, and are slightly softened; or they are completely dislocated and fully so, within which they are softened at the joint part where saliva flows from the body, and neither can have that nor can close their mouth, and the tongue of them is wrapped in its word.
If the dislocation is slight, then it returns to its major positions by itself due to a minor cause.
If the dislocation is complete and full, then it should be administered with a gentle reduction, and not be delayed completely.
And the minister should have the head of the body, and let the surgeon place his hand on the same side's palm in the location of one part of the jaw inside the mouth if the dislocation is on one side; or insert both hands at once if the dislocation affects two parts, and the other commands should be outside those as usual; and command the patient to stop moving their jaws and let them move from each side. And the surgeon should adjust the jaw and place the lower jaw back in its original position.
And if it is difficult to reduce the patient, especially when both jaws are always dislocated, then administer evaporation with warm water and oil, during which a slight reduction should be made of both, without delaying the complete reduction of both as we have said.
And when they return and are equalized, and the mouth of the patient is closed but not soothed, then place over those powders of rue on cerot, and apply with wax and rubbed oil; and let them be left to facilitate the molasses movements.
And let the patient sleep on his back, and his head be between two pillows, so that he does not suffocate at the right or left; do not force him to try any cause; let your food be forbidden to him except for lion's meat, until the pains are soothed and the jaws are broken, then let him drink whatever he wants.
And let this be administered with ease, and do not work on the extraction of the mouth's content, eat, drink, and rest until the jaw is broken and healed.
And if it is difficult to reduce two jaws that are dislocated at any time and do not turn into their usual places, then hot baths and frequent soups occur, and you must relieve the patient's stomach, and you must relieve him with a green vomiting.
And when you do this, then know that it is dangerous; and hot baths lead to death for the person to whom this happens within three days.
Chapter XXV
On reducing the dislocation of the furca and the end of the muscle.
The furca is not dislocated inside the left side due to its continuity with the foot; sometimes it gets dislocated outside at the joint part, and this is declared by feeling.
And the restoration involves having the patient lie on their back and extend their arms. And apply force with your palm at the spot, with strong compression, so that it returns.
And press over that plaster and powder, strengthen that area.
May the end of what is inside be continuous with that, it is not dislocated in any day; then make sure to reduce and equalize it according to what we have said and according to your equipment.
And press over that plaster, and powder, and compression, and instruct the patient to rest in bed and have peace until they are healed.
And with this method of treatment is the end of the muscle reduced when it is separated from its place.
Chapter XXVI
On reducing the dislocation of the muscle.
Know that the muscle is not dislocated in any other way than these three ways, of which one is when it is dislocated at the nipple part and at the front part.
And the second is when it is dislocated at the top of the muscle, and this is done in a twist; and it is not dislocated at the back parts by the shoulder; and it is not dislocated at the front parts by the nerves.
And it is especially dislocated and outward of the parts in front of the nipple, and especially in those with few muscles, slightly dislocated; more so when there are many muscles, it is out of difficulty.
And many people suffer from blows or impact, and the patient's muscle is swollen with a bruise or boil, and it gets twisted because it is already dislocated.
Then understand that when you try this while you are overburdened with him, then proceed in the treatment of him.
And when you recognize the dislocation of him, which is at the parts in front of the nipple; so that you distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the normal muscle, which you find among those with obvious diversity; and find in the head of the muscle concavity and place the nipple of the muscle like a hen's comb, and the patient cannot reduce his hand to their armpit, nor extend it further for all movements.
If it is dislocated towards the foot or upwards, then you will find a distinct sensation later, and it is not hidden.
And of this dislocation, a slight reduction is done when it is cool and the patient is young.
And the reduction of him involves lifting his hand to the parts above for the minister; then place your fingers slightly below his nipple and lift the joint with strength towards its place, the minister lifts his hand of him and extends that part; then press that part slightly so it returns gently.
And if it does not return as we have said, and due to the nature of the dislocation, for several days, then understand that the patient should be bathed in warm water and given a mixture that soothes and heals like high-altitude camel milk, fenugreek, and marjoram in water, and it should be administered.
And then the patient should be laid down on their back and pause his nipple with wool that is balanced between lightness and compression, and press the doctor's hand on the spot, lift the head of the muscle vertically, pull the patient's hand so it does not get stuck at the parts in front, and another minister holds the patient's head, so that it does not get stuck at the parts in front, until that returns to its place right away.
And if you wish, return that second one in this manner: and do as follows: make a man present who is longer than the sick person, and stands on his side, and insert his muscle between the sick's belly button and his ribcage, lifting the belly button up to the sides of what hangs above where it is suspended in air from under the sick person. Then another minister pulls the sick person's hand away from the sides of its abdomen. If the patient is weak, then suppose that some other cause is hanging down, due to its heaviness, so that it returns immediately as soon as the dislocation happens.
And when it is reduced by this other method: and there should be placed on the ground a long rod with a rounded tip, like a mortar's handle, which should neither be thick nor slender, and so that it may be placed under the sick person; once laid over its head of the rod, cover the sick person with sheets from underneath. And let the sick person stand according to the length of the rod, and extend their hand to the sides on the other part; and let them stretch their body from the other side with strength, so that as soon as the joint returns to its place quickly.
And if reducing is difficult for the patient by all the causes we've said, then use this treatment: and you should take a rod whose length amounts to two arm spans, and its width be four inches, and the thickness of it should be ground down like the tip according to this shape:
And place sheets over the rounded head so that the rod does not push down on the patient.
And place the belly button area under your hand or arm over the rod between the sides, and hold the rod steady on the support and arm, and keep your hand's end fixed.
And place the arm on a ladder according to its width, and the hand is extended to the sides on this side, while the other body parts are hanging from the other side; thus as soon as the joint returns.
And when the patient's treatment is completed according to any method that is possible for you, and then cover your belly button with wool of equal quantity; and place prepared plaster made from moli powder and egg white over all the muscles, so it can be rolled upon them, and tighten your hand firmly onto the neck, and leave it like this, without hurting your patient's hand for seven days.
And suppose that the food of the patient should be light, within which the member is comforted, which is easier for its recovery.
And then the food should be given more frequently than seven or five times, and exercise is done with movements. And if it's closed and not softened, then this means that the patient is already healed.
If the joint is dislocated due to moisture that affects it or by another cause, then suppose that in that case, a cautery treatment should be given for three weeks, as mentioned in the chapter on cautery.
And if all this has been done and seven days later the ligament is released and the joint is not closed, and the plaster and tightening have reduced on you for some occasions, but it's still not closed and stands up, then know that the nerves of your body which are at the head of the muscle, they are already cut or stretched or softened, and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
From the dislocation of that which is caused by the foot or breast area or behind parts, the reduction is done with pressure and extension to the hands, as soon as it returns.
And another tightening should be administered there, and treat that until it is healed.
And if the recovery is severe in the limb and delayed in its movement, then the patient should bathe for some occasions until that heaviness is alleviated and returns to its natural state.
Chapter XXVII.
On the treatment of dislocation of the elbow.
Know that the elbow joint is dislocated with difficulty and similarly returns with difficulty; it's dislocated in all directions, but mostly towards the front and back direction. The dislocation isn't hidden from you when you feel its pulsation or touch it according to any figure it is dislocated, and when adjusting the dislocated elbow at the spot, this becomes evident to you clearly, as the joint is concave and unable to bend the arm, nor can it touch with its muscle.
And suppose that the elbows, and quickly reduce the dislocation towards where it reaches to the soft spot of the elbow joint. If it goes to this soft spot, reducing becomes difficult for it, and weak treatment does not heal completely; especially when it's towards the back parts, which is worse than all other types of dislocation, and causes more pain, leading to death for that condition.
And the restoration of your elbow, when it is possible to reduce that, is for your hand to be extended between two hands, and your arm being stretched out, and the doctor's hands are on the elbow and you. The doctor pushes the joint with the heels of his hands' pulses, or inside the base of his palm until it returns to its place.
Suppose that the dislocation is towards the front parts, then it returns like this by bending your hand to your own hand, striking the elbow on the base of your palm.
And if the dislocation does not respond to reduction, then apply vigorous extension and forceful movement.
And it is that two servants extend the arms, and have those two men hold onto that movement for them not to be released against the extension.
And it should be that both arms are turned around completely, since they are enveloped in a folded long sheet on the patient's hand or wrist.
And when the doctor touches the joint with their hand, they should apply oil to that for it helps those causes which aid in the lubrication of the joint and facilitate its return, and forcefully move the joint into movement so that it returns.
And it should be that the reduction of the patient is placed on the ground where there is stability and movement on an album mattress, and stretched against the stiffness, and the arm hanging from the neck, and left for several days.
And it should be that the joint is released; and therefore if the joint has formed in its place, then you release the servant of the patient and let that rest.
And if you see the joint is not strengthening, then you repeat the plaster and the servant, and let that rest for several days until it is stretched; and then release that.
And if it happens that the gravity is near the reduction of the joint, and the position of the patient is in motion, then administer hydration in bath and subtle friction, or compress, until it relaxes; or place on top of the joint a lubricating oil cloth; and then bind it, and let that rest over the bone during the day and night. And it should be that you hold onto that, and put it in the bath; and when it gets clean, then you rub the joint with a seasoned friction, and then apply it several times on that lubricating oil cloth, one time, and the second, and the third. Corruption has already infiltrated inside the body's cavity during its journey, within its limits.
And if you wish, place on that wet and scraped cow's hole with hot steam and pressure onto it; do this several times, until that area is damp and returns to its position.
Chapter XXVIII.
Regarding the treatment of a dislocation in the upper arm, it is about the joint that is between the arm and the hand.
A few times the hand is displaced, and the reduction of the dislocation in it is easy; the opposite applies to other joints. However, it's important that there be velocity in the reduction when it occurs, before the spot gets stuck or if a blister forms at the spot.
And the reduction of the dislocation in it is that you place the hand joint of the patient on a table and have a servant extend their arm; and the doctor pauses their hand or palm over the verge of the joint, and forcefully move that so that it returns to its place.
However, it should be considered if the palm has already reached inside the hand; then the patient holds their two hands on a table against extension and reduction; and if the dislocation occurred previously, then the position of the hand is necessarily over the table, so that the doctor's hand falls onto that verge of the joint.
And if it returns immediately, that's good; and otherwise, then strengthen that with a compress against the blister and let that rest; and don't repeat this process, because otherwise, you won't endure nor can you on reducing it as time passes.
However, the joint twists according to its own curvature; and you shouldn't blame the patient for any cause, but rather that the hand is softened and can't sustain any cause; then you should know that the nerves are broken or torn, and this being within them, it's necessary that they be strengthened with a cautery near the cut and reinforce this cause.
And since the blister has returned, then place onto that reformed compress we have, let it rest and be strengthened for several days; and then release it and let it rest, and exercise the hand of the patient.
And if the movement of it is still present and encounters any gravity, then soften that with hot water and several rounds of friction until it relaxes.
Chapter XXIX.
Regarding the treatment of dislocation of the fingers.
Several times, you dislocate the fingers in all directions.
And when one of those fingers is dislocated towards the palm or inside it, then you keep that finger and forcefully move the dislocation from it until it returns.
And it should be that you hold onto the tip of the finger, and suspend it from the part where it is dislocated, and let that rest for two days.
And it should be that you suspend that and extend it until its length matches its original state on that day.
And when morning comes, follow that method, and don't stop releasing it throughout the day with exercise, and let it rest at night; and do this for several days until it straightens.
And make it seem like this if it is dislocated inside the hand, and let it rest in that direction and do your first operation on it until it heals.
And similarly do this when it's dislocated in other directions.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
Regarding the treatment of dislocation of the vertebrae of the two.
When it happens to any of the vertebrae in the upper or lower back and dislocation occurs completely, and if you replace the vertebrae at those places, then there is no cure, death is feared by the patient.
And the sign of this is that the patient's digestive process leaves his body against his will, and he cannot hold it; and hot compresses are applied to some parts of his body or on both his legs or his arms, or one of those places. Or a vertebra is replaced at its location, where heated compresses are applied and heated compresses are used for removing those (issues) into four quarters.
And that has already been removed towards the back, it is called gelsemiosis.
The treatment for this is that you then consider if the gelsemiosis occurred in infancy, where in such cases there is neither cure nor healing of it.
This may happen due to injury, impact or something similar to those. The ancient methods of treatment were indeed lengthy, the main point being that they return to a more practical approach; I have already shortened the one based on its excessive detail for someone like you, considering my proximity and understanding in explaining it, which is what I have done here, using various tools from that field showing this method and elaborating on that.
And only those are cured which happen in both legs as I recommend.
And the patient should lie on his face stretched out close to the wall, and they should spread the legs wet with water so that the feet do not get dirty.
And another stick straight should be placed, fixed in the ground near the wall around the head of the patient, and another stick should be positioned under the feet at the other end of the bed.
And the attendant holds the stick, and should not bury it in a hole; and another attendant holds the other according to that manner.
And cover the head of the patient with a cloth and tie it tightly around; extend the end of the blanket to the stick which should be near the head, then tie that to him; and tie another girdle around the buttocks and hips of the patient, also bending them towards his legs; and adjust all the blankets and tie those on the other stick which is under his feet.
And then the attendant stretches the blanket to where the stick meets and doesn't replace or tighten both sticks and the girdles at their locations where they are fixed, but rather they should not be tightened as we have said.
And the doctor places his palms on the vertebra with strength so that it returns, or he puts something like a table there and adjusts to return under the table the feet while they are in this position.
If it does not return in this way, then take a table whose width or length is comparable to three arms, and dig into the wall as we have said that there should be a spot for the patient near the end of the table. And place the end of the table on the vertebra, and the doctor places his feet at the other end, stretching until the vertebra is squeezed and returns to its place.
And if you wish, open the part that is turned around the hand; and it is that you place on the ground the head of the patient at the back end of the wall with two sticks, their length being one arm, and place the head of him at the back end of the wall again with two sticks; and make the distance between each stick a palm's width, and has already been done in every stick to pull it towards itself, and each is firmly placed on the ground so that it does not move.
And add another stick in which is the loop, and it should be turned around the two hooks of the two sticks.
And at the end of it is a hook in which the stick is formed, its length being one hand where that rotates; and at the other two sticks are similar to that.
And adjust the blankets that you have stretched on the feet of the patient under the pull which should be at his head, and the blankets that you have stretched on his thighs under the loop which should be under his feet.
And each loop should have an attendant who twists the loop with his hand, and the doctor adjusts the vertebra as we said.
And when the vertebra has returned and the location has been set, you apply a powdered ointment until it forms a paste from almond oil, then stop; and place over the paste a table whose width is about three fingers or around that, and the length should be as long as the area affected by gelsemiosis, on top of where the vertebra is.
And then you apply it with the blanket as we said, and use almond oil to nourish the patient until he is healed.
And if there is any lingering danger in the location at the end of healing, then you should take measures that soften and clean up until the table is administered for a long time after that, which we recommended; and already lead has been applied as a strip in that area.
Some attacks happen suddenly at the lower end of the spinal column in both cases, and it is caused by that dislocation; it's that bone which has already been examined so that no suspicion arises when you administer this medicine, which will prevent such an accident from happening to you, causing your death.
Chapter XXXI.
On the treatment of a dislocated hip.
Know that the joint of the thigh and the joint of the muscle should not be anything other than dislocation only, and it does not happen to them what happens to the other joints with slight movement and curvature.
And the joint of the thigh is dislocated in four ways, which are dislocated internally, or externally, or forward, or backward.
And mostly it is dislocated internally, and less so externally or rearward.
And the sign of dislocation internally for him is that when you fit the healthy thigh to the body, it becomes longer than usual and the thigh is significantly larger than the healthy one. The body cannot bend its foot, instead, it has a tendency to point the toes backward, which is seen as an inflammation caused by a pointed cautery, because the hip space has already been opened here.
And the sign for him who experiences dislocation is externally, that his accidents are contrary to this incident.
And the sign for him who experiences dislocation forward is that his natural thigh expands according to complement, although it does not bend that pain which is in the front region, and if one tries to proceed then it cannot move forward; and his urine is retained, and he becomes immobilized, so you must allow his movement on the foot.
And the sign for him who experiences dislocation rearward is that he does not expand the front area, nor can he bend that forward which bends when you try to move his hand. The thigh of him is shorter than the other one, and movement becomes easier, the head of the hip is forced in this position.
The method for reducing the types of this dislocation is to consider them, thus, if the dislocation is old and long-standing, that it has already become a habit for you to administer reduction in that manner according to its position, then not entirely; hence no suspicion should arise when administered in such treatment.
For the one in whom the dislocation is recent and of one of the four types of dislocation, then you should try to do what causes you to rotate the joint and extend it internally and externally, and move it to the right and left, which forcefully returns it and does not require any other treatment.
And if it does not return in this manner, then you should prepare to apply force and extend the patient's thigh from that side or on their chest, or on any part lying above the thigh region; and another applies to extend the hand of the patient towards them so that their feet are placed under his fingers. And you apply strength to the ankle joint for a moment and hold the other to keep the end of the thread.
And whether it's extension of him or internally from the front to bend towards the shoulder part, or rearward from the rear side to the back part of the body.
And whether all these extensions happen in one go that the body is raised onto its earth-bound chest and that it hangs down.
And this type of extension is common to all four.
And so, if the dislocation returns as we have said, it is good; and otherwise, it is necessary for each type according to its own treatment.
In the reduction of his own, when it is dislocated, and the dislocation is internally, then you should have the thigh bent over its side there; place the threads on the ankle joint at that spot where between the head of the hip and the spot where the toes point inward. Then extend the thread from the part of bending towards the more distant part of the shoulder blade.
And then another applies force to take hold of his arms, tightens the large spot of the hip and extends towards the rearward sides through strong extension, which returns it to its place.
And this type requires a lighter treatment when this member is reduced than the other types.
And if you justify yourself and do not adhere to this type of treatment for all, then you should have both feet of the body lying at once on a strong thread, lightly, over both feet and both hips.
And the length of each according to the quantity of four fingers, and the body's foot is extended more than the other by a quantity of two fingers.
And let the body be suspended above the head of the shaft, and it should be upright. And the length of him from the ground is a quantity of two fathoms.
And command a strong youth to bend the head of the hip, and be suspended by another young man, and the other young man bends the joint with strength, which causes the joint to return to its place at speed.
And in the reduction of him, when dislocation is at the rearward side, let it be bent over the buttock as we have recommended during the heated discussion; and strengthen the thread above the body's foot precisely and on its feet.
And place two sticks, one on the foot of the patient, and the other on the head; and prepare two sticks to be adjusted in the middle of the stomach region where wet cloths are draped over it. So that the patient is not dampened by the stick, with the stick being placed between the thighs of the patient, so you must extend your actions without causing harm to the parts left undone.
And each minister should extend to their own part, and the doctor holds their hand while adjusting the reduction according to skill.
And when the dislocation is in the parts in front, then let the back be slightly extended, and according to this detailed explanation about the stomach; and the doctor places his right palm on the patient's lower back, and adjusts it with the other hand, and pauses during that adjustment while extending the remaining parts towards the part behind.
And if the dislocation is in the parts at the back, then do not let the patient lie on their side, but elevate them onto the ground; instead, have them rest on a hard cause, as one would for evacuation when the width of the patient is dislocated to the outside parts. Just like we discussed about lying on two widths, it should be done with the face and limbs extended, as previously said, without much difference.
And have them administered compression on the table over the area where the joint is located.
So, when the reduction is completed as it should - and you cannot see the sign of the joint's reduction in them, then extend their backbones, and when you equalize those adjustments and the patient straightens out their back and extends their limbs, this means that the member has been returned according to what was said. Then adjust both hands, apply ointment and stretch in this way so that none of the parts are overstretched; and keep the patient at rest for three or four days.
And then gently stretch the muscle and ointment, comparing one limb to the other.
Then, if you find those equalizations to be in place, you know that the dislocation has already been set, and then let the patient go.
And if you find any sign of inflammation, then you return and plaster that area, stretch it according to your first adjustment, and let it rest for three days.
And then gently move that part, have the patient walk on it for some days while they are comfortable.
Chapter XXXII
On the treatment of dislocation at the back.
The back is dislocated in three ways: it can be dislocated outward at the parts, inward towards the center of the body, and more toward the back parts than forward. It cannot be dislocated at the front parts.
And the sign of back dislocation is when you command the patient to bend their back towards their buttocks; then you know that the back has been dislocated.
And the restoration of all its ways is to straighten the back properly, so that if possible they can extend their limbs; attach your two feet under them and hold their hands while lying on their face, placing their foot between your feet. Then gently guide their back towards the back until the back returns to its place.
And the sign of completion is that their back adheres to their buttocks comfortably under light work.
And then plaster that area and have them attach their back to their buttocks comfortably. Then keep it in one position for three or four days and gently move it afterwards.
And do not use the patient's back for walking for some days until they are healed and comfortable.
And if the reduction of your back is acceptable to you, then administer strong extension to the muscles as described in the previous narrative about hip treatment.
Chapter XXXIII
On the treatment of the dislocation of the shoulder.
The shoulder can sometimes be dislocated due to minor trauma, and in other cases it is dislocated according to the type of movement. The dislocation occurs either inward towards the center or outward from the body.
And the sign of shoulder dislocation is that you move the arm swollen when going towards the part where it is dislocated.
The treatment for shoulder dislocation is slight healing, which involves being able to easily extend and equalize the limbs while it returns.
And when treating the shoulder dislocated by rotation, have you straighten your back properly, and hold that with a strong and brave minister behind his two feet in the middle of him.
And then place your right hand under the back part of his upper foot, and place your left hand on the part at the back of the foot towards the side in the position of the pit.
And then pull the arm towards you with your right hand, and apply on both sides through movements, and extend the left side. Then move the foot of the arm to the right so that the limb works.
And make these two punctures as we have discussed.
And then press the foot of the chest onto the third puncture site, and you are at the cavity.
So if the puncture is done in one or two as this method suggests, and if you press equally on both sides of the foot, that's good; otherwise, then proceed with the operation again, when what returns.
May it is forbidden to you the reduction of this in the way we recommended, then make the patient lie on their back on the ground, and place a firm pillow under them, and have them squeeze between their thighs, and you already wrap a cloth around the patient so that the hernia does not slip.
And the minister who handles the patient's legs should extend them on their chest or as far as is tied around the back of the chest; and each minister should extend theirs against the extension of their partner, and the pillow stays between the thighs of the patient to hold it in place, so that the body of the patient is not pulled towards the parts left unused due to its extension.
And then the doctor repositions the joint on their back, and another minister holds the healthy leg in the unused parts where the dislocation returns easily.
And when the dislocation returns and is confirmed to you as the patient's health improves with the reduction, then stop applying the plaster and bind it firmly, and place the foot firmly against the knee.
And when you fear or protect yourself from the nerves which are behind above the ankle, because the muscle on that side will not be overly strong and hurt it significantly.
And let him rest for two days or three; and if the muscle is softened, bind that area again.
And then loosen it on the third day or fourth; and prohibit the patient from walking for forty days. May it is forced to go before this space, not done safely that the dislocation is not dissolved and corrupted, and what does not receive treatment should be avoided.
And if it happens that the patient has an abscess cut, then note that you manage in this section of the document where we proceed from our narrative, in another location for treatment and application, until it is healed.
Chapter XXXIV.
On the treatment of dislocation of the fingers of the foot.
And when the one that is dislocated is held at a slight extension of several steps; and what is not difficult, before it is easier.
May it is if the dislocation occurs in a few toes of both feet, then note that you should have the patient's foot on ground or on a table at a location equal to where they would be walking.
And you stand on your feet, place your hand on the spot that corresponds to the joints and bend it towards your foot with force until it returns, and see that it is already equalized and does not appear in the place of prominence.
And then place the belly of your foot on a table that carries all your foot, which has two ends, and bend it with an extended and firm structure for three days; and then loosen it and have a rest from walking for about ten days, until it is strengthened and its capacity is assured.
Chapter XXXV.
On the types of dislocation that are made by plague or by fracture or at any time.
When any of those causes happen, and you take care in the treatment of that and restore him/her, several punctures follow death.
And for this reason, do not presume on the treatment of him/her, but one who is skilled in the art, long practiced, merciful and compassionate, patient, not hasty or presumptuous; who uses only in the beginning of medicines that tend to pus to such an extent, and leaves the patient to divine judgment, rather than at the one you hope for salvation from loss, towards alleviating the suffering of illness, where there appears any hope. And then make every effort to perform the reduction as soon as possible on him/her in the beginning of the cause, before an abscess cut occurs.
And then if the limb returns as we wish, then administer treatment that allows pus to be cut and treats the plague with what suits you from the dry ointments.
And if the dislocation is from a fracture and happens in the separate bones, then you align their shafts, and do as we have said about the plagues of the simple in what comes before them at these places.
And follow according to your skill the advice of this treatise in the ways of fear as it precedes my preaching; for which you should always serve your Creator, more enduring to your glory, and better for your health that you will see those in your own time. So ends the words of Al-Buwayhi perfectly from which God be well pleased. Amen.
