Oh children, I give you this book as a gift, which is the last of medical science, for the benefit of your health, and through its explanations, and thanks to its statements, in my view it seems fitting that I complete this treatise for you, which is part of my surgical operation, or surgery.
For the operation on oneself is confined to our region and in our times it's entirely private, there exists great danger with this knowledge, and its traces remain; and there would not have been a lot of progress without some small descriptions in ancient books, which rectify many errors and misconceptions where their principles are closed for understanding and extends the effort and skill required.
And it seems to me that I should renew this treatise in a manner akin to exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and for the introduction of forms of the tools used like cautery and other equipment required for surgery, and for preparation thereof, which is necessary.
The reason why no skilled artisan operates on his own hand in our times might be that the art of medicine is extensive, and one must practice it before becoming proficient in the science of anatomy which Gualia described. He knew about the youthfulness of body parts and their forms, as well as their connections and separations; he had knowledge of bones, nerves, and glands, including the number of these and how to manipulate them; he understood pulsating veins and quiet ones, and the sites for their insertion.
And that's why Hippocrates said about it that in speech there is a difference, but more importantly in the work and especially in the art of one's own hand.
We have already mentioned this at the beginning of this book; whoever does not know what we have told about anatomy, should be avoided from falling into an error which would lead to many deaths, as I have seen too many cases like this, where some were trained in this science and abandoned it for that science and its experiments.
I have seen a skilled doctor who accidentally caused an inflamed abscess on the neck of a woman, and cut some neck arteries so that there was a large amount of bleeding, resulting in the woman dying among his patients.
And I have seen another doctor who almost killed a man by removing a large stone from his condition, and the stone was big, it hurt him and he removed that stone with a piece of bladder, so that that man died on the third day.
And I already sought to remove it, and saw that due to the size of the stone and the position of the patient under him, he would die.
And I have seen another doctor who was paid by a duke of our land for surgery, and operated on a black soldier who had suffered from his fracture in the leg; due to the doctor's lack of knowledge, he removed the fracture, covering it with dust and plaster over the wound, without allowing air into the wound.
And then he let it heal according to his desires, and he applied bandages, and let it dry for several days as commanded that we loosen the bandage; and this happened also when bone and flesh were infected with abscesses, resulting in loss.
And I sought help from you and prepared to remove the bandage, thus achieving calmness and alleviation of his pain.
But unfortunately the corruption had been confirmed in the limb, so I couldn't stop it and it continued to spread through the body of the patient, which was dangerous.
And I have seen another doctor who punctured an inflamed abscess and it became worse for the lord of his patient over some days.
The reason is that the cold cauterization is pure of melancholy humor, so it doesn't affect everything, but rather it is a body part that suffers from being affected by everything.
And for this reason, children, it is necessary for you that self-operation be divided into two distincts: one associated with health and the other where there is danger in major positions.
And I have already discussed this in every part of this book about the operation where there is error and fear; so it is necessary for you to keep this in mind and let that happen, so the pages don't accuse you of speaking or dishonesty.
And so take your tools in the service of God and for protection, and your patients with joy and firmness.
And use the best way through God's grace to gain salvation and a prosperous succession, let the terrible illnesses with difficult recovery stay away from your patients, keep your tools prepared for what you fear, so that stability remains in your faith and in your name; which is more lasting to your glory, better than in this world and at last in your sanctity.
Gualia already said in several of his writings: "Don't treat bad patients with bad doctors," he said.
And I have completed this book according to three chapters.
The division of the book begins, and first of the first part. The first chapter organized in the section about feet, concerning the forms of tools and instruments for cautery, and what is necessary in operation.
The division of the second part. The second chapter, concerning drying and puncturing, as well as suction cups, plagues, extraction of arrows, and similarity to those, entirely organized and detailed about the forms of the instruments.
The third chapter, concerning restoration and repositioning, as well as the treatment of dislocations and similarity to those treatments; an organized chapter about the head in relation to the bones, and the forms of the instruments.
Let me tell you about the quality of those cauteries and their consequences, as well as when it is forbidden to use a cautery.
So I say that the discussion about the quality of cautery's effects and its aftermath is long-winded and tedious for those with knowledge, subtle in science, and hidden by mystery; many wise men have already spoken on this topic, differing from each other, and for my part, it's enough to mention a small aspect of their teachings, fearing over-explanation.
And so I say that cautery strengthens the entire body universally in terms of its material or double materials, except for two components, which are parts concerning the double material.
In the component of the tail and the body's dry part there is material; some say that cautery strengthens that, while others say its opposite, that cautery isn't suitable for ailments that are due to quality and dryness. For nature is quality and dryness, and it's inconvenient when an ailment's tail and dryness are cured by that which causes dryness and harm would be its cure.
And those who say the opposite argue that with cautery one strengthens youth in all tail and dry ailments that appear in men's bodies. When you compare a man's body and its humidity to the nature of fire, you find that a man's body is dried out.
And I say according to this discussion, which I have already discovered several times through experience.
However, I do not wish for this to be discussed again in detail as it has already been elaborated upon in the section on cautery techniques and exercises, where one comes to know about the diversity of human bodies and the positioning of ailments among them, their causes, occurrences, accidents, and the timeline associated with these issues.
In other parts of the body, there's no need for concern, especially with wet and cold ailments, which many doctors have already discussed about, not differing on whether youth from cautery is beneficial in those.
And know this, children, that the secret of healing through cautery with fire and its good qualities lie in the use of hot medicines with cautery. For fire is simple, its action only reaches the limb being cauterized and does not spread to other limbs unless there's a small harm involved.
The action of hot medicines spreads to those limbs that are distant from the source, and it strongly facilitates the arrival of difficult-to-heal illness in the diseased limb and weakens it.
And the fire, due to its simplicity and goodness of substance, does not do this except cause excess. We have come to know this through experiments and a long service in studying the art, based on understanding the true causes; for that reason, I justify myself from going into much detail about this topic. But were it not for the fact that these secrets concerning fire and its operation within bodies, as well as your expulsion causing maladies to leave, are not fully understood through philosophical demonstration alone, they would serve you well in these discussions.
And know this, children, that there are disagreements regarding the time when cautery should be applied and they pause on the best period of spring.
And I say that cautery is suitable in any time period; because the harm due to temporary accidents is submerged by the youth brought about from that which comes with cautery, especially if it's used for pain or necessary pains that are strong and inflamed ones, which don't suffer from delay as feared by those that might cause mischief, which is greater than small harm entering through time.
And you shouldn't consider this in your discussions, or children, those who only estimate such things as the common folk and lay doctors do, it's true that for every ailment healed by cautery not all times are suitable, and they hold onto this conclusion.
And the reason isn't simply this when they worry about it, because cautery is merely a form of medicine that alters structure and dries out the humidity which is causing the pain.
And however, excessive cautery over medicine due to its value and virtue of operation and the greatness of its master.
And it's possible that the ailment could return at some point in time, depending on the structure of the body and the location of its ailment, as well as its virtue, and what is prepared within the body from adding superfluities to it, as well as what gets absorbed by it through food and similar causes; otherwise, if the ailment being treated with cautery is a subtle ailment in limbs with few superfluities and humidity, just like dental cautery for pain and similar treatments, it's possible that such pain wouldn't return within it, rather, this happens on a small scale.
And the common saying is that cautery is the last remedy of medicine, and it's an outdated term, not something I understand in this context, they believe it's not a cure that improves with medicine nor any other cause leading to cautery.
And the reason is against this; and I understand that cautery is the last remedy of medicine, but it's only when administering methods of treatment in certain illnesses, and those medicines do not work, then at the end of the cause, one administers cautery, and improves towards that. And here at this point, that cautery is the last remedy of medicine, not according to my understanding which recognizes common and many doctors' views.
And it was said by the ancients that cautery with gold is better than cautery with iron, and they didn't say this merely due to the equality of gold and its limited substance compared to others.
And it was said that the place for cautery does not burn, as this is not absolutely true, I have already done this and found out that it does not do this in certain parts of the body rather than others; cautery with that (gold) is good and better than with iron too as they were saying; however, when you perform cautery with fire using gold, it has not been clearly explained, it's heated according to the quantity you want for the hardness of the gold, and to receive freg. And if you place the fire on it, the gold melts due to the heat; and in some parts of the fire, several sheets are heated so that the artisan can work on it.
And for this reason, when performing cautery with iron, you should do so more gently and more precisely according to the nature of the operation.
And I have already organized this chapter on cautery according to chapters, and I have ordered those of the foot within these, for which I am asking you what you want from them.
The first chapter.
This cautery process facilitates the cold and humidity to reach a sudden event of which there are two causes, they are caused by soda and multiplicity of traumatic flux, called corissa, from the head to the parts of the veins and ear canals, and multiplicity of sleep, and tooth pain and throat infection, and universally for all illness that comes from coldness, such as paralyticism, soda, stroke, and they are similar in those illnesses.
The method of this cautery is as follows, which we initially ordered the patient to undergo a liberating medicine in their head for three or four nights, according to what you require from the patient and their age and custom.
And afterwards you instruct the patient to shave their head with a razor, and then make them sit on a low bench and place their head on their feet.
And then place the tip of your palm close to the pulse under the nostril between the patient's ears. However, when you've reached the middle point as instructed, mark that location with a test, and then apply olive cautery oil which has this form:
And place that (the olive oil) over the marked spot on the heated test, in such a way that it descends slowly as your hand is gradually constrained, and you rotate that.
And slowly lift your hand and look at the spot, and if you see some quantity of the head being exposed already, like the amount of grease in oil, then lift your hand. And if your hand doesn't turn towards that iron or another one, when it is cold, show me what I have told you about this head from which you can observe.
And then take a small amount of salt and dissolve it on the spot, leave that for three days.
And then apply it over the burned cheek in butter and leave it until the skin from fire is destroyed. And then treat the area with tetrapharmacon ointment until it is healed.
And it was said that when the wound opens up, then the bruising improves, because it is better and more rejuvenating.
And it was said by them that the cautery is done inside the mouth, and the cautery should be kept until a part of the quality of the bone becomes hardened.
And then make this mark that gets hardened from the bone, and then treat it properly.
And it was said by others that the cautery reaches to the end, within which one should take care of the bone's strength in order for the bone to come out, and this is the method for small cautery: And consider that place where the vapor from the head escapes.
And keep the wound open for a long time, and then it should be cured when it becomes consolidated.
And yet I have not seen these two types of head cautery from you, but rather in some individuals according to fear; leave that as is, the best is with health when possible; so the head opens through solution due to continuous contact like we've testified in other body parts, and especially if the patient's head has a hot nature.
The first type of cautery is better and safer, you should do it that way; from there onwards and with that method for health.
Second chapter.
About head cautery.
When throughout the head a chronic and long-lasting pain occurs, and this is prolonged in the patient's body, using remedies such as teas, broth, cold compresses, wraps, hot water baths, massages, and other treatments, especially if already treated with one cautery which doesn't aggravate the patient's symptoms from those causes; then consider that if the head of the patient has a strong creation nature; and doesn't cause much heat or inflammation, then this cautery should be replaced by another, leaving the patient with just a few sessions. And then apply the cautery near his forehead in the spot where the neck divides, applying the cautery inside that area. Cut the neck and reveal the amount of matter in it which we have recounted, then apply the cautery near his head behind the neck at the place where one would call gout, - and that is the spot where suction was performed. And hold your hand in ashes, do not uncover the mouth, for this patient experiences great pain due to this different from all other head cauteries.
And I shall direct this cautery in its place, for it is known that this cautery when used to cauterize the horns of the head and the occiput is a finer cautery than that which is applied to the middle part of the head; and this is the form of this patient.
Head healed.
Regarding the cautery treatment for non-age-old migraines.
When there is pain at the back of the head or pain spreading within the skull, it should be relieved with medicine that clears the head, and then another treatment is administered, which I have mentioned in the treatments for diseases; and if this does not improve the situation, then the cautery treatment for this is done in two ways: either with an acute burning medicine cauterization or with iron.
Medicine cautery that involves burning is when you take a dollop of garlic, and pierce it and cut off its extremities from both heads. And then apply the painful area in the temple with a small knife where it is cut into you leave the neck, where it is hidden.
And then strengthen on you by stopping it with pressure due to descending constriction, and let that flow through the space of three hours; and release it by spreading out the garlic, and leave the wound for two or three days, and place your elbow under water where the spot makes a bruise.
And then treat that with grease until it heals.
And if you see this done with some burning medicines which I have written in the detailed treatise on burning medicines.
The cautery with iron according to this method: heat it for the process of which here is the form:
And it is called a ring lock, where the head of the patient is thus shaped like a thorn, and in the middle part of it, there is a small elevation.
And then place your hand on the painful area, - to prevent burning the skin which is being heated -, and move the small iron slowly but steadily.
And if the quantity of it that gets burned by the uniqueness of the neck thus much, raise your hand so that the artery which is being heated does not get burned either, to prevent a flow of blood.
And then dip your elbow in water with salt and place it on the spot, and leave it for three days; and then place your elbow under water, and treat it with grease until it heals.
And if you see this done, apply the cautery at the end of the knife as for cautering, and be careful not to cut into the artery in this non-age-old migraine.
Head fourth.
Regarding the cautery treatment for ancient migraines.
When you treat migraines as we have said for the previous treatment, and as we have said in the divisions of diseases, and if this does not improve your treatment, because there is still what we previously mentioned about the first cautery with medicine or with heat, then know that you should light the knife cautery so that it becomes white. This means holding your hand over the painful area at a line which has most of what was previously discussed, or at this point; and place your hand for a moment and press that into piercing the artery and entering the skull.
However, you must guard against the continuation of the jawbone, which should not be burned during chewing, and that the muscle which controls it is not affected, and that no cramp occurs.
And if it is about the fear of blood flow from the artery that is cut, which causes fear, especially in those who do not know what they are doing and lack experience; leave the operation to them at the beginning.
And I will remind you of the protocol for blood flow accidents involving the artery according to his method in this free.
And if you see this disease that does not suffice for this cautery and observes the body of the patient tolerable, apply this cautery at the middle of the head as we have recounted, and treat the wound until it heals.
And if you see this, administer the cautery which we have mentioned in the head of artery iron with two knives, and this is a better cautery treatment and more appropriate.
Head V.
Regarding the cautery treatment for earaches.
When there is pain in the ear due to cold and for lack of treatment which I have mentioned in the division, and if this does not relieve the pain, then heat the cautery, and this is the one called a point, whose form here is:
And close to the anus, it is pierced near the belly button, and guided around the entire area of the abdomen like a wheel being rolled, or in the course of any time if the pain occurs at any time. Continue with the application of the cautery to the edge of the belly button little by little, until you have tried placing your hand on the area and attempted.
And if the cautery is applied to all parts of the abdomen, and it stops there, then proceed to treat the areas inside where they are healing.
End of Chapter VI.
Regarding the application of cautery.
Turtura is something that can be cured and treated with cautery; it involves certain substances that cause issues due to phlegm, as we discussed earlier in the sections about illnesses.
Avoid applying cautery to the substance that causes it through drying or nerve spasm.
When you treat that kind of turtura using jarrings and capi-purgatives and guar-guarisms, if you don't confirm your treatment, then it's like applying cautery to the patient three times: first by treating the belly button area, then leaving a little space for its normal heat to return, and lastly treating the connection between two lips.
Hold your cautery for the opposite side of the affected area, as relief is only found in the part that appears to be healing.
The method of applying cautery is as follows: apply the heat to the right end of the belly button area above the chin, and on the head another, with its length according to the length of that segment, then place your hand in between while letting the fire burn through the quantity corresponding to the substance's quality of the diseased part.
This is how you apply cautery, and it is a skill of the surgeon, whose method involves being in front of the table. However, there's a subtle way to do this: if you use a little for each application; then understand that when it works against excessive roughness, a little is enough.
And subsequently treat the area where it's processed internally until it heals.
End of Chapter VII.
Regarding the application of cautery for old apoplexy.
When apoplexy is old and you treat it using what we've discussed and don't confirm your treatment, and if the patient doesn't have a fever, then apply cautery in four applications: on all parts of their head; with cautery and halfway across the head, as we've said; and apply it to the chest. The method for applying cautery is done according to what was described earlier.
And once it has been treated on the mouth of the stomach; and it's mostly behind; then proceed to treat as you've processed.
End of Chapter VIII.
Regarding the application of cautery for forgetfulness caused by phlegm.
Understand that you should give these to the patient during meals as large jarrings and serviceable pills for improving digestion.
And then shave the entire head of the patient and place the chest on the plaster described in the treatise on plasters, on the left side.
And pause a few applications, which is the method of applying cautery. Do this according to that method I've mentioned before.
And if for those means recovery is good; and otherwise, then do this to them three times on the last part of their head, which should descend from the more elevated part of the head into the less elevated area near the neck. And pause between each application as much as the quantity described has been applied; then proceed to treat the application of cautery accordingly.
If the addition and the patient can tolerate it, then apply cautery in the middle area; and if you find greater addition, then apply cautery over both parts of the head.
And treat it as it heals; and let the olive oil be used according to the method described previously.
End of Chapter IX.
Regarding the application of cautery and the soothing treatment of all parts of the body.
Understand that you should process with digestion of the head using jarrings and what we've discussed; then shave the patient's head, proceed to apply cautery in the middle of the head, apply it over all parts of the head, apply it on the last part of the body, and do three applications on the cervical spine.
And if necessary in the illness of soothing for many and the patient can tolerate it with strong ailment, then apply cautery four times on both cervical spines, subsequently apply it until its effect is felt throughout the body, and lift your hand. And treat it as it heals; this should be olive oil cautery.
End of Chapter X.
Regarding the application of cautery for epilepsy.
Cautery is not applied to epilepsy in general, only when it's due to phlegm.
And understand that you should digest the brain with meals at the beginning using pills and another treatment which we have described in the section when the patient is large and can tolerate the removal of medications.
And if it's a child who doesn't tolerate medicines, then administer guar-guarisms and chewables for good digestion before that with several days, for the improvement of food.
And then shave the patient's head, and then apply a cautery on that spot at the midpoint of the head according to the previous method, and use another cautery on the back of their head, and on each corner of their head he applies a cautery. And if the patient is strong and can tolerate it, then apply those cauteries as I said, while having a paralytic effect and soothing action on the vertebrae of the neck and the vertebrae of the back.
And use an olive oil-based cautery as described.
And if the patient is a child, then use a subtle cautery according to this method.
Chapter XI.
On the treatment of melancholy with cautery.
When the causes of melancholy are corrupted and weakened by humidity, then apply those cauteries as we have said in the area causing paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is overabundance descending to melancholy, and the patient's body is wet, then make them drink that which purifies the brain according to what was explained in the division.
And then shave the patient's head, and apply decent turtoge to them around the circle, and then remove that at the midpoint of the head.
And if the patient is sixty years old, and he needs treatment from every part.
And then apply liniment; it is fitting to use an old sheep's grease for this purpose. And heat that over the fire until the heat is measured, which they say causes discomfort when it grows in him. And then apply that at the midpoint of his head in the circle, and let him stay inside until it cools down.
And do this to the patient once a week for a whole week, and let him follow his usual diet until he is cured; or if you want, apply this by making small punctures according to his preference, otherwise hold your hand with a cautery in such an order: this is the type of cautery that moistens the brain equally.
And then apply that cooked butter or grease from fat.
Chapter XII.
On the treatment of water descending in the throat with cautery.
When it is reported to you that the water has started descending in the throat according to the signs I have explained in the division, then start and make the patient drink what purifies his head, and keep him away from all kinds of humidity.
And let that sugar be dissolved in water for a few days.
And command the patient to scratch his head, and apply a cautery on it on the midpoint of the head; and apply two cauteries on both temples if the water is starting to descend in both throats or one temple if the water is descending in one throat.
Let the cautery touch all veins and arteries that leave the head; and place the cauteries in that length around the temples.
And protect yourself from any discharge when it's being treated with cautery; and if you see any blood discharges from him, give him some medicine which is within your reach.
And I will come with knowledge about the extraction of arteries and the removal of those, as well as caution against blood discharges.
And some times it is treated with cautery at the neck between two bones, using two well placed cauteries.
Chapter XIII.
On the treatment of old tears.
When tears from the throat are frequent and through veins and arteries located in the front of the head area is confirmed that it is overabundance causing phlegm formation, then apply a cautery with the one we have recounted in the chapter on water starting to descend into the throat, and apply a cautery at the midpoint of the head, two cauteries at the neck between the temples, and two cauteries at the neck between the bones. And if you suffer from excess, then apply a cautery across the entire length of the throat on the tip of the eyebrow with a small cautery.
Chapter XIV.
On the treatment of nasal odor.
When you are treating the patient as we have instructed in the division and your treatment is not effective, then prepare and make the patient drink the decoctions for three nights; and then shave his head, and apply a mid-level cautery with an olive oil-based cautery. And then apply the treatment with a thorn-shaped cautery, and place two small cauteries on each eyebrow leaving some hair.
And be careful not to ignite that artery.
And this is the form of the thorn-shaped cautery.
Chapter XV.
On the treatment with cautery for soothing the throat eyelids.
When the eyelid of the throat is softened by illness or moisture, then apply this lunar-shaped cautery to that eyelid. Here is how it should be done:
And if you do so, apply that treatment over both eyebrows with a small cautery on the entire area, and let them extend as far as the temples. And determine the length of each cautery according to the quantity of the eyebrow.
And do not press too hard with your hand on the cautery, but rather according to how the fleshy part of the eyelid gets heated.
Chapter XVI.
On the use of cautery on the eyelid when the skin turns into parts inside and on the hand.
When the skin of the eyelid turns into parts inside, when I prick the eyelid, in this case there are two ways to use cautery, which is either to apply heat or to use a medicinal burning method.
If you use a hot cautery, command the patient in front of it to let their skin grow as if those who undergo circumcision do, until they are extended and equalized; and if you have to pinch that area, then strengthen their eyelids so that they don't become damaged while their skins are being born.
Then when they are born and equalized, then place the head of the patient in your position, and over the eyelid of their eyes apply a test, with a sign according to the shape of a leaf of marigold, and make the start of the sign close to the skin.
And place an embossed cut in the albumen of an egg or in pus from milk on the eyelid.
And apply heat to the cautery which is the form of this.
And apply cautery to the figure which was marked, little by little, in small patches, while burning the surface of the skin that is as if it were a leaf of marigold, all seemingly the same.
And a sign of the health of your work is that you see the eyelid of the eye already contracted and the skin of it lifted from the puncture of the eyelid.
And lift your hand and leave it for three days, then place the cut on the border in such a way that the scab becomes elevated. And take care of that with ointment until it heals.
And if any cause returns through the skin near their birthplace and the eyelid becomes softened, then do another treatment with cautery on that area just as you did initially.
And if the skin is in the eyelid remaining, then apply cautery to that area until it rises to its natural place and becomes equal, so that the skin does not hurt the eyelid.
And with the medicinal burning cautery, this means that you command the patient to let their skin grow until they are extended and equalized, then apply a pattern made of fabric in the shape of a leaf of marigold.
And take some known soap and a live ash. I., o let it sit this way, then mix those ashes with water and let it boil in such a way that it does not cool down; then spread the mixture on the fabric made like a leaf of marigold shape, place it over one eyelid or both; spread a cut in the albumen of an egg over this, and have the head of the patient in your position.
And place the described over the medicine and press it a little but do not damage it until the patient feels the bite of the medicine, which bite is like that when it's hot.
And when the hot bite is endured, then wash the medicine and remove it from your position; when the bite stops, then wash the medicine with water over the eyelid; and then observe if the eyelid has been lifted as if it was washed by water. If no return occurs to that place of the medicine on the spot where the medicine did not reach, and does not damage until your operation is equalized and the eyelid is contracted again.
And place the cut on the border so that the crust of the adjustment is eradicated, and then take care of it with final ointment or another until it heals.
And for this, you must observe with diligence during the night that medicine does not fall from under your eyelid, and if the eyelid becomes softened over several days and any skin cause pinches in the eyelid, then apply your medicine to that place where the eyelid is softened again, in the same manner as at the beginning, and take care of it until it heals.
And this is the shape of a leaf of marigold.
Know that men's eyelids are differentiated according to their size and smallness, so this is how you should contract them.
And do not hide the way of straightness towards that which is studied in this art.
Chapter XVII.
On the treatment of a fistula that occurs in the tear duct of the eye.
When you treat a fistula with what we have discussed in the divisions of maladies and do not apply your treatment, then you should proceed to cauterize it like this: command the patient to place their head in your position, and have one of their attendants' heads between your own hands in such a way that they are neither damaged nor agitated by their own head.
And place the cut on the surface of an egg white or in pus from milk over the eyelid of the patient.
And using the heat of the cautery of which this is the method:
Which should be heated, just like a cane or reed pen form, from one end where the cautery is applied.
And if you see, it penetrates into the other end. And if you want to remove it, do so like squeezing out.
But the one that is heated is better for this work.
And then press the fistula if it has been opened, and heal and dry out what belongs to him. And if it is not opened, then open that one and remove the pus from him.
And then place over him the heated cautery which should be well ignited, and hold your hand with your own one a little closer to the fire at the tip of the nose, so that your hand does not move and the patient is not disturbed. Then pause the cautery on the edge of the nose and clean that area.
And so if during the beginning of your cautery it enters into the nose, that's good; and otherwise, then you should repeat the cautery once or twice, as needed; and leave him like that for three days, and then place over that point on his forehead with some oil, within which there is a dried ointment to heal.
And if it has been more than ten days and is not healed, then place over him the corrosive quick medicine into which the nose is exposed and shave according to what suits in his skull.
And another method for cautery of a fistula which some earlier authors said: look at the location of the fistula and make an incision there and place over that fracture a thin layer, whose form is like this: Then put in that area the quantity of one inch of melted lead; hold your hand well in place without harming the patient so that the melted lead does not go into his nose; cover where you pause on the nose tip with something soft like egg white or water, let the lead settle on the location of the fistula and heal it by a marvellous cure.
And if the fistula is healed with what we have said about cautery and healing, that's good; and otherwise, then it is necessary to administer medicine from the nose and reduce the fistula into the nose according to where it naturally belongs.
Chapter XVIII.
On cautery of the wound in the foot.
Redness occurs causing cracks on the lips, and more so on the lips of children.
And as you treat those cracks with what we have told you in the divisions and do not deepen your treatment, then heat the small cautery knife according to this method which suits:
And let its shape follow the subtlety of the knife.
Then place that initially in those cracks where the cautery penetrates into the root of the cracks.
And then heal that with ointment until it heals.
Chapter XIX.
On cautery of a fistula in the mouth.
When in the throat or on the palate or in the cavities of the teeth there is pus and you make a cut, and then it bursts, ages, cleans out that part and creates a fistula, then when treating that without deepening the treatment, heat the cautery according to the amount received inside the fistula, place that heated into the source of the fistula, hold your hand where it reaches the heated iron to the root of it, do this once or twice at its end; and treat that with what we have told you about healing until it heals.
And if the healing is removed and it heals, that's good; and otherwise, then it is necessary to uncover the place and expose the corrupted bones according to what comes in its chapter.
Chapter XX.
On cautery of teeth and soothing of the gums.
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth are tender, treating those with medicines instead of waiting is necessary. So place the head of the patient in his own position, then heat the cautery according to this method, making sure you pause the small part over the tooth so that the heated point quickly reaches the root of the tooth without harming it from the inside.
And then lift your hand, and repeatedly apply the cautery for as many times as you wish.
And then let the patient drink water mixed with salt and keep that for an hour. Then wash that out, as when the tooth pain is reduced and the gum inflammation is alleviated and the moisture is dried up.
Chapter XXI.
On the treatment of dental pain through cautery.
When dental pain is due to coldness or worm, or if you do not respond to medical treatment, then treat it with cautery in two ways: either apply a point on the gum of teeth, or use direct fire.
Cautery on the gum involves taking cow's horns and heating them in a forge. Then take hold of it and cover it at the tip of the tooth, then immerse that into heated horn, and place it on the painful tooth as soon as possible until it is heated up.
And then apply that several times while allowing the heat of the fire to reach the root of the teeth.
And if you see that, immerse wool or cotton in the heated horn above it, then place that on the painful tooth and place a glowing iron over it while letting the heat of the iron reach the root of the tooth.
However, cautery with fire should be done when the ember or iron is at its hottest point, and there's a roughness inside it, and the heat of the fire does not reach the mouth of the patient.
And then ignite the cautery in the form that it will take, place it on the tooth and hold your hand over it until the cautery is heated up; and do this several times while reducing or completely alleviating the pain either on that day or the next.
And so, because of this cautery that the patient fills their mouth with good horn and hold it for an hour, then they should swallow it; this is how the cautery works.
And treat with what you see as necessary according to what is possible for you.
And this is how the cannula is done:
Chapter XXII.
On the treatment of hernias through cautery.
When hernias are caused by phlegm and fluids that do not yield to digestion with medicines, and you notice a slight improvement in digestion, then ignite the cautery according to this method: hold it at both ends so that the steam can be used to apply heat from one end to the other. Place the burning tip on the hernia once or if necessary again while allowing it to reach the root of the hernia cavity.
And if the hernia is small, then hold the cautery according to the size of the hernia, and leave it for three days while applying an ointment made from fat in a horn until whatever the fire has burned out.
And then treat that with grease, cloths, and bandages until it heals.
Chapter XXIII.
On the treatment of coughing and constriction in the throat.
When moisture enters the pulmonary canal, especially if it is due to coldness in the stomach, then note that the patient should be made to expel this at the beginning with laxative medicines, and then treat by applying cautery to the bottom of the throat where it has become swollen.
And make sure that the cautery does not reach the throat and do not burn too much of their body, only a little.
And apply cautery there with another type of cautery to the junction of the neck with the lower part of their spine. And treat the elbow joint in the same way as previously described.
And then treat that with what was mentioned before until it is healed.
Chapter XXIV.
On the treatment of lung disease and coughing.
When cough and lung disease are caused by moisture, the patient does not have a fever or scabs, this is ancient lung disease. Then apply two cauterizations on the sternum at the swollen parts of the neck and the chest; and with another cautery in the middle of the chest between two nipples; and treat the elbow joint as previously described.
And if you wish, your cautery application for the punctation is with the type of cautery called punctum, as explained in the section on puncturing ear pain.
And make points inside each of them; and then treat that with what was mentioned beforehand until it is healed.
And already, you have three levels for this cautery treatment at that point: in one application, you can perform three cauterizations according to this method:
Chapter XXV.
On the treatment of a bump at the tip of the penis.
When the tip of the penis is dislocated due to lubricating moisture and does not return in time, you must correct its dislocation before it returns to its usual state. Then move it slightly so that it becomes straight as we have demonstrated. In this case, first reduce the dislocation, then have the patient lie on their back or their stomach; and lift the body part which is inside the bump at the top of the penis when you place your left hand's fingers on its parts with your fingers facing upwards. If the dislocation is inside, follow these instructions.
And you should heat the cautery with two points; this is how it works:
And you should heat the cautery in such a way that it enters from one side, and then from the other side; and the figure of the cauteryization will come as if with two cauterized points.
And some cases are adjusted according to this account, and these are the cauteries .viii.
And place your hand on the cautery in such a way that there is salt residue, and then have the patient lie prone, and make sure the body does not get burnt for some time until it feels comfortable.
And if the dislocation is above and towards the back, do this: then apply a cautery on the muscle under the cauterized point or on the bone's points, until the joint is confirmed and moisture is reduced in the patient's body, thus healing them.
Chapter XXVI.
On the treatment of gastric cautery.
When cold and wet humors accumulate in the stomach, causing a protrusion of its components and their multiplication within it, if you continue with the methods of treatment and they do not work, then it is observed that the patient lies on his right side, extends his hands and things, and applies a cautery there three times: in one cauterization place the foot as wide as the palm of your hand under a cauterized bone point, and in two cauterizations place each of the two sides of the cauterization between them until you get the figure of triangular cautery; and stretch out those that are not properly adjusted causing pus to form.
And if the depth of the cautery is as much as the two fleshy parts of the thickness of the intestine.
And the figure of the cautery is according to this form, and if you wish, apply a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form; this is a cautery according to the circular form according to this form:
And the stomach should be cauterized punctually at that which is frightened by this cautery: and you place your hand on the stomach point according to the heat you want with the heat, then apply a cautery to it; then treat that with treatment that proceeds until it is healed.
Chapter XXVII.
On the treatment of colic by cautery.
When there is pain in the stomach due to coldness or moisture or excessive wind causing excess from its normal composition, and the patient does not improve with what we have said and it doesn't work, then observe that the patient lies on his back, holds heat three times according to this form over the stomach under the ribs, and you can continue until you feel comfortable in the lying position for a person.
And let the space between each cautery be according to the size of the finger, and make the cauteries along the length of the body straight.
And don't touch your hand on the bone under the cautery.
And if the amount of heat that sticks is equal to the size of the thickness of the intestine wall, and it is not properly adjusted; and if the patient stands on their feet; and if not standing, then lie down, which already has spread their things, and raise their arms.
And it is possible for you to apply these cauteries with knife-like cautery tools when you have skill and caution in the art.
And be careful not to overdo the cautery process, and ensure that the heat sticks to the entire intestine so it sticks throughout the body and reaches all organs, as this is due to the subtle nature of the intestine; know this.
Chapter XXVIII.
On perforating stomach abscess with a cautery.
When there is inflammation or an abscess in the stomach, and you want to know if that abscess is within the flesh of the stomach or around it, then if it's within the flesh of the stomach, the patient will experience increased gravity and pain intensity.
And if it's around the stomach lining, then the pain is intense and often tires the doctors in treating him.
Then observe that the patient should be lying on their back; and then place your hand over the location of the abscess with heat; and then heat up the cautery which is similar to a needle, as its form was described in another page. And apply the cautery there and within it until the entire intestine is heated up, until it reaches the chest, until you feel it heal.
And then treat that with the cure of other abscesses until it is healed.
And do not use this method of cautery but rather the one that is prolonged as studied in the art of medicine, and with the most maladies associated with it; however, there have been some cases where heat has been applied to this operation, however, you should follow that advice, and it's better.
Chapter XXIX.
On the treatment of swellings with cautery.
The ancient methods for applying cautery to swellings were done in this manner and you should follow this from the texts of Aristology. Take a long pointed reed found among the aristology texts that is as thick as your finger.
And then immerse that in oil and heat it over a fire, and apply a cautery at the place which is between the continuation of the shoulder blade up to the chest; and with two cauterizations leave it directed, one slightly inclined towards the part below the chin, and with two cauterizations in this area that is declining between the fifth rib and the spine, leaving one inclined to the parts behind; and another cautery at the midpoint of the feet; and another on the stomach, and three cauterizations at the parts behind; and a cautery at the place which is between the two shoulders, and two cauterizations on each side of the feet, leaving the cauterization that is in between the two shoulders.
And do not remove your hand from the area of the cautery, but rather in the process of its application.
And it is said by some old men who are among the people that use to apply iron-like cauterization with fire in this area which is between the ribs, up until we reach this place and heal it there as we have mentioned for this place of the wound.
There should be no fear in this perforation with the cautery; it is just like what happened to you recently when you injured yourself at the site of the fistula where healing did not occur.
Chapter XXX.
On the application of the cautery to meat.
When you treat the illness of meat as we have discussed in its division and do not apply your treatment, then using a cautery on it occurs according to three ways, all of which are perpendicular. One way is to make three or four lines in a row along the length of the meat according to the shape of the cauterizations in the wound, which I have already described.
And between each cauterization leave the thickness of a finger or even less, and the way to apply the cautery is the same as we have described in the cautering of wounds.
And do not remove your hand from the area of the cautery; and let the patient rest on their elbows.
And there is another way to apply cautery; that means you ignite the cautery with two streams of fire, a fact we have mentioned in the chapter on dislocation of muscle. And raise the patient's body from behind so as not to let the discharge of the left thigh reach the area where the meat was wounded.
And your elevation should be at which you raise the body according to the length of the torso, so that the cauterizations are made according to the width of the body.
And then insert both streams in the middle, ignite them, in that place where they penetrate from the other side.
And then remove the cautery; and thus four cauterizations are made.
And if you see fit, apply the cautery with three streams of fire.
And then you treat the effects of the cautery which has allowed blood to flow for too many days; this is preferable compared to other previous causes in treatment.
Chapter XXXI.
On the application of the cautery to dropsy.
Cauterization should not be applied to dropsy but only in places appropriately.
When you treat dropsy as we have described in its division and do not apply your treatment, then you should use the following method: cauterize with four cauterizations around the belly button, one on the stomach, another on the wound, another between the two kidneys, two cauterizations on either side of the backbone, one on the right side of the leg, and another on the stomach. And the depth of the cautery should be as wide as the thickness of the body part being treated.
And then leave the application open for a long time until blood flows out properly.
And do not remove the patient from treatment near the cautery as it causes confusion and hinders the healing process. It should be treated with rest and aid for recovery.
The shape of the cautery which is applied to the abdomen should be elongated as per its previous form, and the area where the cautery is applied on the back should be like an olive according to its previous form.
Chapter XXXII.
On the application of cautery to the legs and thighs.
When the legs are swollen with watery dropsy and filled with salty water, you should apply cautery to the back of the feet up to the area between the thumb and little finger. Lift your hand next to the cauterization and do not twist it; then lift your hand and do not return it completely as the salty water will drain out.
The application of the cautery is as follows: Apply two cauterizations on each thigh, and in every part place a cauterization at the tip of the knife-like extension. And the application of the cautery should be according to the length of the thigh: hold one end and the other is in the middle of the thigh; on each thigh, two cauterizations.
And leave the open wound for a long time as part of treatment so that some water drains out from it.
And then treat those causes which we have mentioned.
Chapter XXXIII.
On the application of cautery to the abdominal region.
When abdominal pain is due to wind and moisture inside causing digestive and retaining processes, they are within the stomach and in the intestines. This condition can be treated using standard therapeutic methods without causing harm; often, patients endure the exhibition of the disease's symptoms by undergoing a stomach cautery procedure. In this case, it is necessary to perform a large stomach cautery according to the sequence established during the gastric cautery process, followed by a circular cautery and four cauterizations in the area below the umbilicus, including subtle pin-point cauterization; and a large cautery over the navel region, or two cauterizations.
And if you encounter excessively abundant moisture and the patient can tolerate it, then perform a cautery on the groin area and over the intestines, reinforcing your adjustments with two cauterizations on the stomach and close to the inguinal region. This is a complete cure of youth that will not fail.
Captulo XXXIV.
On the cautery of ancient hemorrhoids.
When dealing with ancient hemorrhoids of a large humor or corrupted moisture, if they are treated as we have said in the division and you do not cause harm to your treatment, then perform three cauterizations on each of the two small and triangular buttocks' pus points. Also, conduct one cauterization above the navel groove for two times.
And if you feel that the stomach of the patient is cold and the food they eat isn't digested well, plus if their face appears pale, then perform a large stomach cautery according to how it was done before; also do one on the tongue and another on the chest. Use a subtle pin-point cauterization for these procedures. Allow some time after each treatment for healing, and soon after this process, they should recover.
Captulo XXXV.
On the cautery of the liver near the appendix.
When you remove the liver, then you apply the cautery that is akin to fire. Place the heated tool into that liver incision, and as you perform your work, ensure the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which the disease spreads.
And do this once or twice; if the liver is too big, then cauterize each of them according to what we've discussed earlier. Also, cure those with treatments you administer until they recover.
And if you apply a large cautery to the liver, it will heal better during youth.
Captulo XXXVI.
On the treatment of fistulas that naturally occur in the parts of the body.
When nature does not conform to the treatment we've recommended in its proper place, and the patient is frightened by this, they should be treated with cautery.
So when a certain one has a fistula in nature and it's ancient, full of sickly fluids, and contaminated pus, then that which is the essence worth discharging from it should be extracted with gentle probing. And you ought to understand the depth of its extent while conducting this probing process.
Place the cautery that resembles fire. And place the ignited cautery in this fistula, according to the depth of the probing.
And apply the cautery repeatedly inside until those corrupted bodies are consumed; do this one time or two times, or three times according to your need.
And protect yourself from burning nerves and veins; or if the fistula reaches to the bladder's blood vessel or intestines, then protect all those areas. Do not perform this operation until you're sure that the fistula is in a fatty area and there's no possibility of it penetrating further.
And treat the affected area until it heals.
And if the area has healed, and all substances have been removed from it, and they continue to do so for a long time, then you will know that it is completely cured.
And if the substances are not his own, then you will know that it is penetrating or in the vicinity of his organs, or that there lies a reason for this condition in those causes whose memory will return to him at that place.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
Regarding the cautery of the ears.
When in the ears there is pain due to scratching or through great windiness, and when the patient's ear is reddened, then one should consider cautery of that on the ears with a cautery over each ear with a pointy tool whose handle helps remember the procedure.
And for the second one, slightly apply the cautery, so that three linear cauteries come forth, and therefore they will be more at the back in youth.
Chapter XXXVIII.
Regarding the cautery of the bladder.
When it happens in the bladder due to scratching and wetness causing urine retention, if the patient cannot urinate, then apply cautery at that sensitive spot over the bladder, like starting points of the skin on the penis, and do so with a single cautery tool at that sensitive spot on the right side, and another on the left side.
And the length of each cautery according to the size of the feet' nails; apply cautery with a tool at that sensitive spot on the lower part of both sides, or use two tools if necessary.
And apply pointy cauteries according to how they are performed.
Chapter XXXIX.
Regarding the cautery of the throat.
When there is scratching and wetness in the throat, causing it to be difficult to swallow, and menstrual periods are disturbed for this reason, delayed or not occurring at all, and pain arises in the throat, one should consider that this area needs three cauteries around the navel, as we have described earlier when treating the bladder; and also apply a pointy cautery tool over that sensitive spot on both sides of the body, either using two tools if necessary.
Chapter XL.
Regarding the cautery treatment for a dislocated shoulder.
When wetness causes the muscles to infiltrate the shoulder joint area and creates instability in its location, a sign that this occurs is when one arm extends beyond the other when compared. And the place of the dislocation is compressed within the armpit region.
Then consider applying cautery to the patient's shoulder area as if drawing a circle similar, once you have marked it out around this circumference in the shoulder region just like it is rotated, and for that reason, when the shoulder rotates, the center of the circle will be the right spot.
And follow the same form for applying cautery as described in the treatment of the stomach.
And if this kind of cautery is not at your disposal, then apply three large olive-shaped cauteries.
And apply the cautery according to the intensity of pain in all parts of the body; and then proceed with caring for that area until it has healed.
Chapter XLI.
Regarding the treatment of sciatic vein cautery.
When pain occurs in the shoulder area, caused by scratching and wetness for this patient, the treatment we have mentioned is applied to the patient without delay, and then it gets cured. So consider that you will let out the body fluids through pills made of honey or artificial pills or similar; and then apply cautery to the area.
And the method of applying cautery in this case follows two methods: one is using cautery with burning medicines, or the other is applying cautery with fire.
There are two scientifically recognized methods, of which one is to apply three triangular-shaped cauteries over that area on the shoulder width of the patient as described, and ensure they have good depth. And the distance between each cautery is equivalent to the thickness of your finger, and apply either an olive-sized or large cautery.
May some improvements be made on the mid part at the head of the shoulder blade so that there are four cauteries in total.
And if you wish, apply cautery as described in the treatment of a shoulder dislocation using this circular method, which encompasses and burns away pain throughout the entire body.
And this is the method of applying cautery in the form of heat when pain is localized to the shoulder and does not extend within the chest.
And if it does extend within the chest, then apply two cauteries on the breast over the area where the pain is concentrated; and one cautery at the ribcage slightly to the right of four finger-widths.
And if it's a surgical knife cautery, then the depth of the cautery should be according to the intensity of pain in the body.
And if the pain is centered within the area between your feet and hands, then apply cautery here at this location, using a point for three points or four or more if it's necessary.
And if the pain is localized in front of your chest area, then apply a surgical knife cautery here.
And always remember that when applying cautery, you should not continue until the process burns nerves or large vessels, for this can result in damage to the body or contraction.
And I have seen both of those who apply cautery on the ribcage and finalize during the process, then fire inflation within where the tumor has obtained the foot, and fire perforates and decays throughout the foot. And it happens that there's an intense stomach solution, and at that moment death occurs.
And if the pain is in two parts simultaneously, cauterize each one according to this manner.
And some wise people say in the cauterization of water cautery, this is how it should be done: make it resemble a circular iron piece where the circumference is about the size of a hand; and make its opening according to the thickness of a finger bone or perhaps slightly less.
And inside that circle place another metal piece; and make the space which is between them equal to the length of a toe; and those circles should be opened in two parts each; and the length of those rods is one toe or two toes, and make the iron grooves suitably aligned within the circles; and this is its form:
And it should be ignited in the fire until it heats up and sends sparks, and then it should be placed on the water part, with the patient standing upright. And thus cauterize that area with three round water cauteries.
And let that area rest for three days; then, cover that spot with bandages and let the opened wound heal properly for many days; and treat that area with ointment until it is healed.
Albucasis: or, children, of this type of cautery we have used few for the sake of examining them, and for this reason we have found those that watch over them.
Consolation to those who suffer from large cauteries, and finds the place of pain for them.
Consolation for the cautery with medicines attached is that you make two circular holes in each, through which the steam of iron water escapes; and the length of the part on the patient should be about two or perhaps three times this size.
And if the space which is between each part has the amount of thickness of the iron rod; and place them under and above each other, and make sure they contain one within another according to this form:
And place the patient's foot in the water part with them standing upright, and press your hand on the water part; then take hot water and pour it between the two circles, making sure its quality is with a small fire, and let that be for an amount of one hour, and make the patient endure the biting sensation - as if they were being bitten by fire - until the biting sensation ceases.
And then lift your hand to the instrument and wipe off the hot water from all of the water with lukewarm water.
And let that area rest for three days and place a poultice over it where the color of the healing is intensified, and let this be done for several days, then the body will run off from the patient; this comes at the end in youth.
And treat that area with ointment until it is healed.
And if the pain extends into the thigh or chest, make the patient stand in a position containing water as is done for water cautery.
And this is the method of iron water, and I have already written about it in the treatise on the rectification of medicines. Recipe of alkali and ash not completely extinguished in equal parts one-third each, mix them with a new wave where the part left is pierced through a small rod, according to the amount that fits into your fire.
And place the bottom of this wave another wave in such a way that it sends water over the live alkali and ash with lukewarm water which catches them as wide as your finger, and when you squeeze these between your hand for good pressure, let the steam that comes out from the sharp water of the part left to the new wave.
And then adjust all that water, and pour it over live ash and new alkali, where this will have strong acidity from the moment on, which is administered in operations of medicine and in cauterization of other limbs, this operation being done with fire.
And some medicines among which there is a large cauterization, as with thyme vinegar and honey and ash in water that should be mixed.
And as for the treatment of a man from antiquity in terms of surgery and healing, which is used to heal pain caused by water and sciatic vein, this method is very effective, and it doesn't require any other kind of treatment, and once healed in one go as described, it makes him feel light on his feet and already feels better in that way.
And it should be taken close to a minty vert, and if there's no vert available, take a recent fig; then mix it with a little water and place it in the water where the pain is, or on the thigh, or on the chest, and let it rest.
And leave it for a duration of three hours or until the patient feels relief from the pain.
And then immerse that in water until the patient's body turns red, and then place it in the sun, where the pain will cease and healing will take place.
And know that one should not use these medicines with cauterization unless it's for the purification of the body.
Consolation from Escorides states that when there's an injury to the vein, it is cauterized; and this is how you perform the cauterization: take wool and soak it in old oil, then place it between the feet and below the knees.
And then take a goat's skin, make it bleed in the fire where it has been burned with charcoal; and place him over the wool, let it stretch while it is being heated. And continue this process, and do not stop doing this until the sensation of gnawing enters the water and rests on the pain.
And this method of cautery is called cattle's cautery.
Chapter 42.
On the treatment for pain in two stages using cautery.
Some pains in two places are caused by several reasons, such as impact or striking or excessive evacuation, and for reasons similar to those, due to the infusion of moist and irritating matter.
And cautery is not like any other; it is made in this single kind which is produced by the discharge of irritant matter.
Then remove the waste from the thigh with fitted pills and make them similar to these, which are made over both sides where there is pain, three lines according to the width of each one; try with tests in each line up to cauterizations or more, depending on the amount that can be tolerated by the patient and its effectiveness.
And this is done with cattle's cautery using a pointed cautery.
And if you want, you can cauterize with three or four cattle's cauteries according to this method:
Chapter 43.
On the treatment for glibesity using cautery.
Some symptoms associated with this disease in young children; and the sign of its commencement in children is that it affects their skin and causes elevation and movement.
And it appears behind the lower part of the back and on the buttocks where it already begins to rise above the other vertebral bones.
And when you do this and want to stop it, then cauterize that with cattle's cautery according to this method: let the cautery touch all parts of the spine equally.
And if you want, cauterize along the circumference of the spine with two or three lines of cattle's cautery. Make the points close together among themselves.
And then treat the area until it is healed with what we have said.
Remember that cautery should not be administered in glibesity which is caused by muscle spasms of nerves.
Chapter 44.
On the treatment for gout and joint pain using cautery.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that permeate every part of the body, and when pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
And how gout caused by cold humors is treated using the method of treatment and not letting the pain recur, then the pains are subjected to cautery.
And this is that you cauterize there, regarding evacuation in the circumference of the joint on the thigh with small cauteries.
And this is how it should be for an olive-shaped cautery, which is its form:
And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. And if the pains spread into the hollows or to other joints, and these symptoms appear, then you should cauterize that above each hollow with three or four cattle's cauteries in total around this olive-shaped cautery.
And if these cauteries are what you need, then cauterize that and do not press too hard with your hand before the cautery only around the circumference of the lesion.
And if the pains enter into both hollows and feet, then administer the cautery that we have said in its chapter.
And if the pains are only in the chest and it is called gout, then puncture along the ribs as they move, puncture on those two lines.
And if the pains remain in the fingers, then puncture along the rib circumference on each wrist and on the thumb of your hand.
And if the pains spread for several days to the elbows or muscles, then cauterize all of those around each helper.
And do not remove the waste from proper regulation and reception of medicines; if proper regulation and heating are done with this cautery, then healing will occur, God help.
Chapter 45.
On the treatment for ruptures using cautery.
When there is rupture in the arteries and saying that the intestines are hanging in front of the belly, and this is how they start doing it, then you should advise the patient to leave his food for the day and use gentle means so that the abdominal opening will close down.
And then guide the patient between your hands on his back, and command him to have his chest so that it may be healed or that you see the belly opening or intestines.
And then return that to your fingers and test the rupture over the bones of the foot with the indication being similar to half of a circle in the lower parts of the body.
And then heat the cautery, which is its form like this:
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors. Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
Then place the cautery over that mark on your hand near the tip of the cautery, and you go inside where you find the veins in the middle of the body; and try again with this position if you have not succeeded in the first attempt to reach the blood vessels.
And observe wisely the condition of the intestine during your cautery procedure, making sure not to burn that section of the intestine as it may cause death or other serious harm to the patient.
And know that when you use the cautery near the blood vessels, do not touch them; otherwise, your operation will not succeed.
And understand that the application of the cautery for children should be delicate according to their size and proportion.
And then care for the site of the cautery for three days with salves until the scab from the burn heals.
And then treat that area with other ointments until it is healed.
And the patient should rest on their back for 10 days until the site and wound are sealed.
And know that you should adjust the patient's diet according to the duration of their healing period; make sure not to force the intestine out during their recovery.
And when it is time to remove after approximately 10 days, then administer medicine properly; keep the patient for another 10 days.
And let them rest from work and enjoy full meals and drink, as well as vigorous activities; when they use this complete regimen of treatment, they will indeed recover.
And I will tell you about the treatment of ruptures in other parts of the abdomen, especially at mealtime, where you should not drink excessively. In this case, cauterize that rupture on the rounded part of the cautery according to his size, as what is drained from the fever would be like the remainder of him; and then treat that with what we have said, and do not adjust it.
And already tell some first that the rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery according to this form, because it is marked with temptation:
and draw a line that extends beyond the width at the waist for the left side of the rupture, and another line above it; then place your hand on a triangular cautery, more so the first cautery is lighter and better.
Chapter XLVI.
On the treatment of twisting (of the intestine).
When pain persists in any limb due to injury or impact that continues for a long time and fails to respond to medication treatment, then know you should treat it with a pointed cautery.
And for the cautery of any member according to its size and proportion, its vitality and development, location of the twist and pain.
So if it is healed by the first cautery, that's good; and otherwise, then apply the cautery again. Given the custom of these pains, they often puncture the limbs near that limb which is closest to them, so know you should treat those with a pointed cautery while ensuring the patient heals completely.
Chapter XLVII.
On the treatment of leprosy.
Some lesions are treated with a large amount of cautery, especially when it results from the decay of phlegm and melancholy.
And when you want to cauterize it, assess whether the leprosy is contagious and treat with what we have said in the division of treatment without delay or hesitation. If you're hesitant about harming the patient, fear that corruption could spread throughout their entire body and cause damage, then cauterize on the head with several cauteries: one in the middle of the head, and another at the back near where the hair ends; treat both on two corns; and one behind, on the base of the neck or spine.
And finish your hand with the cautery for a little while until it starts to form a small suction in the blood vessels, ensuring that any past dislocations are corrected so that the expiration of large vapors is alleviated; cauterize on the mucus according to what is needed.
And if the leprosy has already spread to the patient's body and is clearly manifest, then know that you should cauterize it with those cauteries we have said for the head; apply a cautery on the tip of the nose, two on each eye socket, two on each collar bone, five on the ribs, one large over the hip joints close to the anus, one on the neck, two on each knee, one on each ankle, and another on each heel, on all the muscles, and on both sides of his feet; cauterize it over all the joints mentioned along with arms and legs, and on each of his heels.
And protect yourself from the nerves which are on the foot so as not to harm those.
And some inflammations are treated with a cautery on the bones of the heel and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the intestines.
And know that the more accurately you apply cauteries, the faster and better they heal; and know that the patient does not feel pain in the cautery like in the gums, as long as their body is numbed.
And know that the size of cauteries should vary according to the body parts and joints as determined by the special tools.
And after that, treat the cautery with powdered turtle shell mixed with honey and another treatment until it heals.
Chapter 48.
On the application of cauteries for numbness.
When any limb is numbed or asleep and treated with medicines, plasters, and yet does not heal, then you apply cauteries to that numb limb with cauteries according to the size of the limb or its diminutive.
And let your cautery penetrate only a little into the severity of the condition. And after that, treat it with ointment until it heals.
And some inflammations are treated with a cautery on any numbness which affects the rest and the feet, as well as the spinal columns of both, stimulating the nerves that belong to that limb, thus enhancing the numbness.
Only consider this if someone is knowledgeable about the anatomy of limbs and the exit of nerves throughout the body's moving parts.
Chapter 49.
On the application of cautery to those that are disfigured.
When scars are old and do not improve with some of the ointments of medicine, then you apply cautery to that with a mild cautery according to the quantity of severity of the condition inside. In this way, the whiteness and color of it are enhanced, and its color is changed.
And after that, treat it with turtleshell and lentils mixed with rubbed oil and the leaves of arnica, or with gander's dung or guinea hen dung, each part from one of them, all are mixed together. And then cover a cloth and place it over the area until it heals.
Chapter 50.
On the application of cautery to warts.
When warts start appearing and you want them to stop growing, then apply a circular cautery around it as it is rolled.
And the wise say that it should be treated with an inner cautery in the middle location; however, I do not see this, fearing that it might become infected, as I have seen some inflammations.
And the pus is inner that should be treated with a circular cautery around it as we have said, or with multiple cauteries.
Chapter 51.
On the application of cautery to tumors.
When some tumors take time to mature, and this is due to an excess causing that, or because of the patient's age in decline, having few symptoms, or due to time, and you want to hasten their maturation; then apply multiple small-pointed cauteries around it. And afterwards leave that which will facilitate its maturation.
And if you want the perforation of it with cautery, then ignite that which is the shape of it: and leave it in the middle location of the tumor until the condition penetrates.
And if the cautery in that place which left pus, because the arm's body is relieved; then treat it until it heals.
Chapter 52.
On the application of cautery to ulcers.
Ulceration is a spreading corruption in the limb, which eats away at it as wood burns when a live twig is set on fire.
So if you see that ulcer in the place that undergoes cautery by fire, then ignite small and large pointed tumorous cauteries as appropriate for the place where the corrosion is.
And after that, treat it from every part until you eradicate all the corrosion without harming any cause of it.
And after that, leave that for three days, and place over the areas treated with oil mixed until all the scabs have been eradicated and all corrosion is gone.
And after that, treat it with meat-generating ointments.
And if within three days the healthy meat grows in that which is not corrupted, it's good; but otherwise, then you should reapply the cautery to those that are destroyed in the affected areas.
And corrosion is treated with some days using a sharp medicine, which is half in the location of cautery. However, applying cautery by fire is for minor ulcers that heal quickly.
And I have already mentioned the treatment with sharp medicine in the division, so take that when you find it necessary for its use.
Chapter 53.
On the application of cautery to nodules and other similar conditions.
Inflammations that affect the parts of the malaise body which are called clau, and it is a large cause, inserted deep inside causing pain in the chest; applying cautery to those is done in two ways: by fire cautery and by heated water cautery.
Light the cautery with fire and heat up the point of the cautery like a needle, which is made of iron according to its capacity to contain the entire part, and it should have thin grooves.
Then place that heat on the tip, and then rotate your hand around the cautery within the groove of the tip, so the heat reaches to the depth of the tip. Leave it for three days until blisters start forming. Then cover that with salvedge leaves impregnated in salt, and leave the plaster on it for a night, until that rash is eradicated.
Then cure the area with meat grease ointment until it heals.
And if they are not converted, and spots that heal occur on the surface of the body, especially on the chest and feet, then you should apply with hot cauteries in water. Take a piece of iron or a needle point, place it over the spot; add some water to the container, take a small amount of boiling water, hold your hand, rotate it slightly with your fingers, press the edge of the container on the rash of the spot, and allow the boiling water to penetrate through the center of the boil; let the patient endure the bite of the hot water for an hour, then remove it. As soon as the spot heals, that is eradicated from the body.
And do this with those and another one next to each other, until you cover all of them in the body.
Then treat those abscesses that are eradicated from the body by using the ointments that cause meat to regenerate.
Chapitre 53.
On cautery of tremor.
When there is a tremor due to friction on the nerves or through fever caused by friction, or through another similar cause, you should apply a series of four or five cauteries or around the vertebrae of the back, between each vertebra having one cautery; and on the feet, you have a single cautery, and over the stomach, you have an olive-shaped cautery.
And the patient's tremors subside as their health improves with friction massage.
Chapitre 54.
On cautery of accidental damage to the body.
When there are ruptures in the body, and pus-filled channels that are made of corrupted thick matter; thus, at the beginning when they appear, it should be treated by applying cautery over all parts of the fistula with a thin, sharp stick that is heated like fire; or with long rods of lithology; or with a lentil-shaped cautery.
And some blisters are cauterized during the beginning of their expulsion according to this method; they are not hardened, and they break up excesses, doing so on those, and it heals them.
However, you should ensure that this is accompanied by the evacuation through phlebotomy.
Chapitre 56.
On cautery for inflammation due to the cut of an artery.
When there is inflammation from the cut of an artery that should bleed out, or if you need to make cuts for abscesses or on body parts, then do so carefully, and it becomes difficult to stop that.
And when this happens with another one, then you wrap your fingers around the opening of the artery, and place them on that spot where you have just applied strength to those blisters, so that it stops the flow of blood left there, without causing it to come out.
Then place the olive-shaped hot cauteries for few and large ones, in number many, and blow on those until there are flames.
And then take one small or large depending on the location and wound where the artery has ruptured, over that vein blowing vigorously as soon as you have stopped your action, and apply the cautery so that it is reduced and confined to that blood flow.
And if the blood is expelled from the opening of the artery when you stop your action and remove the cautery, then take another one from among those heated cauteries prepared in the fire, and thus do not cease doing this one after another until the blood flow is restricted.
And be careful not to burn the nerves that are here, and that brings other harm to the patient.
And know that when blood flows from the artery, it is not possible to restrict this flow in these cases, especially if the artery is large, unless with one of four methods: or you use a cautery as we mentioned, or extraction when it's not extracted, which happens when it's extracted and its extremities are burned leading to restricted blood flow; or they're treated by oil or paste due to their stiffness or tightness, or they are laid with medicines whose virtue is to restrict the blood flow; and they are strengthened with powder during proper restriction.
Use what helps to properly restrict the patient with paste and stiffness by means of burning causes or similar methods, do not use anything else but the correct method.
If this needs to be done with something else and the doctor or medicine is not present, then apply the method we have described on that vein opening as we mentioned, and understand making great restriction within the wound so that the blood flow stops from most parts of the wound, and over the artery do not allow it to bleed; and make sure that you sprinkle water rubbed with large coldness over it until the blood coagulates and thickens; and then decide based on what is necessary for cautery or medicine.
From incisions, puncturing, suction, phlebotomy, plagues and their appearances.
We have discussed in the first chapter all the illness related to the application of a burning cautery and certain medicinal remedies, along with the opportunities and causes thereof, and the instruments necessary for those applications; I have organized the chapters concerning the anatomy of the head up to the feet.
I will proceed in this chapter with that specific treatment, so as to alleviate the suffering of whoever has requested it, regarding what they have demanded.
And before I begin this, listen carefully, son, because in this chapter we will delve into what is done in the first chapter on cauterization.
And for you to be cautious, remember that in this operation which is part of this chapter, various evacuations are performed such as the application of salt in the place where life can be endangered by pouring over the vein or making an incision on the abscess or area of pus removal or purging of the plague or extraction of a splinter or making a cut for the skin and their appearances. And all these are accompanied by fear, trembling, and in their worst case scenario, death.
And I warn you that this should not happen to you in the case of illness, some practices must be followed regarding diseases as they are for men. And among them is one who will suffer from his illness and it's only mild death awaits him, also due to the intensity of what he finds in his illness, and because of the prolonged illness, there is fear which means death.
And among those is the one who gives you this advice and tells you to hope for their health, and their illness is harmful.
And therefore do not consent to someone who approaches you like this one; your caution should be greater than desire and your greediness; and do not presume any cause over this without a certain science that verifies what you must know, which brings sensible consequences.
And use in the treatment of all your illnesses with prediction and indication towards which health is transformed, where in that it is an aid for you regarding acquisition of fame and memory, of praise and glory.
Oh, children, God inspires His wisdom in you and does not withhold direction and protection from you, which is in His hands.
And I have organized this chapter in sections according to chapters following the one on cauterization, for dealing with illnesses from the head down to the feet, so that you may be relieved of what you request and what you need.
First chapter.
On the treatment of water that is contained in a child's head.
Know that this illness mostly affects children, and when the baby's strength reaches the child's head, it will subside.
And some cases are due to a hidden cause which is not known.
I have only seen this illness in children; and for all of them that I have seen, death comes, which is why it seems to me like an abandoned work among those.
I have seen a child with the head full of water, and his head was always so magnificently large that it could not contain itself due to the size of his head, and more than the humidity increased within which fire would result in death.
And this moisture either accumulates between the bone and the skull, or accumulates outside on the skull.
And in that case if the moisture is between the bone and the skull and the abscess is small, then you should make an incision at the mid-point of the head along a fissure across its width, and let the length of the fissure be two fingers deep where the moisture flows. This is the shape of the spout:
And if the moisture is more increased and the abscess is larger, then here are two incisions as follows:
And if the moisture is outside of the skull, the sign of it is that you open the head's seams from all directions and water squirts out when you press that with your hand on those inner parts, not this that you hide. And if you make incisions in the middle of the head along three fissures as follows:
Then extract all the moisture; strengthen the incisions with bandages and padding; cover that above with vinegar and oil on the fifth day, then stretch the muscles and cure the wound with salves and ointments, strengthen the head with equality; eat the illness with dry meat of little humidity so that the member is comforted and healed.
And there is another method for making an incision that takes into account the size of the abscess and collection of water, where some cases are more in the back of the head or on the front part or on the right or left; therefore, pay attention to the location of the abscess and accumulation of water, and do this as best suits you.
And observe that don't cut the artery and let flows of salt and dry up illness through that flow of salt for evacuation of moisture.
Second chapter.
When sickness or pain occurs in the mouth or in the body and if it is long-lasting, and does not benefit from the treatment of medicines, then this is the main treatment for these two arteries.
And indeed when you wish to cut into those that the patient directs as their head, and properly rubs the place with a hard cloth so that the arteries appear, and properly strengthen the neck of the patient with some cloth; and properly consider where the pulse is; and the places above the places which are close to the ears are depressed, and they do not necessarily appear in some people.
And properly press onto the artery as if trying to pierce it, and properly cut into each from the tip of each sharp part until you enter the mouth, and do this according to the width of the head.
And if you wish, insert the needle into the artery and twist it where they intersect with the parts above them.
And make the length of the cut two digits in proportion, so that when any vein is cut, the beat is interrupted at its exit, which jumps back and forth frequently.
If the artery does not appear upon probing, then measure from the ear the quantity of space three digits, and properly press as if trying to pierce it, and enter into the mouth.
And whatever that removes from the pulse is a quantity of blood one part. And strengthen the flow if it is more or less blood than that, and all of this depends on the quantity that appears from the vitality of the patient and the fullness of the artery.
And properly consider the wound, and therefore if there remains on the bone any cause of pus, then cut that so as not to produce a boil.
And properly strengthen the wound with plasters and with strips of cloth bandage, and properly treat that with grease until it heals.
Third chapter.
Regarding the extraction of arteries which are in the temples.
When an old headache or intense pain occurs in the temples due to moisture and quality in those pains, or a hot headache that resembles those, if it is not treated with the methods of medicine treatment, then we resort to these illnesses: extraction of arteries in the temples or cautery on those as we have shown.
The method of the operation and extraction of those is that the patient directs their skin where it's in the temples; and understand the artery noticeable in the temple which is shown by its pulse, and it's hidden only in few people due to the intensity of rubbing.
And if it's hidden from you, then strengthen the neck of the patient with some cloth; and properly rub the area with a hard cloth or evaporate the area with hot water until the artery manifests itself clearly. And then you take the needle of which this is the form: And properly you prick the artery under that with ease until you reach it; and properly let blood flow into it and extract from there at the outer parts as soon as you remove from that what is in the artery, and uncover those of the tunics which are left from that, for all parts.
If the artery is delicate, then wrap it at its extremity with the tip of a thorn, and properly cut out one part according to the quantity by which its extremities extend and are contracted, and do not allow blood flow, for if they are not cut open, the pulse will not rise at all.
And properly remove a quantity of blood one part. Inside three parts.
And if the artery is large, then properly make that in two places with double strength at each or with cords long, and do not leave it to rot before the healing of the wound and do not allow flow of the pulse.
And properly cut off the excess which is between two strips; do this either at that time or soon afterwards.
And if you wish, cauterize that with a cautery inside the mouth with an operating knife until its extremities are cauterized, and stay in place for this half-finished operation.
And it's better to work this way if the patient has fever or is of cold constitution; since the cautery comes from those causes that help in dissipating moisture, and therefore it's better for youth.
And properly consider the extraction of arteries that you make at the usual place on the neck, they should be placed over its dirty dust appropriately made, and properly treated with dry medicines to let the skin regenerate and within it until it heals.
And if during your work another opening occurs and blood flow from the artery happens, then you should restrain that blood flow, or with a cautery, or filling in the place of the cut, and strengthen your hand until the blood is restrained. And if none of those causes is present, then place your hand on the spot where the pain is concentrated, and immerse that area in water with strong coldness inside it until the inflammation rests, and strengthen it as long as it lasts.
And when pus is found during the extraction of an artery, you should use a cautery on the vein with this method: have two knives ready for the cautery. Since you have heated both ends, then place them gently in water until they cool and cut through the vein at two points, so that it can be extended where it meets the extremities, which are not fully hardened by this cautery.
And this is how to use the cautery:
And let the heat of both knives be equal. However, if your skill allows for both knives to be very hot like two heated points, and they touch the flesh at their hottest without cutting through it too quickly.
So when there's some swelling in those cases, the heat of the fire is applied to them and the flesh is cut lightly.
And this method is better for all operations and even the slightest ones.
And let the distance between the two knives be equal to the thickness of the object being worked on.
End of chapter.
Of treating bodies affected by sharp, acidic tears in the eyes.
When there are acidic tears, and the body is affected by veins located above the nose that swell up, and no medicine cure for this condition exists. The patient's face has already reddened, walking around in their room as if it were a group of ants, their eyes are exhausted, wet to the point that their skin seems familiar, their eyelids are scratched due to the sharpness of the tears. The old methods involve treating these conditions with operations like this one, and they also include passing the cure through this method.
And you instruct the patient to scratch the skin on their forehead, and then proceed to make three equal-distance incisions along the length of the forehead. And if the length of the incision is two thumbs: one incision should be equally distant from the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, the second according to the length of a small movement of the tears that are in the lacrimal area, and the third on the other side.
And be careful of the beginning of the arteries that are in two sides, and extend your hand from the continuation of both jaws. And if the space between each incision is equal to three thumbs adjusted together.
And if you have a piece of sponge or dry fabric, place it moistly under the area where the pain is.
And then insert the pointed ends of two sharp points; this is how the incision should look: it's from one-third to halfway into the second incision. Scrape all the way down the line between two incisions towards the middle of the face which is above the bone, and then make this same incision move halfway into the second incision. And then cut through this point and place another instrument in the first incision, a tool which is called a scalpel, sharp on one side and not so on the other.
And hold the sharp part you should grasp the connected flesh, and the line inside the bone, place it in that way until it reaches the incision on the other side, then cut all the veins going down from the head to the eyes.
And continue this incision up to that part of the line, and do this also in the central incision between the other incisions.
And when there is an equal amount of blood flowing due to pain, squeeze out the areas with the accumulated blood masses.
And then pause at each incision with a little salt, place those burned powders in vinegar and oil and vinegar mixtures, make sure not to create an abscess.
And on the third day, dissolve the mixture and administer large quantities of warm water or tea, then proceed to treat it with basil oil and others in between where the wounds have healed.
End of chapter. V.
Of treating tears by cauterization and the eyes that descend from the internal parts of the head.
When applied to an artery and continued with heat, and sometimes the eyes of the patient are exhausted, their vision is blurred, and their eyelids are inflamed along with their cheeks. The skin beneath the head also experiences sharp pain leading to extreme discomfort; then understand that these incidents indicate that the substances and cauterizations come from vein particles within the organs.
And the best cure for these is this: instruct the patient to raise their forehead, then make an incision in it at the middle of the forehead, a little smaller than the width (start from the left temple's incision into the right temple; and let the incision go through the bone; extend your hand until the bones under the jaw are revealed).
Dry out all the pus with a sponge or dry cloth and then fill in between the two lips of the incision with salt or a cloth. And then apply over that with powders burned in vinegar and oil to prevent the formation of a cauterized abscess.
And when you release this and see that the pustule has already diminished, then guide your hand into where it begins in his birth flesh, and place your hand near to cure with an excretory regulation which makes the flesh secrete, as if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of poppy paste and mix them, and from these make a poultice which is applied to these wounds at the site of natural origin of the flesh.
"Capitol .vi." likely refers to a specific section or part within the document that might discuss about the 'capitol', possibly referring to the brain or head as historically some texts used the term 'capitol' for parts of the body, especially in medical writings. The '.vi.' is probably an ordinal indicator denoting this is the sixth part of such discussion. Without more context, it's hard to provide a more detailed interpretation.
Translation:
Translation:
Translation: Translation:
Translation:
Translation:
Translation: Translation:
Translation: Translation:
Translation:
Translation: Translation:
Translation: Translation:
Translation:
Translation: Translation:
Translation: Translation: Translation:
Translation:
Translation:
In the extraction of worms produced in the ear, when you treat it with what we said in the division and in the treatise on distillations, do not let your treatment go wrong, otherwise look at the ear to the sun.
And therefore if any cause of the worms appears here, then extract that one from its place or from the subtle ones, but if no cause appears, then take an opening and make it large, as this is the form of it: And insert the subtle extremity into the ear according to the quantity which the patient can tolerate; and then suck through that by strong suction, and do these punctured actions, so that all the worms may be forced out.
And if you do not follow my advice with the application, then press and close on the circuit of the tube with wax as we have said; then administer distillations which have already proven effective in treating worms, and refer to these in the treatise on distillations.
And if your effusion is to which you will pour the medicinal oils in the ear with this utensil, as it is its form: And make that of silver or of reed, let it be hollowed out, in which there should be a small hole, and on the side.
And therefore as long as there is something inside the cavity of the tube of continence here that needs to be present. And if you wish, take the rod and wrap it around the descending extremity of the crotch, and then pour oil into the cavity of the earlobe, or juice from some herb, or whatever you want from these medicines in the tube - and that is in the ear - and then insert the rod in the crotch and press on the oil inside until the oil is expelled into the cavity of the earlobe and the patient feels oil internally.
And whatever is inserted in the ear should already be heated by fire, a little. And remember that the cause which you will distill in the ear should not be too hot, for the medicines of the ear do not tolerate this.
Capitol VII.
Of treatment for inflammation of the ears.
Some boils that form on their children's bellies do not penetrate, and this happens sometimes in some people, inflammation inside the earlobe due to an infection or without much flesh there; and this inflammation is performed within the border of the ear canal which does not admit moisture, and some boils are performed outside the parts.
And that which happens at its beginning, which does not allow moisture in, is within the more difficult to heal dispositions.
And in that one where you can reach moisture, know that you should place the ear of the patient to the sun and look at it. And if you notice an evident inflammation, open it with a subtle spatula as this is its form:
If the extremity of it in which there is a small breadth, one part being sharp and the other not; and the spatula should be of two lemon widths on each side that it does not hurt the ear.
And if the inflammation is due to no flesh in the ear or within its substance, then prepare it with small onions and allow that to penetrate completely into the flesh.
And if the inflammation is at the front of the earlobe, then take a small lemon rod and heat it by fire for a little bit, and then place that in the substance of the ear.
And if you have sensed inflammation through the difficulty of hearing, relieve the oppression for them with ease; and remember not to harm the nerves in the ear.
And then place a bandage on the ear according to the width of the canal which you have wrapped in Egyptian oil; do this for several days until you are sure of the healing of the sore; or take something and immerse it in water, grind it with salted meat juice, and use it; and if you see that the ear is already swollen, then know that you should discard that thing and replace it with another thing which you wrap in lint that is made from rubbed oil, so that the pus may be drained out; and then treat it until it heals.
And if there is blood discharge, then immerse the sponge or cloth in warm water and place it over the ear, and use another treatment that thins out the blood discharge, which is mentioned in the treatise on distillation.
Capitol VIII.
Of the treatment of adhesions that occur to the eyelids.
The adhesions that occur to the eyelids of some people are moistened, while some boils remain dry.
Then know that you should have them with small knives or with needles, and separate those with spatulas from their roots, and then place them on the sites with salted meat juice.
And if there is pain with blood discharge, then you should apply a cautery to those with the thin plectrum.
And the best cautery is to have the incisions and boil discharges return whenever there remains some cause of their roots; and when they are burned with fire, those roots burn and do not recur.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
Treatment for swelling that comes to the eyelids of the animals.
Causes that cause swelling in the eyelids of animals, there is an assembly which manifests in their largeness and hardness, and due to its largeness it is called.
And it's the addition of large moisture on the eyelid leaves and above.
So the operation on them is that you should understand if the largeness arises in them from what comes out of the eyelid and expands everywhere; and the cause of it is minor.
So make an incision across that width, and then carefully expose all parts of it inside to allow the removal, and suspend that with hooks and remove that.
And if the size is large, then you adjust it with suture; and treat that until it heals.
And if it's little, there won't be harm for that, because the loss from it restores that and heals.
And if the largeness declines to the inner parts of the eyelid, then you keep the surface inside, so lift that eyelid and suspend that largeness with hooks, another that you use for suture, press it from all sides, and if the eyelid is elongated by suturing, then this will not be noticeable for any reason.
And at the suture point, wash the animal with salt water; and treat the area until it heals.
Captulo 10.
About the treatment of excision in the eyelid above the animal's face.
Excision is an operation that arises in the tunics of the eyelid above, and especially affects children, exacerbates their condition causing them to suffer from conjunctivitis; and they cannot see the brightness of the sun because their tears flow towards them.
And you should touch those several times on their foreheads continuously, and sleep with them on their foreheads; and wet their eyelashes with tears, which are already swollen and have an appearance of congestion in the eye; and when you press that area with your finger tips, you will feel congestion inside those.
And another method of operation is when the patient puts their head on your hand, and then pulls down the skin and the face with a cautery, makes a circle according to the amount that contains pus from all sides, and then pulls this up over this and presses with your fingers around it so that congestion will accumulate in the middle of the circle, and then cuts halfway into that moisture with a groove across the width, and the incision should not be larger than the incision made in lumbotomia.
And in the procedure you should make a complete cut until you reach the congestion, where after that place pus through the cut according to the shape of whiteness.
Then remove those with cloths which you have enveloped between your fingers from the outer parts, and rotate it between your right and left hand until it is dispersed.
And remember not to press in the incision because at that groove do not reach into the face and remove it.
And if you do not find pus at the beginning of the incision, then press in that incision with a small tool so that pus can flow; and take off that similarly as we said; and then soak cloths from him with water, vinegar and oil, spread them over the area and strengthen those with powder.
And in this way they sprinkle salt and place it in the cavity of the incision so that what is moistened by that moisture disappears.
And then treat it until it heals.
And if an abscess occurs in the area, then treat that with plastered ointments until it heals.
Captulo 11.
About methods of touching the face.
When in the eyelids of animals natural hairs are aligned and old, then they touch the face and cause behaviors such as excessive tears, pallor of the lids and inner cheek where this is a cause of deterioration of the face known as blepharitis of the face, and treatment is done in four ways: or with a cauterizer fire; or with an acute medicine as it was said in the chapter on cauterization; or is done by incision and suture; or through canals according to what I say.
And when you place the head of the animal on your hand; then convert the eyelid of the face to your left hand, if it is converted, then yes; and if not, insert a needle in that where pus exists from the eyelid, and make the needle penetrate into the top, this is - close to the edge of the eyelid where hairs come out - close to the hairs, pull the thread upwards on the parts above the eyelid, and convert it to the ray.
And then cut in the inner part of the eyelid so that natural hairs are tied with an incision down to the major lacrimal duct at the minor lacrimal; and then pull out the needle and place some dust of camphor or cloth on the eyelid, and then cover it with a tent, this is like the shape of a mallow leaf.
However, it is necessary to determine the shape according to the amount of levigation of the eyelid, which has already been diversified in men, and among those who need that a large quantity of the lid be incised according to the amount for which the lid is softened.
And then make the cut along the two lines you have drawn, starting from the larger tear duct into the smaller tear duct. And if your incision is close to natural hairs such as a king's beard.
And then insert the needle in one of the two angles of the chain stitch, and then remove it all over. And adjust the stitches on both lips around the mouth or wooly beard. Clean the wound, and keep any excess hairs from covering the eyebrows if you want to do this, otherwise leave it uncured.
And then suture the stitches with wool within three or four days and treat it accordingly.
And if you want, let the wound's suture dry out, and treat it with what dries and constricts; when you soften the lid, seal off the wound and add to it; however, this suturing is better and so do this for the benefit of many years.
However, with concern for the patient, it is a good operation, and not out of fear.
And there is another way to examine, and that means that the figure on the eyelid resembles a leaf of myrtle, and then lift the eyelid with three needles separated and gathered according to this shape:
If it is not possible to do this, hold the needles, and if this does not match, then take a thread with which you will insert it in the middle of the figure, and place the other hair near the larger tear duct, and the hair near the smaller tear duct, and adjust between your fingers the hairs for equality, and when holding those lift your hand up to that height, lift the entire chain stitch on which it is sewn as we have described.
And then adjust the two lips of the wound with suture, and treat that part that is healed internally.
And if pus occurs you must begin your incision or cut, drain that lump with lint and to it resemble, and with ointment.
And sometimes there are lumps under the eyelid that their hairs should be converted, then cut as we said about incision; however, suturing in some cases is more artificial.
And sewing with needles is according to this shape: And it is that you convert the eyelid and divide the figure inside as I have recounted; then, by art make two needles or two fine threads of which length corresponds to the length of the eyelid and their width resembles that of the stitches. And you have already incised at the extremities of each section, where you have the threads.
And add any that have fineness below what is excessive on the eyelid of the animal, and strengthen the stitches of each section with tightness, and let it sit for a few days. For the chain stitch will die from tightness and be rejected and will fall when you put it back itself.
And if it takes longer, then cut with the tweezers, and then treat the wound that is healing internally.
Therefore, once hardened, the eyelid is raised and the hair does not hurt.
And this is the way to make two needles which you should do according to this shape: And have the length and width of the quantity neither more nor less.
Capitol .xii.
On raising thorny hairs on the animal with forceps when the hair is hard.
When the hairs are unnatural, hard and prickly on the animal, then in this operation with it you take fine forceps and hold onto that tip of each fine one and lion, and adjust its extremities finely without crushing any part. And the length of the threads is as much as a hand.
And then you make another fine thread from it quickly, and if you want, adjust its extremities.
And then place the animal's head in its usual position, close to the sun so that your work may be seen clearly, for this is a delicate and small operation.
And then insert the needle into the hair follicle adjusting it where it needs to be pricked, and make it penetrate the eyelid gently until you extract that above the natural hair.
And then pull the hair inside and insert it into the follicle, with one or two or three hairs and no more.
And then pull your hand into that follicle so that the hair is pulled out from the follicle in the eyelid along with the natural hair.
And if the hair is pulled out along with it and not the hair, you will pull it out along with it from the parts leaving the thread that you have made in this manner, where inside there will be pulled out hair from the root.
And remove that from the animal's view, where then you will pull out the hair and the thread, and cut all and clean the wound, and let the wound heal for two or three days, so that the hair sticks to its place and grows new good flesh.
And if the hair is shorter, then you adjust a long hair of natural hairs, and raise it up to that place or lets it stay in so as to be elongated near some space, and then you raise that.
Title of Chapter XIII.
About the treatment for ahacratir, which manifests on the eyelid above.
When ahacratir is seen, and it is contraction of the eyelid when it tightens around its edge, or on the right or left side, due to bad consolidation of pus, blood clot or cautery, it is called leporine. This ahacratir is either natural or accidental; it is caused by consolidation of pus, blood clots, or cauterization, or by similarity in their symptoms.
The method of the operation for the patient is as follows: you should cut open that consolidation and separate the labia from him. Place a piece of linen cloth in the area between those two parts, and tie them together until they heal.
And do not cover the patient with any treatment that dries and constricts. If you perform such treatments, ahacratir can worsen much more than it was before at any time.
Use remedies that soften such as fennel, and soak them in water with a piece of linen cloth, or apply almond oil, which should be mixed with some oils and then immerse the cloth in it. Treat with this preparation.
And the key to your treatment is that you should puncture all chambers that are not consolidated according to the form it was at the beginning.
And this operation that we have described is simply a correction of ahacratir which does not return to the original shape as it was before.
Title of Chapter XIV.
About the treatment for ahacratir which occurs in the eyelid above.
This ahacratir which occurs in the eyelid above is called vertically ahacratir; it can be either a natural one for the patient, or an accidental one.
An accidental ahacratir is caused by pus, cuts, cauterization, or other similar conditions.
The method of the operation for this is to take a needle with a double thread and place it in the skin. Then you should make it pass through the left lacrimal into the right, so that the thread reaches both ends of the skin.
And then extend the skin to the sides on the needle and hold it against the needle, and cut open the wide space. And then if the eyelid returns to its original shape as expected, it is good; otherwise, take out the thread and hold it at the cut edge, and by doing this reshape the eyelid, making both cuts on the left side of the eyelid.
And let the ends of the two cuts be at the two corners of the incision area that you made inside where they meet, and make an angle among them so that when they come together it forms their figure.
And this figure is the Greek letter lambda ().
And then remove that amount of skin which corresponds to the length of the tip of your finger on one side of it, so as to flatten the eyelid.
And then adjust the separated parts and sew those with the thread of wool; and then treat those with the remedies we have said for softening medicines and bandages so that they heal.
And if vertical ahacratir occurs due to a cut, stitch, or cauterization, you should open it with a flat incision on the skin of the eyelid according to what has been described previously. And then separate with the bandage between two layers as we have said.
In the total discussion of treating ahacratir when it is above or below, the operation proceeds according to how ahacratir is prepared in the form of various spots.
And skilled artisans always prepare chambers in every manner that is possible for the patient so as to make it return to its natural shape or close to it, and the patient according to what suits him from the operation and tools in their best arrangements.
Title of Chapter XV.
About the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
When this consolidation happens in middle-aged men, so that the eyelid sticks more above the white of the eye, and prevents ease of movement and natural actions, it is necessary to insert the tip of your finger under the eyelid, lift it up on one side, or extend it towards the nose.
And then you make a slight incision for the adhesion to the thin space underneath, which is not at the sharpness of the cuts, having an obtuse edge so that the patient does not feel disturbed by the operation, and leave the tissue without damaging the eye's sharpness.
And let your incision be such that it removes that adhesion with ease, returning the eyelid to its natural shape and allowing total healing of the adhesion.
And then put salt water in your eye, or distil it from juniper dissolved in water.
And then separate between the eyelid and the eye with bandage on him, place wool infused in egg white on your eye, and for several days use remedies that consolidate until it heals.
Capitol. XVI.
Of the causes of inflammation and the prominence of flesh in the tear ducts.
Know that gout comes in two ways, either it is nervous, resembling a thin hard tissue; or it is non-nervous, resembling white moisture that has coagulated. When you touch this, or it causes swelling there, it makes that swell up like an onion, and when it's removed, the onion does not remain with it.
And both of these species do not begin until within the larger tear duct where it grows slowly, covering the view and preventing light and movement.
The way to operate in the case of it is that the patient holds their head in its place, and then opens their eyes, lifting the eyelid with your hand, and then removes the gout like a thin onion layer and extends that up to the parts above. And then take an awl and insert it into that with a piece of horse or bull or cow hide, or one resembling, or from a strong beast, or double the tip of the awl gradually and place that in the middle of the gout, penetrating that to the needle, and fix that at its end; and extend that upwards, and scrape under the skin around the tip of the gout which severs the pupil. And continue following that into the hair under the back of it.
And then cut the remainder in the recess of the tear duct through a thin slit or with small cuts, and leaves the flesh of the tear duct natural so that by operation of this does not cause continuous weeping.
And sometimes the gout extends under the sun's onion or from its root, as we have said, and then it is excised through a long slit which this is the shape of it:
And remember that when you are on the slit do not touch the corneal membrane and that it avoids in it rupture, and that the pupil is pierced.
And during the operation it affects in the eye a little of salted or cooked meat from a pig, and leaves that inside another day; and then treat that with water that covers until it is healed.
And if the gout is not nervous and you cannot insert the needle in that under the onion, then this type of gout heals with medicines, and it is treated like this as I have said and recommended in this section.
And if you want to cut that out, then open the eye of the patient and make a long slit with an incisive blade according to this form: with subtlety. And if you notice that it is thinned and mixed up and spreads into that recess, then distil from your mouth in the eye of cooked pork meat or in a hog's head or in salted meat, and apply the eye inside another day.
And then iteratively perform the operation until all that is from you has been removed, but if instead pus appears in the eye, then leave it and treat the pus inside until it is healed.
And repeatedly perform your operation on that at reason until it is healed.
The prominence of the tear flesh, if noticed in the eye due to great damage, is suspended under the onion; and cut a part from that at each time, and do not finish the operation so as not to cause weeping.
And then distil over the tear duct with hog's head meat and cooked pork until it is healed.
Capitol. XVII.
Of the operation of eyelid enlargement and what is born from adjusted flesh in the eye.
Some swellings in the eyelids of some are born from cooked flesh, and it is over-stretched to cover the pupil, or approaches or strengthens against the eyelashes, causing the eyelashes to press against the parts forward and is assembled to rub against the mullions.
The operation on it is that the patient holds their head in place; and then open the eyelids of that and gather all that flesh with convenient onions for water, and hold that with forceps or pincers; and then cut the flesh at the beginning until everything ends with the scissors, and remember not to let go that you must perform your operation.
And make your cut like the one in which you cut those or with a narrow slit as we have recommended in the operation of gout, or with small cuts where they collect scales according to how it comes close to this chapter.
Then when your operation is complete and all that flesh has been removed, then fill the eye with salted meat, or distil in it powdered pork meat and resembling those of corrosive medicines, and place over the eye outwardly cut with egg white until pus is assured.
And if there is any cause of eyelid enlargement and it has been removed by cautery, and you fear pus will appear, then leave the eye and treat that pus with water that softens that pus, and then repeatedly perform surgery on that at reason until it heals, similarly do this to the adjusted flesh which happens in the eyelids of this species.
However, you must understand that all healing of the eye with through natural or accidental means operates by fire, and do not put your hand in any of these operations until this member suffers from that operation.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
From the collection of arrows in the wound.
Arrows injure veins which are obstinate in the wound and prevent blood circulation, they also cause inflammation of the wound along its length for days.
So it is necessary for the consumption that you consider if the wound in which there is an arrow is strong and in it there is no other illness than the arrow, then you remove that arrow.
And you command the patient to put their head in your place, and suspend those veins with one ounce or two according to your judgment; and that one ounce of fine duplication is as follows:
or gradually from two ounces in a single object as follows:
And those veins should be suspended with fine strings, with thinness, and remove the wound bit by bit, while you observe those veins to swell from the wound and become retracted.
And remember that you do not let the wound touch the extremities of the stump; and if your operation is in mid-morning facing the sun, and are steadfast in your operation, that you only cut those veins.
And when you have completed, then in the wound you distill vinegar or wine so that its acidity will corrode what has swollen from the arrow.
If it's not possible for you to remove everything in that hour, then cover everything with what relieves the pain of them, and let them rest for a few days until their pain is soothed and the pus pocket has been confirmed.
And then treat them as per the customary methods until they are healed.
And this is the form of the hammers:
Chapter 19.
Regarding the reduction of hernias to the nose.
When you treat hernias with a cautery or with quick burning medicine according to the description of them and they are not healed, then it is not good for them in any way but you must make cuts over the pus pocket waiting for its maturity, and remove all the moisture that is in them until you discover the opening, then place your hands when exposed to discover the bone.
And therefore, once you have discovered the bone and see corruption or blackness in it, then you treat them with an herb of which this is the form:
And it is called aspice cap, and it is made of iron, and the head should be red like an apple also so that when you make it pierced by the point of a file or finely ground (as shown in the following form).
Place that over the corrupted area of the bone, and then move it between your fingers, and press your hand little by little until you know that the corruption has been removed.
And this should be done with some passes, and then restore the area with drying causes and coagulative agents.
And if the area is consolidated and you have a good cut in them, and it is removed from the source of disease for forty days, and it does not renew itself and there is no pus pocket and no incident occurs in them, then you will know that they are healed.
And if not, then it is not in them but to reduce the crack to the shape of the nose, and according to this manner: you should discover from second bone or with acute medicine, and when you have discovered the bone, then take possession as follows:
Let the end of your iron be triangular, and the shaft of it is primarily thinned inside to the extremity as shown here.
And then place that over the bone, and it should be near the lacrimal; and extend your hand a little inside the wound, and then rotate your hand in the area until it penetrates all the bone, and they feel the patient through this when you touch their hand.
And then restore the area with stictic drying medicines as one should do.
And when the flesh and the area have hardened, then the matter which flowed to the parts goes back to the nose, therefore that is minor pus over the patient.
Chapter 20.
Regarding the reduction of swelling in the wound.
When the wound swells up to its entirety and does not cause harm or diminution, then you should release the patient, and follow them as they continue, and blow many times on their neck in front of the incision and allow good exhalation; and then place liniment over the wound which is made of garlic and aloe and vinegar and powdered saffron, and cover it with plaster powder on the wound.
The method of the powders is that you take cloths made from powdered lemon, and each cloth should be divided into four parts; then make them.
And place those one on top of the other according to the quantity that the wound needs. And then strengthen them with a firm bandage; and apply the suction cups to the suction in front of the incision; and take off the suction cups and let the wound stretch for the day and night.
And if meanwhile the ligament becomes softened, then you should keep it strongly tightened.
And hold the ligament tightly day and night as we have said.
And if you see the heat already reduced, that's good, and if not, then apply repeatedly the plaster with the powders and the compression and the suction cups inside until it is healed.
Chapter XXI.
On the emergence of the prominence of the uveal membrane.
When disruption occurs in the uveal membrane, and then it becomes prominent like a slight swelling under the eyelids, similar to the start of an inflammation. Its shape resembles that of an individual, henceforth known as such. If you want to proceed with this operation, here's how we recommend doing it: You will enter the needle into the area of the uvea at the point you left off from below and then another at a place where there is double thickness at the lacrimal part, have that needle penetrate and smooth out the first needle according to its position; subsequently cut the area corresponding to the double eyelid and lift up that part of the uvea into the groove of the needle, and reinforce that movement.
And then remove the needle and place it on top of the heated woolen thread in the aqueous humor, allowing it to settle inside until the thread is submerged by the vitreous humor.
And then treat the heat with water that will ensure that thing stays in place while the injury heals.
And sometimes the healings gather from all parts around the circle of cloth near the heat prominence large, and then it is pierced with a subtle pin that reaches to the root of the heat, and drain the phlegm moisture, and descend the heat and come in shortly.
And reinforce until it heals.
Chapter XXII.
On the treatment of conjunctivitis.
This illness known as conjunctivitis is nothing but an inflammation that occurs in the eye like water flowing out, and it is not that one.
The method of treatment for this condition involves having the patient lie down on the padded surface and straighten their head, placing your hands at both ends as you observe where the inflammation seems to be spreading towards the previous areas. Then ensure it dries up without descending further, keeping the light constant; the patient observes these developments as they happen.
And if it doesn't descend below, know that it is water.
And if it is not ready for the descent of the inflammation as we have mentioned, then have the patient lie between your hands and take a subtle needle to place upon the skin, piercing through to slightly cut into the conjunctiva membrane at the corneal part (into the location you see), so that the inflammation comes out.
Once it is released, then you apply a distilled water caud to the eye in which you have mixed honey or water in which you already cooked fenugreek and honey.
And then treat all the other causes until it heals.
Chapter XXII.
On the treatment of descending water in the eye.
We have already mentioned the types of water in the division and which one is suitable to pierce during the declaration of symptoms, then use that type according to their health condition.
Then have the patient lie down between your hands on a mattress and hold their head steady.
And then place your right hand near the eyelid of their eye, if it's the eye with water in it is the left eye; or with your right hand, if the eye is the right one.
And with your right hand take garlic if the eye is on the left side; or with your left hand if the eye is on the right.
And then press the end of garlic near the crown by the thickness of the ray in the aqueous humor's part from the nasal tear duct, and then peel garlic with its skin and turn your hand towards it.
And then penetrate into the aqueous humor and feel that garlic has reached the cause of sight due to its presence.
And when the length of garlic's path to its root matches the size of the space from the pupil to the edge of the darkness, this is the boundary of the eye; you will see the pupil with eye visibility due to the clarity of the corneal membrane.
And then place garlic into the area where there is water, and press it down slightly once or twice. If the water descends immediately, then have the patient lie on their back with their eye open towards the garlic in their eye.
And then take a slight pause; if the water has descended, then remove that press before garlic gets heated.
And when it's heated and doesn't descend, then extract garlic easily, turn your hand slowly, dissolve a little bit of clear salt from gemstone in water and with that wash the inside of the eye; then place wool soaked in pressed oil and aqueous humor outside the eye to cool.
And it's best for those of our time to take a brief respite while eating something on top of the aqueous humor.
And if you don't feel your garlic inside the eye due to its hardness - which is typical for some individuals whose eyesight is hard - then know that you should take the needle called albede, and this is its form:
And then pierce that conjunctiva with it, and don't end your hand on the teeth, but rather make a path to where garlic is located deeply.
And then insert the needle as we have said.
And you should prepare the patient's bed so that they sleep on their back in a dark room, and all movements are prohibited.
And place the patient's head naturally so that their body is lined naturally and does not turn to either side.
And let the limbs be placed according to their natural position in the bed for the entire day.
And then move them from one dark mattress to another and expose the cold view, make them see some causes, and later return their limbs back into bed for day VII.
And don't do this at the time of treatments or just before infusion. It is wise for you to avoid doing this so that water can pass very little by great and violent consideration.
If it happens that there is an abscess, then know that you should move the bed before day VII, and correct whatever allows the abscess to form.
Then you should avoid the view of the patient and place your face over their mouth from which their breath is regulated for several days, existing in the dark mattress.
And then gradually get out of that mattress and talk about its causes.
And know that during surgery, the student should avoid seeing some operations, and thus your focus remains on the procedure.
And it has already been reached to us some of those who are in the Artach, and some say that you should make a hole in the perforated magdaam where water can drain.
However, it is not seen here in our land a perfect way, nor has this been written in any of the ancient books; and this could be new.
And these are the forms for the different types of magdaam, in order that one should perform them on those who do not know them:
And they should be made of iron or properly steel, and their extremities are at this level of triangular subtlety, the acute end is like that one, which is the form.
Chapter XXIV.
Regarding the treatment of wounds in the nose.
When there are various types of nasal wounds joined together, and one cause among them is gathered in the weighty matter, or as a polypus on the face; this disease is called a polypus that resembles that face represented. And if it's a cancerous wound, it is reddened, discolored; and of this kind, it is that the wound is lion-like not colored darkly.
So in the one that is in these lion-like wounds that are not fraudulent nor cancerous, know that you should make the patient lie between your cushions and place them under sunlight, breathe their nostrils, and pinch your thumb in those wounds. And then extract it from the forward parts, and then remove whatever you have understood from those at a sharp, subtle point in one part between which you know that all flesh has been exposed; if there is any cause that can be excised from the patient, then cut this with one of the finer instruments so that by cutting this cause escapes. If it happens that you have to drain or an abscess occurs, then stop doing this for the patient; or if it's from malignant abscesses, then you cut and cauterize in there where the excision of the cause can be done, and all cavities are exposed.
And then get out from the nose near the incision area with water or blood. If the nose is open and there's moisture inside the palate from this process, then know that it has already been healed.
If the moisture does not penetrate as you do, then know that inside the patient is flesh with pus in your nose bones where there has been no excision.
So then you should insert a needle into him where there is some lump, and blow in the pus, and pause between each breath with the amount of what was said or monthly, and make the patient blow one end of the needle into their nostril or another cause which might be possible for them.
And after doing this, have them blow their odor into where it reaches the canals of the nostrils, and stand over their mouth, which causes many symptoms in these actions that children do to their ears, and is a slight cause for those who want to do it.
And then pause the two ends of the needle, one end that sticks out over the nose and the other that penetrates into the nose, and apply a bandage to the flesh in the nostrils that are in the needle, do this until you know that the flesh is inside the nostrils of the needle.
And then remove the needle, pause in the nose near the removal of pus with a caulk, and do this for three days or longer until the infection has completely disappeared from all parts of the flesh.
And at the end of the treatment, pause in the nose with a lead cannula for several days until it is healed.
If you are performing a drying cure, use that method.
And this is the form of the device for nasal evacuator which boils oils and medicines in the nose:
And do this with silver or iron which resembles a small open lamp, like a small pot, and its mouth similarly.
And if you want, make a closed tube like a cane, and the tube of the instrument to the cap-purging maker and let it be flat, exposed; on which one hold in the backside of him, where you take it when you dip into his oil or whatever you want from its products and causes that can be extracted.
Chapter XXV
About the mucus at the extremities of the nose.
Blocked mucus is in the extremities of the nose, and this swelling gets bigger or softer within a few days during which one should observe closely.
And for that purpose, you need to introduce it at the beginning of the patient's condition, and release all of that. Then pause over the area or with a cautery or burning medicine which is in place of him.
If his introduction is delayed until it gets bigger, then consider if it's a tumor, hard, of dark color and with little sensation; then don't touch that with iron which is an abscess; the swollen mucus around this abscess must be avoided due to its great malice towards that on which that person was.
And if the abscess is like a lion's touch and not of dark color, and an introduction becomes possible in all that area, then evacuate the patient and introduce that sign fearlessly, and cure the place with what dries out and restricts until it heals.
Chapter XXVI
About stitching the nose, lips and earlobe when the continuity is dissolved by disease or trauma.
Know that if you accidentally dissolve the continuity in one of these cartilages, there is little to do during this operation rather than some men.
So understand, when faced with any cause of those conditions, consider if it is a fresh wound on the patient's hand, and then you adjust both sides of the wound's lips for stitching, and then cure that until it heals.
And if the lips of dissolved continuity are already separated, and each is a healthy part, then know that you should remove every part of its external condition until there is no more pain. Then adjust both lips with stitching and strengthen them; over these sprinkle a handful of dragon's wound on the powder, and place it in strips, then cover that powder with two or three days worth of a drying plaster, or another from among consolidating plasters, and let the bandage rest for those two to three days until the scabs fall off by themselves, and then treat with ointment until it heals.
The way of the stitching is that you add the continuity solution or with needles as we have recommended in stitching the abdomen, or add the continuity solution with wax according to your preference and inform about it.
Chapter XXVII
About extracting those causes that come in the two lips in the parts inside.
Swelling can be seen in swollen men in the parts inside of their lips like hard abscesses resembling lard, and some are softer and others are larger.
So understand that you should convert the lips and each opening of all those hard swellings from every part, then cover the extraction with strips of wax until there is constriction in the wound, and then wash it with vinegar and treat the place with what promotes healing until it heals.
Chapter XXVIII
About introducing the adjusted flesh in the gums.
Much swelling appears above the adjusted flesh in the gum which the ancients called albus; therefore understand that you should suspend this one with a stick or whatever you have for that under it, and introduce it with its root, and let the clean blood or the wound run.
Then pause over the place covered with wax or other powders or stimulants.
And if that flesh returns, then introduce it again, and burn this one; for the burning will not return.
Chapter XXIX
About tooth extraction with iron.
When on the surface of the teeth in the parts inside and in front, and between the gums, hard stumps appear that are yellowed or some swellings are blackened, they cause citron or sourness to occur within which the gum decays, and they cause the teeth to become yellow.
So understand that you should separate the patient's thighs from your servants and place his head in its proper position, remove the teeth where these stumps appear along with similar causes of dirt inside so that no unnecessary cause is damaged, and do this for the blackness, sourness, and others until they are modified.
Then if this is like what happens during the process of extraction, it's good; and otherwise, then you continue the extraction on those to another day and to the second and third until it reaches the end stage as you want.
And know that teeth require hot rods of various shapes and pokers of figures according to how they are prepared for your operation. And know which razor to use for each tooth's size from the inside of your mouth is another about the tooth razor according to its position between the teeth in various ways, and these types of razors should be prepared by you as you will see shortly:
Chapter XXX.
On removing teeth.
Make sure you cure the tooth of its pain from root to tip and proceed with the entire extraction process until it is finished, so that there is no reason for the wound to heal in place when extracted, as it is a substance within which the healing occurs during the extraction.
Understand when the patient insists on having that tooth removed; you must firmly be certain which tooth is causing pain, as various wounds allow pain to spread into healthy teeth and fall upon them. When you remove that tooth, if the pain does not cease until the sick tooth is extracted, we have already seen this in operations on rabbits.
So you must be certain which tooth is causing pain and that you know how to do it well. Then understand that when you scrape in the circuit of the tooth at its root, where there might be a virtue, while dissolving the tooth from gingiva all around, and carefully move towards your words or with fine saws at their beginning gradually until this scrape works.
And later wash with strong forces large gashes for good speech or swelling, hold the head of the patient between your thumbs so you have to not allow it to swell, and move the tooth according to its rectitude in a way that doesn't damage it, nor cause more pain to the patient.
And if it's not removed when it should be, then take one of those instruments and place the patient's foot from all sides with ease and force the removal of that thing so that it is done at its beginning.
If the tooth is twisted or corroded, then understand that you must remove that twist and tighten it at its subtle end so that it doesn't get twisted during your compression on it with your thumbs.
And understand that you should open it delicately with scraping in the circuit of all parts of the gum and maintain your strength so that you don't damage it and break any part of it, and return to the patient for the malice that is more than the first pain of them.
And be aware that you should not do what other ignorant barbers do in their haste and audacity during extraction; they don't provide the things we have recommended. Various wounds cause great troubles among humans which are harder to correct than twists, and all parts of their teeth become broken or some parts of them, or whatever extracted from those areas as various twisted points that we have witnessed.
And when the extraction is complete, wash your mouth with vinegar or add salt to it.
And if you need to flush out the wound for this purpose, like various wounds do, then take a small amount of zinc and sprinkle it over the injury. If that zinc doesn't work, then use a cautery instead.
The shape of the forceps and fine thumbs that are twisted by which tooth is pulled at the beginning should be elongated with a longer handle, short in width and thick, so they don't bend when working on those.
They should be like this with thick thumbs so that when you stretch them on those they don't bend, and have short handles.
They should be made of Indian iron with thin and straight handles, and in the ends of those have teeth where one fits into another and stretches through compression with descending strength. Some wounds have the ends of those like a bird's beak which is called stork, this is its shape and they are made strong by compression.
Chapter XXI.
On the removal of teeth and extraction of twisted jaw bones.
When you need to remove a twisted tooth for some reason, then understand that you should place your hand over the spot with pressure for one finger or two until the area is softened; and then insert an object or use fine thumbs which are assembled like the beak of a bird called stork or guant, the shape of forceps:
The ends of them should be made inside in such a way like chisel or almond.
And if you do not follow your judgment with these forceps or thumbs, then understand that you should dig into the root and remove all the flesh and insert the tool which is called atali, this is its form:
And it should have a short handle and be thin on one end that is small, and not bent so that it doesn't become twisted.
So if the root is removed by this method, it's good; and otherwise, help yourself with these other tools whose forms are:
The form of the second tool is that it should have a triangular and even more delicate end.
And already you will be helped by this tool having two slopes, the shape of which is approximately as follows: And there are other tools that precede in the process of tooth scraping; where youth is done with this tool which resembles an old bear, and this is its shape:
From the triangular or bent/curved extremity, which is some sort of swelling, and should not be squeezed by one's own hand for fear of causing injury.
And you should know that the tools used for tooth extraction are similar to other surgical instruments.
May the craftsman be wise and skilled in his art, finding what suits himself according to how it means the operation and various diseases; these are the diseases to which the ancients neither described nor used proper instruments, due to their varying shapes.
May it be that the bone of the jaw or other bones of the mouth is broken, or if you place pressure, then your hand rests on that at its location according to what is convenient for the instruments and forceps which we have mentioned in tooth extraction, and helps with this gesture where this is the form:
And if there is any swelling, take it step by step, tie or hold it in the mouth so that it doesn't escape or go into the place where the bone is pierced; and then restore the area with appropriate medicines.
May it be that in the bone there is a small opening, then treat that along with its coloration, and cure that within where it becomes healthy.
Chapter xxxii.
On the treatment of prominent teeth above others.
When teeth are prominent not according to their natural course due to that particular form being elongated, especially more so in women and particularly among older respectable ladies; therefore consider this: if the tooth is slightly closer to another tooth, and it's not possible for extraction or application of a solution on it, then that tooth is considered to be deeply rooted; but if it is not attached to any other tooth, then you should insert that tooth with this tool which has this form; and it resembles cutting pork, made from Indian iron with an extremely sharp edge.
And if your attempt to cut that part where you are going to insert it takes too many days because of the hardness of the tooth, and there is no similar area among other teeth.
And if it's a prominent tooth that has worn down to the point of needing grinding, then grind that with an Indian iron grinding tool which has this form:
And it's all made of Indian iron and the groove is formed similarly as you would grind with a tool that has needles, where the tooth is ground slowly bit by bit in physical days for ease, so that there is no similar tooth that gets damaged and breaks. And then draw that (a line) at the end, and scrape that with another razor.
And if it's a tooth where one part is broken and lies against the tongue, then consider that you should smooth out that area where that roughness of that fraction exists and is equalized, and be filled so that the tongue doesn't slip or the word doesn't get corrupted.
Chapter xxxiii.
On restoring teeth that have worn down at their tips with pewter or silver.
When it happens to teeth before crumbling and removal due to impact or due to smashing, and the patient can't strengthen themselves upon what they eat, and you have treated that with stomatic medicines, and your treatment hasn't been effective; then for those which weaken at pewter (silver) and not at silver, where silver turns green and after a few days you can apply it directly, but gold doesn't change over any amount of time.
And the paste should have such subtlety and coarseness according to how much can fit between teeth; as for the process, take the paste and place twice the amount between two healthy teeth. Then gradually grow it in the middle of the paste between two worn teeth, whether one or several, until it reaches the thread of the healthy tooth from the other side. And then repeat this process within that part which you began with, and strengthen your hand in ease and wisdom so that it doesn't become worn down.
And if your scrape is the one by which you strengthen the pewter, you should have the teeth that don't slip out.
And then use forceps or remove them all, and add those to any location through your gesture, and convert those and the hidden ones between healthy teeth and worn teeth, so that it doesn't cause injury to the tongue. And then smooth out that one as you would with a Roman tool.
May it be that if it's displaced or broken, strengthen that one or those with another pewter in such a manner throughout all its time.
And this is the form of teeth and the figure for restoring two healthy teeth and two worn ones, as you would apply these techniques:
And when it's done that one tooth or two are returned to their original position in all those places, and grow as we have recommended, and that they wear down.
And do not perform this except for skilled artisans and wise people.
And some diseases are suitable for the bones of cattle, and it's done in the same way as a tooth, and placed at the location where the tooth fails, and is strengthened similarly as we have said, and remains and serves there for a long time.
Chapter xxxiv.
On the treatment of tongue swelling which impedes speech.
This ligament of the tongue which causes some diseases or is naturally present in humans, or accidentally occurs due to an injury which has already been healed.
And the operation on you is that you open the mouth of the patient, with its head existing in your seat; and raise their tongue, and then carefully cut into that ligament of nerves according to the width within which their tongue can be released from their recent position.
If there is any hardness or disturbance in that area, and this has been treated with the consolidation of the lesion, then you apply one measure of heat and cut through it along the width where you have separated the ligament, so that the node can be dissolved.
And remember not to cause a crack in the base of the flesh, and cut here carefully so that blood may flow out.
Then, wash away the residue of the cut with water or add oil or sand to it; and then rest your hand on the patient's tongue; this will ensure that the patient's tongue remains moist each night in order that it not be hardened again.
If there is blood flow, place your hand on the heated spot; but if the blood leaks out, then cauterize the area with a hot cautery which you should use for this purpose. And that cure other causes within where it is healed.
Chapter XXXV.
Concerning the removal of a hernia, care for the tongue.
Some swellings occur, causing a small pus-filled lump to form that impedes the tongue's normal operation; and its size increases as it fills the mouth with unpleasant odor.
And the procedure for you is to open the mouth of the patient at the sun's position and examine the lump.
And if you find it a dark color or black, hard, which the patient does not feel, then do not touch that lump as it is malignant.
And if it is whitened with moisture, then you place the heat in them, and cut into it delicately with a scalpel, cutting from all sides; and if blood comes out during your operation, then you pause over that heated spot, which is hot, within which you restrain the bleeding.
And then return to your work until you have treated it according to its condition, wash it with oil and salt; and treat that according to the other treatment needed so that it heals.
Chapter XXXVI.
Concerning the removal of a lump from both ears and that which is located in the armpit, as well as other lumps.
When it comes across in the armpit area, they are glands that are grouped like cotton balls, which occur outside and are named as the two ears, which when you treat them with what we have said in the division and if they do not heal, then you should consider whether the lump is hard, has a dark color, little sensation, then do not touch that with iron.
And if it is reddish in color and the root is thick, then do not touch that with iron for fear of blood flow; wait until it matures internally, then either you remove it from there, or it may break on its own.
And if it is white in color, the root is round, and the thread of its root is delicate, then that must be cut.
And the procedure for you is to examine before your operation whether the lump has rested with rest or if it has decreased due to some diminution; then place the head of your patient in front of the sun, and open their mouth, and have the servant take hold of the tongue of the patient between their hands using this noble instrument whose form is:
And let it be made of silver or gold, and delicate as a thread.
So when you press the tongue and it shows you the lump, and you place your hand over it, then take heat and put that in your seat, and pull that out from all sides as much as you can. And another thing when you remove some cause of the tunics, then carefully cut it with this tool whose shape is:
And another thing when you remove some cause of the tunics, then carefully cut it with this tool whose shape is: It resembles forceps, yet the ends of these are curved, so that each one's opening is opposite another, sharp points, which should be made of iron and bent inward.
If this tool is not available to you, then cut it with a scalpel whose shape matches this description: It should be sharp on one side, but not sharp on the other.
And once you have cut one side, cut the other according to this method of incision, and when cutting for the patient, it is recommended to hold water sand.
If there is blood flow, hold water from the decoction of horse chestnut sap or mistletoe leaves and treat it similarly to the causes of stasis where bleeding stops, then proceed to cure it until it heals.
And sometimes swellings occur in the armpit other lumps besides the two ears, and you should cut those according to what I have said about cutting two wounds equally.
And I have already treated a woman with an abscess that was located in the groin area of her, this abscess had a color tending towards dark brown, with little sensation, which had already closed off the groin area for her, and the woman was breathing very painfully, she had already been forbidden to eat and drink water by him, and she was already close to death if more days were passed.
And the abscess had grown so much that it contained two months' worth of pus, which flowed through for two groins.
So I cut him surgically and placed him in one of his elbows, then pulled him out, removing a large portion from him. Next, I burned the opening where pus was understood to be coming from another arm, and then forced open his mouth, constricting his tongue. Finally, I left the elbow in that abscess.
And I removed a large part of him, and there was only a little bleeding from him. Therefore completely the groin of that woman is healed, she began drinking water immediately, and soon resumed eating. So I didn't let any pus emerge from that abscess for a long time, instead an abscess formed in place of it, which continued to grow as that one was prolonged.
Then I went in and burned the groin area of him, this was to improve; and then I walked around not knowing what God did with that afterwards.
Chapter XXXVII.
On the expulsion of pus when it is inflamed.
When phlegm settles in the throat, and it is inflamed and long, then it is called a perpendicular. And if it's at the point where it becomes thick and round, then it's referred to as a boil.
When it's healed according to what we've discussed in the division, and you don't continue with your treatment, and after several times of pus expulsion that has stopped for him and is delicate, then I would suggest you insert one that becomes added roundly; and if it's at that length, and it bleeds, being of dark or black color, and doesn't reach his sensation, then I would advise you to try the expulsion from him, where there's fear on the patient.
And when you perform that according to the method I've told you about in terms of its whiteness and length, that you check the patient and press his tongue with an instrument whose shape corresponds to this, place the elbow near the new area, pull it down, and then insert it with one of the two instruments which were mentioned in the expulsion of two abscesses.
And know that you should not insert it until it's adjusted to the natural end of your treatment, for if you insert more than this, you will injure his speech.
And near the expulsion, use the one we recommended in the expulsion of two abscesses, and treat it until he is healed.
And if the patient was frightened by the expulsion of him, know that you should use forceps in the cauterization of him, and the way to perform the cauterization is with hot water only. So place the head of the patient towards your side, then press his tongue with the instrument we mentioned earlier. Take the hot water which we have told about in the chapter on cauterization, pour it onto that live area, pause when it's neither thick nor delicate, and fill the concavity of the tool whose shape this is:
Let the end of his cavity where medicine is placed be like the cavity of a mouth, and place the tool on the water with him, the patient lying down on their back so that saliva or mucus from their mouth flows through the intrinsic medicine, so as not to cause any harm to his groin and to relieve him.
And then hold your hand on the medicine, and press it over the uvula for about half an hour until you see that the area has become discolored and numbed by the chewing of the medicine.
And if you wish, take hold of the skin and the flap over the end of the ray, immerse the stick in medicine, insert the ray into the tube with the stick within it so that the stick adheres to that tube. Do this as many times until you achieve what you want from the cauterization of the uvula, then let that rest until it dries and falls off about three or four days later.
And if you need to repeat the medicine, do that and after cauterization cleanse it in the path of the uvula with a moistened stick, change what is inside that part of him from the path of his medicine, wash it with water rinse and afterwards treat it with ointment, and internally use remedies until he is healed.
And this kind of treatment saves from expulsion and long fear.
Some healings are performed on the uvula with that subtle type of cauterization and expulsion, which is cured through subinhalation in this manner: gather calendula, hyssop, chamomile, rue, powdered gum Arabic, camomile, groundnut oil, and other similar herbs, adjust all those causes or some of them into a single bowl, let them steep in hot water, they should bubble; heat the water until it's lukewarm, then strain it, place the water bowl on half a cup, on which place an aram tool according to this manner: made of silver or metal.
And immerse the extremity in the mouth of the patient where steam rises over the uvula onto the quanaula, where the uvula is moving and obscured.
And then proceed to cut through those pus-filled areas within where it is dry, and remember not to perform this treatment immediately after the appearance of abscesses, as that would exacerbate in the abscess, and you should not do this but rather declare the abscess's presence with caution.
If you cannot present this instrument, then take a cane and apply a cloth to the extremity of the patient's foot, so that the mouth of the patient is covered, for which the eucalyptus leaves prevent the steam from burning the mouth.
And this treatment is good for health.
Chapter XXXVIII.
Regarding the extraction of thorns and what adheres in the gallbladder, as well as other causes.
Pus-filled areas adhere in the gallbladder or thorns of leaves or any other cause.
Then you should extract what is evident from those, on which your attention falls, because when you press the tongue against the tool in front of the soleilh, then you will declare what is in the gallbladder.
And what is not apparent and remains hidden in the gallbladder, you should make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach, because a strong cause related to the gallbladder will lead to vomiting; or force the patient to swallow a piece of bread or grated lettuce or a mouthful of dry bread; or take a handful of dried marine sponge and tie it firmly with thread, then make the patient swallow that; or if you have access to it, use a mustard poultice. Once this is done, if it reaches the location where thorns are located and they are extracted, then the cause will be eliminated. And take a snake and drink it with bound thread, then put it in the mouth gently until it is extracted; or take a stick and gently place it inside her and pull it out gently.
And if none of those causes we mentioned are eliminated, then use a lead tool according to this form:
And if the pus is large and splits small, then at the extremity of which you enter into her throat with ease.
And have her raise her head up, and be careful not to touch the base of her throat, for fear that it will harm her body or cause the bone or thorn to pierce the bone or stick, or what the doctor puts in his hand.
However, let the patient insert honey, according to their knowledge of the location of the related cause and pierce it downwards, then pull her hand towards the tool while all this is happening as much as she has been prepared with for elimination.
Chapter XXXIX.
Regarding the extraction of gallstones attached to the gallbladder.
When treated with the medicines we have described in the division of treatment through medicine and if it does not respond, consider now in the gallbladder of the patient at the soleilh, since you have pressed her tongue against the tool which we recommended.
So if you rotate the gallstone, extract it in a small way or through subtle gestures.
And if it is not possible to extract it from there, then take a concave cannula and insert that into the gallbladder of the patient, and place in the concavity of the cannula an iron rod lit on fire, and do this as many times (until the gallstone dies and comes out of the gallbladder) and forbid her any water for the entire day.
And then take a basin full of water to rinse with, and open her mouth in that, and rinse her mouth with that; do not swallow any cause from that but let the water sit for an hour beside her hand, until she feels the water come.
And if it is not eliminated by what we have recommended, then fumigate the patient with cinnamon or with asafetida using the tool we recommended for fumigation of the uvula.
Do this, and see what happens.
Another way of operating in fumigation is to take an ember with lit coals and the ember is covered with a cloth in the middle of which there is a handle, you place the extremity of the tool in that handle; then proceed with the fumigation above; have the patient put her mouth at the extremity of the cannula and close her mouth so that the fumigation does not penetrate until you know that the fumigation has reached the gallstone, as soon as the gallstone will fall.
And if it does not fall, then you should continue the fumigation for several times, forbid the patient to drink, and eat salty foods and vegetables, and do not drink water, and it is necessary that this regimen be properly carried out.
And this is the form of the tool with which gallstones in the gallbladder are treated when they are seen; it resembles forceps like these, but instead being curved somewhere on her. Which is flat towards the gallbladder, and the extremity of which resembles the beak of a stork that is curved, which is shaped by grinding, for when you grasp any cause, it does not slip.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
In which the total speech pertains to consideration of boils and sections related to them.
Boils are special lumps, according to manner of occurrences, based on their memory recall, from any in this free.
And they are diverse in puncturing and sectioning them through two manners, of which one is for the special boils within themselves; and from this we acquire knowledge about humidity.
And the second manner is for the places where they occur in the body, when a boil happens in the head it is another from a boil happening in the anus; and a boil in the fleshly location is another from a boil happening at joints; and each one of them has its role for operation.
And many boils are some that cover, which are not punctured but rather until the healing matures in those or completion of them.
And other boils are those that cover until they are ruptured when crossed, and do not mature according to their completion, like boils near joints; when a boil approaches a joint, its being extends within what is in the circuit of it, and makes it so that it corrupts the muscles or nerves from that joint, causing contraction of that limb; or it's a boil near the main body, and if you delay the puncturing of it until it matures inside it affects the main body; or it's near the anus, therefore puncture what is not matured; and do not cover when you puncture across from incomplete digestion, but rather the one near the anus, so that you don't prevent its extension to the parts inside the anus, and make a fistula, or it's made in the end of it that is not healed. Many are those you know when to perform the puncturing of the boil, which is when it matures.
And know that it matures when the pain and fever diminishes, and the decrease of the swelling and pulse, and the sharpness of the boil's head, and other signs.
And when covered you know to puncture in the place of pus left from the boil and pus coming from the healing of the exudation.
Puncture at the right length of the flesh or body, if boils are in the limbs or feet, and on the spots of the scars, from the nerves' cords, from the arteries; and, beyond that, in all equal places where they do not reflect. For those reflecting ones, use puncturing according to that limb.
And when the boil is in a fleshly place, then it's that you wait for the digestion of it to be confirmed until its completion according to what we've said; if you puncture this ahead of time, it extends the circuit of its discharge and sordic matter, making the lips of it so hardened and deep.
And such boils are punctured according to the width of the flesh or body as necessity demands, or according to which one requires for a limb.
And know that you should administer small punctures, and in large boils a big and wide or narrow sections according to the variety of the sizes of the boils.
And other boils are those in which it is that the canal is conformed and ignited when made like this bread, thus within a term that already continues, like those that happen too many of dublecs and bubos.
And of those that are incised in section have three angles; and of those it's as if incised like a thorn figure, like the boils of angonars.
And of them there are for which round and lunar sections are administered, resembling those.
And for that one which does not have a cap like superficial boils, you puncture that in superficial puncturing, or flatly just.
And when the boil is thick and has already collected healing matter, you puncture that without worrying about extracting all of the pus in that moment; having extracted some part from it, then place the boil inside another day, and soon after extract a larger part, and then make these drained holes according to stages until it drains.
Especially if the patient is of greenish vitality, or a female in pregnancy, or a young child, or an old person in decrepitude, where the animal spirit's aged matter resolves during the discharge of healing, and makes them so weak, then you open these.
Take great care with this chapter, and when you puncture these boils for which you clean the wounds, know that you examine each boil's condition within it or from its position; and if the boil is large, and the openings of the puncturing are round, then it's that you pause the method in every draw until they reach their time.
And if in the boil an extent of the canal has been removed or has become concave within its circuit, then you complete it from your position old or with a needle made of cloth material, like when you pull out bread or pieces, considering moisture; strengthen that inside the third day; and process this and heal what comes from the ointments until it heals.
And if there happens bleeding from sickness during your operation time, you administer water baths and vinegar in those you wash with a cloth of it, then place that over the area of the blood's gushing points, making these drained.
If the flow of the sweat persists, then it is necessary that you administer treatment and care and powders as I have recommended in specific locations of this our book and division.
If it is in the winter time, and the site of the abscess is near the nerves location, then you should coat powders in vinegar and oil, and place those over the sites.
And if it is in summer, and the sites are fatty, then you should place ground powders in water or oil, or in vinegar and oil, and let that be rubbed until the hot day ends as we have said, and then you should open the abscess and cleanse that, and administer to its care whatever suits it until it is healed.
And this is what is necessary of knowledge about the universal treatment of abscesses, but according to the path of distinction already described for all abscesses in which manner their cure should proceed for each case specifically.
Chapter XLI.
Regarding the section of abscesses that occur in the head.
In the scalp of the head are small abscesses, which are special glands that contain tunics at their roots; and the types of these are many.
And they have pus, and those contain moisture resembling lime. And there are others that contain moisture resembling dust, similar to them; and those are cold ones, hard.
And in the section of all, and in the extraction of those, there is no fear, just as you should extract the pus of those without causing pain to the patient.
And the operation in the section of those is that you puncture those with an instrument whose shape resembles this, which is called an awl, knowing that it contains pus.
If what it contains is moisture, then divide that in the section according to its length by a superficial section according to this form:
And start at the section of the line B between the line G. So as moisture is drained away, then you scrape off that skin which contains that moisture, and do not leave any cause from it all, for if anything reappears after scraping off those causes, if there remains any cause of it.
And then immerse it in Egyptian ointment if present, and if not, in water and salt; and fill that wound with this and leave it for another day, as you scrape off everything that is left of that skin layer.
And then apply this skin again with Egyptian ointment several times and subsequently if needed, knowing that there should be no residue of that skin layer; then treat the wound with ointment until it is healed.
And if an abscess contains fatty lumps, then you should incise it according to this form: In a cross-shaped section, make an incision between the two edges of the section and cut it through from all directions, and exert your strength in extracting the tunic that contains this.
If you encounter resistance due to pain, then do as I instructed you at the beginning.
Similarly do this for the absorbed abscess in terms of section and care according to what we have said; and the section about an absorbed abscess is minor pus, which contains little sweat.
And some of these abscesses are particular to this kind which occur in the head in certain men who do not have moisture; this cause is that I had to incise on an abscess at the head of a woman and drain it like a deaf lump, hard and white, which could not be sucked out, and if there was any struck on that, it would swell.
And for other abscesses that occur in the head in this manner is not contained in this chapter, like those abscesses that come from the ears of children, and you have their reasons for having ear infections, but the section of all these is superficial section.
And pause the puncturing of those from the lower part of their pus for so that it may be relieved of the body in the parts below the pus.
And then treat those with what is suitable for its healing process.
Chapter XLII.
Regarding the section of scrofula which occurs in the neck.
These abscesses are formed by these scrofula lumps in the neck and axillae, and some occur in other parts of the body.
And those that occur in the neck are these lumps formed between them; and all of this scrofula is within its own tunic like so, as well as with knots and abscesses on the head, as we have recommended.
The types of these scrofula are lumps; some of them are cold, and others contain moisture, and the malignant ones do not respond to treatment.
So in that one where you have good position in the Touchment, whose color is similar to the color of the neck and responds everywhere, does not stick to any nerves of the neck or veins, nor has any pain, then you should incise that with dry superficial cutting from above to below relative to your position between the line G and the line B on the neck line; cut it through from all sides, and spread both edges of the neck as much as you can or as much as oil ointment if you need those, just like we have said about abscesses in the head, then extract that piece by piece.
And more caution than to pierce the vein or nerves.
And if the scalpel is not too sharp, that you do not cut your hand during surgery or relieve the patient's suffering, and that you refrain from cutting what is unnecessary; for if you were to pierce a vein or artery and had to stop in the midst of your operation, then apply some glassy plaster or other powders that still flow with sweat, strengthen the wound, and leave it as it is until the inflammation subsides and the wound becomes soothing and begins to heal. When the sweat has ceased.
Therefore, continue with your operation while it is still within you.
And subsequently ask about the specific location of any cause among the other small scrofula lumps, therefore cut those and cleanse those.
And if it's in the root of the scrofula large vein, cut here that you do not cut out that scrofula from its root. Before cutting where you are, make sure it's a fold of flesh that is firmly attached and leave that area so that the wound heals on its own.
And subsequently fill the wound with old cloth which you have already soaked in Egyptian balm, and then attend to that.
And if you cut out the whole scrofula lump, then make sure that you adjust both edges of the wound and drain as much pus as possible without leaving any unnecessary remainder.
If you find that there is excess pus due to the size of the scrofula lump, make sure that you understand where to cut into it, then remove that lump and perform suturing as was discussed.
And for those scrofulas containing dampness, pierce that at the superficial opening where it appears at your location of the maturation of their area, and make a puncture at the bottom part where pus is secreted from the body, as we have said.
And afterwards apply puncturing, you should dress it with balm and resemble those, so that it dissolves what is rotten from the corruption. And when you find that the wound has already been cleansed, then treat it with balm of flesh-producing substances until it is healed.
Title: 43
Regarding the section of the abdomen in relation to a wound that occurred inside the gallbladder.
The ancients divided this section into the appendix, and nobody in our land has seen that being done.
And this is the record of the speech about those things.
In men who have a twist, make sure to avoid removing the appendix, as this is done only in cases of necessity where all the veins and major organs of the body are here.
In those who have scabs in the mouth or gallbladder or both ears, when the illness is not in the tooth, use the section of the appendix to avoid the destruction which comes from perforation.
And when we want this, cut the appendix leaving three circles of the circles of the appendix, or four in a small section by width in that which is between two circles according to quantity, so that the section is circular not within the cartilage. This location is suitable for cutting as it lacks flesh and the sweat veins of its area are its own.
And if the surgeon is cautious, then here expand the edge of the gallbladder to where the tip points, and later make an incision into it until it reaches the duct, but avoid the blood vessels should you see any cause for concern.
And afterwards cut the spleen according to what we have prescribed; this signifies about the section of the duct by the swelling which is from that expanse towards this area and through the rupture of the belly.
And leave the wound open for some time.
And when the time has passed in which puncturing is feared, add two layers of the edge of the wound's membrane, and ensure that this single layer is just the cartilage.
And afterwards administer medicines that help produce flesh until it is healed.
It is said by Albucasis that the main discourse about which we have discussed, namely, involves observing that some of these abscesses have already spread to the gallbladder area of the body, and the body has entered into death. The cause is inside the body, and others would cut into the epiglottis so that the body could breathe over the wound for a certain breath, thus saving them from death.
And for this reason we are commanded to keep the wound open until it consumes the malignity of the illness; and the malignancy of it lasts for three days; then afterwards we command thus on the wound and treat it until it is healed.
And what I have seen by my own experience is that a servant had a boil inside their gallbladder and cut out a part of the lung canal there, and I was called to treat them, and they did so in this way as they would for those who died, and uncovered the wound and treated the pus which was exuding from the small area of the wound.
So I confessed that it had not cut a vein or artery, and the wind was coming from the wound, and treated it until it was healed.
And nothing happened to the servant except possibly in their lungs, and after some days returned to improving their condition.
And now I say that in the region of the epididymes there should be no fear.
Chapter 44.
About the section concerning empyema which occurs outside of the groin and is called groin hernia.
This empyema, named groin hernia, appears large according to the color of the body, and it is found in women.
And it occurs in two ways, either naturally or accidentally.
And for the natural one, there is no cure.
And the accidental one occurs in two ways. One is similar to fatty lumps, and the other way is similar to empyema which results from blockage of an artery, and in that case there is fear (perhaps meaning concern or risk). And do not assume that it consists of iron with the patient, except for when it is small. And you should prepare that and investigate it according to this method. If you find something similar to fatty lumps, and it is not suspended by any of the veins, then proceed to cut it in the same way as for nodes, and extract whatever content it has within the skin and evacuate; and if not, then thoroughly examine its entire structure, and treat the area with what promotes healing until it heals.
Chapter 45.
About the section concerning the types of nodes.
There are various kinds of nodes, and I have already mentioned all the kinds in the division.
And note that I will distinguish between a node and an abscess to avoid confusion.
So I say that for abscesses there is heat and fever and severe pain within where the boiling of excess ceases; and when decomposition occurs, the fever, pain, and heat cease.
For nodes, there is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and they contain a white pus which is specific to that organ.
And it varies according to the color of the body, its onset is like a boil and proceeds in the same way as a stomach ache, whether larger or smaller, and they are divided into two types; either they are fatty and contain moisture, and the colors of moisture vary, as I explained in the division.
So when you reach the treatment of nodes, extract it and inquire about it at its onset concerning the instrument which is called the intrument, according to how its form approaches this.
And this is the method of inquiry for empyemas and all nodes; you should take hold of this instrument and insert it into the pus-containing moist area that you find in the empyema, and you will gradually move your fingers inside until you know that the instrument has penetrated the membrane.
And finally place your hand according to the size of the empyema, and then extract the intrument; observe what is left behind in the place where it was.
And if the moisture has drained away, regardless of its color, then you proceed to cut through the surface as I have said for other empyemas.
And if there is no moisture left in the place where the instrument was inserted, then you will know that it is fatty.
And dry off over it, according to this form for the cut area which resembles a cross: Just as you have been taught, suspend it on a string, and scrape the membrane from all sides with ease. Save the skin or sac if possible over that, and extract that healing out of the node.
And if it breaks during the operation, it's not possible to extract that healing. There are various views on this, and then you would remove it in pieces so that it does not tear due to any cause.
And if some or too much of it is torn, the node will return according to the best method.
And if you find that some small part of it was torn off, then complete the wound with some corrosive acute powders and strengthen the wound. Place over that which is a boil cautery, and treat the other parts of the treatment until it heals.
And if it is a large node, then you should expose both sides of it and treat it with what promotes healing.
And if there is pulsating vein on the opposite side, or not, then you should cover and heat that area where the tension is, which is the vessel and smooth that stretch for two days or three until the wound heals and stops the boiling of the blood; and then return to cut off what has hardened from the node.
Chapter 46.
About the necessary forms of the instrument in section and puncture.
Among those are the forms of the instruments, which are three kinds: some are large ones, others are medium-sized, and others are small.
The form of a large instrument is this:
The form of a small instrument is this:
They are made of iron, bronze, or pointed ends cut appropriately, so that they pierce the empyemas.
These are the forms of experienced (doctors), which are called almond-shaped, and one of these is named red.
They come in three varieties: large, medium-sized, and small.
The form of a large experienced (doctor), this is its form:
The form of a medium-sized experienced (doctor), this is its form:
The method of experiencing pain, form of his/her:
Let's convey that they are through those apertures, exits, and cysts, abscesses, through which either the bones or other causes are involved.
They are made round, large, spherical like big needles with threads attached to them, and they are made of copper, iron, or silver. The best ones are those made of copper.
They are made with black feather experiences which recall that in the cavities of those abscesses, reflections occur, that they are reflected by their lightness upon those reflections.
They are of three kinds; some of which are long, and others of medium length, and the rest are short, according to the size of the lumen of the abscess and the constriction of the patient.
The form of the large lead experience:
The form of the medium-sized lead experience:
The form of the small lead experience:
The forms of the needles are special motifs; among those there are some simple ones, which have only a curve, and they come in three types: large, few, and medium-sized.
And they have metal hooks from them, and they come in three kinds.
And those hooks have two curves, and they are of three kinds.
And their ends have three curves, and they come in three types.
And all of them are necessary in their place.
The form of a simple small needle, its form:
The form of a large needle with two curves at the end. The form of a medium needle with two curves at the end. The form of a small needle with two curves at the end.
The form of an elongated (large) needle with three curves at the end.
The form of a medium needle with three curves at the end.
And these are the forms of knives used for severing and cauterizing nodes and abscesses, they come in three types: large, medium-sized, and small.
The form of a large scalpel:
The form of a medium-sized scalpel:
The form of a small scalpel:
The ends of those are sharp for the cuts that are made and the other ends are blunt, they are not used in such a manner but rather for making incisions during the cauterization of nodes with fear of lacerating veins or nerves. By doing this you heal the patient and find comfort to some degree due to the adjustment which is achieved by this method where one finds the excision of abscesses.
And these are the forms of needles, they come in three types: large, medium-sized, and small, just like thorns.
They are made of copper and resemble reeds on which alcohol is applied.
And in the tip there is a punctured surface covered by grease and within it goes towards the divisions inside and outside, as you wish, just like you see.
The forms of spatulas, which you hide among your fingers for puncturing abscesses and not feeling the discomfort of patients, they come in three types: large, medium-sized, and small. And these are the forms of those:
The forms of the suction devices by which the discharge from the blood is removed, and they come in three types: large, medium-sized, and small. The forms of these:
They are made of copper, round with some length, and they are delicate.
And know that these types of suction devices should be large, medium-sized, and small for when you need to quickly remove blood discharge in necessity, or when initially there is no medicine.
However, do not use those to remove blood everywhere in the body, and instead only use them on fatty areas. Like this, you would use them on fat pockets of breasts and thighs, on armpits and nipples, stomach and kidneys, and similarly for all fatty lumps.
And some treatments are made using those instruments other small pieces resembling stitches according to this form; when blood is removed through phlebotomy or for the laceration of veins or arteries.
And some treatments are done in round forms as follows:
Chapter 47.
Regarding the treatment of male breasts which are assembled by females.
Some treatments cause the breasts of certain males to swell like when their skin begins to soften in sleep. They are also swollen and assembled like female breasts, and far apart from each other.
And for anyone who experiences this issue, note that you should cut those along the lunar section according to this form, from line B into line G. Then scrape off all roughness, apply medicine that hardens skin over the injury, adjust both edges of the wound with stitches, and treat it internally until it heals.
If the nipple descends to the parts and becomes softened by its magnitude in such a way as it does for women, then it is cut into two halves of pus in them, with two sections resembling a lunar figure, each one being contained in the other of them, within which the major line contains the minor according to this form of .B. and .G. Then cleanse the channel that is between two lips of the wound, and stop the swelling, and administer what has been said about suturing and powders necessary for the treatment until it heals completely.
And if you do not complete the instruction for what to apply inside due to the distress of the patient and the flow of pus, then in this case when you treat the wound by submerging it in corrosive ointment and leave it there until the corrosion that is from the fat occurs, then afterwards heal it until it heals completely.
Chapter 48.
Regarding the perforation of abscesses that I have left to heal naturally.
These abscesses that I have left to heal naturally are of the species of scrophulas, tumors, which contain a skin that is expelled.
And of those that contain moisture; and for those containing moisture, you should apply them to a lunar section according to this figure: from the line of .G. to the line of .B.. And when all has been evacuated from the pus in the abscess, then fill it up with a paste on the second day and leave it inside another day.
And afterwards let the wound be covered and treated with an appropriate ointment until it heals completely.
And if the abscess is of the species of lymph nodes and scrophulas, then you should cut it in the same way as we have said in the section on scrophulas.
And if the wound spreads so that pus is present, then administer a cautery according to what we have already explained.
Chapter 49.
Regarding the section on abscesses that occur due to injury or vein rupture.
When a wound is ruptured and the channel that was above it has solidified, then abscesses occur. And the signs by which one can know whether inflammation or an abscess is due to an artery or a vein: if when the abscess is from the artery it is long and accumulates at the base of the body; and when you press on the abscess with your fingers, in it there is wheezing.
And the one that is from a vein manifests around the surface of the body.
And if this kind of abscess is incorrect, especially in those with symptoms, in anginas, and around the neck, and in localized body masses; it's a large one, so you should avoid iron treatment for its cure, and the one in the extremities, or at the head, should be avoided.
And for the one due to inflammation of the artery's opening, cut through the channel section longitudinally; then clamp the section with forceps and clamp the artery where it is exposed, removing the tunics that are revealed.
And then operate on that needle and make it penetrate into the other side, strengthen the artery with double thread in two places, - which causes you to feel your strength during the extraction of two arteries which are in the temples.
And then pierce that spot which is between two ligaments up to the skin so that all pus in it is dissolved, and the abscess is resolved.
And then administer treatment in which the ligaments are weakened, causing them to fall apart; and afterwards heal that area with appropriate ointments until it heals completely.
And if it is an abscess due to vein section, then you should have this at your disposal: holding the place of the abscess with your hand in relation to the channel; and then insert the needle into the spot where you held your hand on the abscess, make that penetrate; and there within you extract what comes out from the other side, and afterwards tie the abscess with a ligature according to what I have said to you at the vein of the grape in two parts along both ends of the thread.
And if you fear that the thread will be extracted, then insert a needle into that spot with your hand until all of the abscess is reached, and strengthen your threads in four places.
And then dry the abscess in its middle until when you situate what is inside it, then you cut down the excess of the channel, and leave that which sticks out from it.
And then place over it the powder that you have submerged in vinegar and oil, and afterwards administer the treatment which is done with cloths and ointments until it heals completely.
Chapter 1 of the abscess which occurs due to twisting of nerves.
Just like abscesses occur in arteries and veins, similarly abscesses occur in nerves when they are injured during percussion or due to unnecessary treatment, alike.
And the method is similar in places near the elbow or at the wrist, or anywhere where joints swell.
And this is an abscess that is heavy, and resembles the color of another part of the body, and is in the major parts of its disposition sites; when stretched under tension, one feels distress like a fainting sensation at the chest.
And it is not added to the front of the chest, and by itself it leaves the chain, and it escapes in every direction and does not go to the parts in front or behind.
And about those who have it in joints, it should be treated with iron, which will strengthen them and lead to contraction.
One may apply the chain or steam on the head or forehead. If it is a small abscess, then one should apply it to the armpits and remove it from under the clothes.
And if it is large, then you should suspend it with a hook, and scrape it, and keep it there; and adjust the wound with stitches, and treat it until it heals.
End of chapter.
Section on abscess which occurs due to eating that causes the stomach disorder.
Proceed to some diseases that occur in the stomachs of those and in other parts of the body of these, which are called fungal due to their similarity with fungi. The cause is subtle and the head of it is large; already the lips of these are involved, and they belong to those who are small, and they belong to those whose growth is magnified.
And I have seen one where in the stomach of that person there were two parts which resembled fungi, and there was no difference between those white ones, except for their small cause.
And the lips of these were inverted and would split, and moisture flowed from it all the time.
So I inserted those and extracted them in one weighing eighteen units. And the other weighed six units.
And in the operation during their extraction, consider if the patient is wet and if the color of the lesion is white, moist due to a subtle cause; then you should extract it from under the skin laterally, and with your presence apply heat to the fire, remove all the swollen areas that have affected this area; and if there is any pus, cauterize it.
And if you find the patient fearful and anxious, avoid extracting with iron; rather take a lead bullet recently made, strengthen that lesion, which is done in the way we have said; let it rest for two days.
And adjust near the constriction of the lead thread; therefore, do not cease to strengthen the large lead until it is removed and falls out on its own.
If the lesion is due to a large cause, then in its removal there is some fear and anxiety, especially if it's in the stomach.
It's possible that you might remove most of its moisture, then proceed to cauterize it so that it doesn't return.
And after that, treat it until the wound heals.
And be careful not to assume that you can extract parts of a black color, with little sensation, under careful examination, which one is simply cancerous.
And I will come back to recall something close by.
End of chapter 52.
Section on the treatment of inguinal hernia.
An inguinal hernia is caused by various reasons; or through fissures in the pubis which is above the stomach, and moves the tissue or intestine according to where they end in other ruptures; or due to pus that flows from a vein or artery as previously mentioned, or due to constricted wind in it.
If it is due to a fracture in the pubis and through the movement of the tissue, then the color of the abscess resembles the color of the body; and there are various pains, and it appears from different locations. And if it is due to the escape of the intestine, then its location is like what we have recounted, with greater intensity diversity, and when you press on it with your fingers it disappears, and soon returns; and force you onto his stomach, and there is a magnified work that should be done.
If due to moisture, then it's visible and doesn't disappear when you press with your hand, nor is it constricted, nor does it increase.
And if due to pus, then these signs appear showing the abscess turning black and decaying.
If it's due to flesh nothing, then it's a heavy, large, hard abscess, and is formed according to an amount.
If it's due to wind, then the feeling of the body is evident.
And the operation on it is to consider if the inguinal prominence is due to arterial or venous pus, or wind; thus you must refrain from treating it, because there is fear and anxiety as we have taught in the chapter where I said about abscesses by artery and vein.
And if the inguinal prominence is due to the intestine or the tissue, you must command the body that has its own will, and stands extended; then try within the circumference of the entire umbilicus, and command it to stand in your favor between your hands on both sides, and also surround it laterally in the circumference around the location where you have tried with your fingers; then extend most of the abscess upwards by units large; and after that lie down inside the circumference with strong or gentle lead bullet or powder, following the method of applying it properly.
And after that, cut the middle of the extended abscess over the muscle and insert your fingers into that area to pull out the intestine; and if you have found it or guarded by the muscle, then do it now and push the intestine into the inner parts of the stomach.
And if you have found the thread, then take it with a needle; and cut off the excess of him.
And if it is against your artery or vein, then surround that motion, and proceed with your operation; take two needles and enter them into those two strong points, then insert the needles into the created circuit around the abscess in a criss-cross manner, making sure they penetrate deeply. Then strengthen the abscess in four parts over the needles.
And if you want, hold the needles and lay out the area where you will stretch the skin and let it fall on its own; or cut that when it is tender and place something there, then take care of the one with which the ointment covers in such a way that it becomes healthy.
And if the bulge of the navel is made of flesh or due to dampness, then cut out the abscess as we have said and remove the pus or dampness, which you find in it, and then take care of what covers and consolidates the area.
Title 53.
Of the treatment of scabies.
We have already stated in the division of various types of scabies and how these are treated with medicines, that treatment with iron is avoided unless the scabies has not progressed to ulceration. We have also discussed scabies caused by pregnancy and caution during its treatment.
And it was said by the ancients that some scabies lesions can occur in areas where eradication is possible, such as on the head, which occurs around the nipples or thighs and resembles patches distributed across the limbs to remove all of it, especially when they start small.
And when it is old and severe, do not try to touch it, because I cannot heal him of that without me seeing another or hearing of its cure.
And the operation on you is like what we have said, it means that you prepare beforehand and let the patient rest and purge them of black bile some times, then proceed to cut out any visible swellings, if found.
And then prepare the patient for surgery in the preparation stage before the operation, and take precautions when using the surgical knife near that area; and carefully hollow out from all sides a good incision to ensure there is no damage to any cause of his complaints. And let the pus flow out, do not squeeze it lightly, press on the areas and wipe off the large pus with your hand or any tool that allows you to use the available tools.
And if it causes you to feel that there is large pus and an obstruction of vein or artery, then apply the cautery inside until the flow of pus stops, and then take care of this with other treatments so that he becomes healthy.
Title 54.
Of the treatment of dropsy.
We have already discussed in the division of various types of dropsy caused by water, and the signs for each type. We also talked about how these are treated with medicines.
And that one which is cured with iron is only the type caused by lead alone, and it should not be treated with iron for any other type like tympanicus or osteomyelitis, because this latter is fatal.
And when you have treated this type of dropsy called tympanicus with medicines and your treatment is not showing results, then consider that if the patient has already become debilitated or if there's another illness along with this dropsy like cough or abdominal pain, similar to these conditions. In such cases, don't treat it with iron as it might cause fear in this regard.
And if you find the patient is suffering from excessive vigor and in them there's no other illness just dropsy alone, neither pregnancy nor old age. Then the way of surgery for this is that you lift the patient between your hands, treat him accordingly by pressing his abdomen with your hand, push out water to the side opposite to where it enters through the anus, take a thorn shaped instrument according to this form:
It should be made of two sharp parts, long like a thorn; but it must be small and gradually decrease towards the tip, such that in the operation you don't penetrate into the intestine and gently remove it.
And then consider if the origin of dropsy is from within the intestines, in which case cut out the section starting three finger widths below the navel towards the sides, on the right side of the patient above the anus.
And if the origin of dropsy is due to illness in the stomach, then your section should be on the left side of the navel for three finger widths.
And if the origin of the patient is due to milk, then your section should be on the right side.
And don't let your section be near where you want the patient to vomit, so that the excess does not flow towards that area.
And then pierce the instrument through the entire canal, and insert it into that section. Lift your hand with the thorn between the canal and anus, and scrape it out; if the amount is similar to one fingernail or approximately so.
And then pierce the anus so that the thorn reaches the desired location, which is where water accumulates. And then remove it and insert a tool with this shape: It resembles a slender silver tube; it is made of silver or copper or stag horn, in which at the lower part of it there is a small groove, and on its sides are three grooves: two from one side and one from the other side; and its end is cut according to the way of a feather, as often times.
And in the end of it there is an armilla, which when the tool enters the water, immediately rests on the tool, therefore evacuates a moderate amount of water halfway through. If you evacuate more from this than within half an hour, weaken the patient by dissolving their animal spirit, or you may cause them to faint as death becomes imminent.
Evacuate from this according to the virtue's quantity of the person and according to what you interpret from the patient's disposition regarding the virtue's significance, as well as their goodness.
Then remove the instrument, and collect the water which causes this, as it is held back by the constriction which holds that groove which you have on its belly, and when you collect this you understand to perforate according to that manner.
And then move the instrument to the other day if you find that the patient tolerates this, and extract a small amount of water, and do this for several days out of fear, and guard against error not allowing much water to be released from it.
If you fear for the patient, and let out a large amount of water, then treat that as a burial in hot sand, sweat in the bath, and wait under the sun for a long time; and treat that with drying medicines until it is healed.
And apply the cautery on the stomach, and prepare the mixture close to the water extraction, as I have recounted in what has preceded this.
Capital.
Regarding the treatment of children who are born with undeveloped urinary openings.
Some of the child's passage from their mother's womb does not have a puncture in its head, or is straightened out and not in its proper place.
Then it is necessary to quickly puncture the child as soon as it is born with a subtle needle according to this form:
Then insert into the groove a slender leaden pin and bind it there, and keep this for three days or up to four days.
And when it wants to urinate, let it relieve itself and then return it.
And if you do not remove the lead, it is possible that the urine which goes to the wrong place does not close this opening.
Let that which is straightened by the pin be medicated with a leaden pin, as we have said, for too long a time within which it becomes enlarged.
Let those in whom the pin is not in its proper place be treated, which causes this because of these, the one who is born and whose penis pin is at the end of his genital organ so that he cannot urinate within himself; as it raises the penis with his hand to the upper parts; it does not affect his generation, for where the semen cannot reach the mother according to rectitude, it is a malady of a stuck position.
The method of the operation on him is that the patient be laid on his back, and then extend the head of his genital organ with your left hand with a strong extraction, and cut at the tip of the head of his genital organ in its straight point, as it would be cut by a feather, or you do not leave any part, so that the middle of his body resembling the head of the penis falls into the middle place according to what he does.
And be aware that in your surgical bleeding, what kinds of wounds may occur; pause it for him when you cut the wound, and treat the injury until it is healed.
Capital.65.
Regarding the white substance that occurs in the prepuce at the tip of the penis, and the whitening and darkening and adhesion of the prepuce at the tip of the penis.
Wounds may occur in this white substance on the penis, it is an indication of stuck flesh.
And one of them is malignant and the other is not malignant.
Not malignant, let it be hung on a slender one and cut that when all of it comes off; then apply it to that spot under the Egyptian balsam; and then there, treat it with transparent balm until it is healed.
And if the white substance is malignant, let its color be known; then it must be that you administer cautery near the cut and reason of it.
Let it be that if white substance is in the prepuce of the tip of the penis uncircumcised, and one part of the white substance is inside the prepuce and the other part is outside; then let it be that you remove the white substance which is inside at the beginning until it becomes consolidated; and then you treat the outside portion, when you treat this period the prepuce may not be shriveled.
And just as discoloration and corrosion occur in the genital organs and on the prepuce, then let it be that you remove everything that is already degraded and what wants to corrupt or is already corrupted; and then spread over that area a mixture of honey, which has been mixed with flour made from saffron, dill seed, and coriander.
And then cure it along with another treatment that should be healthy.
If there is an escape of pus, then apply a lunar cautery according to this form:
The application of the lunar cautery is done in two positions at once; one when there is pus discharge and the other when the wound becomes infected.
And if the head of the penis is corroded and destroyed completely in the process, then dig that you should insert a lead tube into the interior of the foreskin so that the patient can urinate through that.
In the adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis (and this adhesion occurs only in that which allows the foreskin to be retracted, and on it circumcision is not performed; and when an adhesion occurs due to infection or abscess) dig that you should scratch off the thick pus until it dissolves the membrane and the head of the penis is freed from every part.
And if it is difficult to remove those thoroughly, then dig that you should scratch off some of the foreskin and head of the penis, which explains why when the foreskin is thin and light, it is pierced slightly by its thinness.
And then separate the foreskin from the head of the penis with a thin thread; the latter is already washed in water so that it does not adhere to another part.
And then let the patient be treated with astringent until it has healed.
Section 57.
Section 57: On the development of children and on treating what may happen to those who have been circumcised.
Circumcision is not a solution like other infections: however, it's necessary due to our operation and will, and more so for children, we need to assign the best possible operation with fewer losses for health.
So I say that the ancients did not advocate circumcision in certain free zones, which they do not use in their laws, and it is only because of our experience that we have come to know the majority of craftsmen and barbers use circumcision and development on the prepuce and on testicles; they use tendons at the foreskin and incision on the nails.
And I have tried all these methods and did not find better development on foreskins, on tendons at the base that in development like nails, which allow escaping pus from above; the lining of the foreskin is made up of two layers, and there is a layer of pus left behind, which is easily punctured for another incision and a sure pain. And for development which is done with a knife and manually, as blacksmiths do, it's not secure in cutting the tip of the male organ, as it easily enters into its groove.
In the operation on nails, slightly you should use iron and ruin your operation. And the umbilical cord is short by nature, and pus-filled vessels do not happen in such a way that it doesn't need development, and I have seen that.
The development that is done with foreskins and tendons at the base, the benefit, I discovered through experience, that the foreskins have a proportionate incision; therefore, when you press your hand it has two sharpnesses, they cut according to comparison in one go; there's no mistake made throughout this process.
And the first method of operation is that you should have the child stand up considerably if he's one of those who are a little small, so don't do anything but tie the base at his penis only, and let him stay like that for another day.
And then make the child comfortable in every way possible so he can understand this process when he receives his intelligence. And then make the child stand between your servants who are well arranged beforehand, and do not let them see more than one; hide the foreskins in your hand or leave them on your elbow so that the child doesn't see those nor any other tools.
And then insert your hand into his penis and blow on the umbilical cord, pulling it until the head of the penis is free, and then develop that which is added to the one of pus.
The form of the foreskins for development, this is how it should be:
Let the first group be non-cut at their ends and the others be cut, so that they don't leave a stump of the keyring, and let the length of both sharpnesses be as long as twice the length of two pencils equally.
The mistake in development is that you easily remove the entire intrinsic cord or part of it, so you should make the incision.
Then ensure that you spread out that part of your hand on your thumb in front of the joint area and then puncture it according to equality.
And if you can't hold it with your thumb, then extract that part with a needle and puncture it.
If it has passed three days, and if there's swelling left from the joint, then let that bleed out for you until the pus cavity is soft, then scrape it out with ease, and puncture it according to your preparation.
And be careful at the tip of the joint, where we will not let him do this to you.
And therefore treat that with those powders which we have recommended in the section on powders of the treatise on powders.
And if it has been punctured from the bone to measure, and follows the divisions above, then you won't notice it for him.
And treat that with what we have said until it is healed.
Chapter 58.
Regarding the treatment of retained urine in the bladder.
Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by pressure due to sand or gravel, or by swelling, or by obstruction, and it's similar to those that we have discussed about the methods of treatment in this section.
And if it is not dissolved as we have said, and he needs to forcefully remove the cause from him, then you should make a catheterization of him with an instrument which they call syringe, which has this form: It's made of silver and its thin like a lion's mane, just like a needle from ausel's artery with the thinness of a long ray that resembles half the length of a palm, and it has a thin tip.
And the method of expelling urine through that is: take the curved penis and bind it with wool or string for a good grip; then insert the ends of the penis into the part closest to the syringe, and cut off any excess from the wool if necessary, but make sure it enters the cannula forcefully. And then pull the syringe inwards and towards your body.
And have the patient lie over their stomach, and wash the bladder and the genital area with thyme oil, olive oil, and water.
And then bring the syringe with ease into the genital area; and bend the penis upwards above the umbilical part; and push the syringe inside; and push that in until it reaches the bladder; and make sure the penis reaches the cause of the blockage, and do not do so according to this order, but where there is twisting.
And then extend the penis with small wool pieces gradually, as the urine moistens the wool.
And then remove that and perform the urine treatment, use a catheter, do not stop doing this and use the catheter until the bladder is emptied and the patient finds relief.
Chapter 59.
Regarding the quality of bladder irrigation with vinegar and similar instruments that are compatible with this.
When there is an ulcer or pus in the bladder, or gravel within it, or if you want to distill water and medicines inside, then this must be done with an instrument called a clamp-curette, and here is its form:
And where the tip of it is closed, there should also be a tip. And in that, there are three prongs: two on one side, as you see.
In its beginning is a concave place, there where you insert it, and according to the quantity that presses against this, it adds, within which when any cause is pulled by this moisture, it's pulled out, and when it's expelled from it, then it's pulled out too, and when it's expelled long, as if by a clamp-curette with which naphtha is poured in naval battles.
And if you want to stop this moisture in the bladder, insert the end of the clamp-curette into the moisture, and pull what is pushed out towards the higher parts, where the moisture is pulled off by the curvature of the clamp-curette.
And then insert the end of the clamp-curette into the genital area as we have recommended in the catheter; and then pull out the moisture with what you're pulling out, for that moisture goes to the bladder immediately, and the patient feels it.
Shape of the subtle catheter by which the bladder is irrigated, and this is its shape:
And it should be made of silver or copper, where the tip resembles a small feather and let its shaft be smooth internally.
And then hold the bladder in movement, pause there the moisture you want to irrigate in the bladder, and hold that between two with strong ligature around the double penis, and heat that moisture over the fire.
And then insert the tip of the catheter in the vagina.
And then press your hand on the bladder in the wetness at the point wherethe patient's body bends, because that moisture has already penetrated the bladder.
If you do not have the bladder present, then take a piece of parchment and make it at that circle; and pierce it all around its curvature; and then insert a strong needle into those cuts, even when they are turned; and then add the circle in such a way that it is also added naturally, because you place where you want from the moisture, rinse and water.
And then you hold that in the instrument and do it like you did with the bladder, spreading your hand into where the moisture reaches the bladder.
Chapter lx.
On extracting bile.
We have already discussed in the division of types of bile and its treatment with medicines, and the difference between bile produced in the gallbladder and bile produced in the bladder, as well as the signs of that.
And we have discussed the bile for which my operation is performed, and sectioning.
And the bile produced in the bladder is that which is formed in the bladder.
And I will explain that in a clear and abbreviated exposition.
So it's said that bile produced in the larger bladder mostly goes to children; and the signs of this are that urine that leaves the bladder is like water in its subtlety, and appears in that sediment; and the patient sweats their body, produces waxed lumps inside, and then is expelled through the anus with these lumps.
And it takes a while for children to recover from this until they have reached the age of fourteen; and treatment is difficult in the elderly. In young people, it happens halfway through about that which exists among them.
And of the one in which bile is greater and treatment is easier; If it's small, it's contrary to that.
So how do we approach treating that, by starting with the initial stage of that which modifies the patient's body where it extracts all the passage which is in their intestines; where that opening prevents some lumps from preventing bile production.
And then take the body of the patient on their feet and straighten them up by force so that bile descends to the bottom of the bladder or escapes from any lumps.
And then make that hole between your hands which have been prepared, and let the things of you be left with these matters, so that the whole bladder is made to descend into the parts that are left.
And then remove all of that and any other deformities.
So if you feel the bile in the space, then you immediately cover it with a section over them.
And if you do not remove it all of your touch, then cover with oil the indication of your left hand thumb, if the patient is a child, or the middle finger if they are a full adult, and insert that into their anus. And remove all of the bile where it stands with your thumb. And gradually convert that small amount into the neck of the bladder.
And then press on it with your thumb, and expel that to the parts outside of the place where you have made the section.
And command the attendant to press the bladder with their hand; and command another attendant with their right hand to extend their legs towards the parts above, and with their other hand raise the pubis which is left by the legs in the part where the section was made.
And then insert the small end of this instrument, for this is its form: And split in him that which is between the anus and the legs, not at the midpoint, before the right thigh; and make the section over that bile, your thumb being in the anus, the section should be transverse, so that the section outside is wide and inside compressed according to the amount of bile I can remove for his possibility, but not excessively. And if we press our thumb which is in the anus on the bile, it must be at the level of the section, and becomes a hole-exempted from its faculties.
And know that there is some bile which has an edge and borders, because its excretion is made difficult by this.
And that one looks like a lion, it's round, and it causes a more difficult excretion for him.
So if it is the one which has edges and borders, adjust in the crack.
And if it is not like that hole-exempted, then cover over it or strengthen over it in a decent way, the tip of which is like a file on which you strengthen over the bile and do not escape from him; or insert those of your tool with curved tip.
And if you cannot strengthen over it, then widen that crack a little, and if you see bleeding, cut in firmly with vinegar.
And if bile is more than one, then at the beginning you push your hand into the mouth of the bladder, and proceed to cut over it; and then push a little close to that; and similarly do so if there are more than two lumps.
And if it is severe body pain, then the ignorance is that you incise in that large area, which befalls the patient with one of two causes: or if they reside or lead to his continuous urination distillation, so that the place is not completely consolidated.
May assist in the expulsion of what is inside until it becomes exposed, or in the creation within the fracture where the edges are inside that extract that through pieces.
So when you have completed your operation, fill the wound with substances of aloe and dragon's blood, and strengthen that. And place over that piece of cloth immersed in oil and vinegar, or in ground oil and water, because the pus is to be absorbed by the dressing.
And place the patient on their back on their bed, and do not move the bandage on the third day.
And when that has been removed, wash the area with water and oil, and continue to treat it with clear ointment and with diabolicon ointment until it is healed.
If pus and corrosive appears in the wound, adjust it and make it corrode, and if that resembles so much as if the blood is frozen in the bladder, and for him there is forbidden urine (and this is known by the release of blood with urine), then intervene with your advice in the wound and remove that blood, because if Roman causes the bladder to rupture from the bladder and its putrefaction.
And wash the wound with vinegar, water, and salt, and against all kinds, with what you find suitable for him during his healing until he is healed.
And observe throughout the entire healing period that you are in touch with all the areas and adjust the medicines which are placed on the area.
And if the pain is small and it's located in the middle of the testicles, and urine discharge is prohibited, then treat that with what I recommend before the area becomes larger; and this progress will be marked by this treatment which leads to healing; and already you have seen this, so you should use a perforating tool on the tip of which this is its shape:
Of triangular tip, sharp, implanted in rod.
And then take the needle, and hold it on that part of the testicles to leave the pain so it does not return to the bladder.
And then insert the needle in the testicles, piercing with ease until the puncturing tool reaches that pain. And rotate the puncturing tool with your hand in that small pain, and you puncture the opening of it until it reaches on the other side; so urine is released immediately.
And then press your hand on that which is hardened by the pain of the part behind the testicles, because that is broken, and it's open through urine, and the patient is healed.
If this treatment does not suit any reason which prohibits that one, then leave a needle by the pain, and another needle above the pain. And then cut over the pain in that testicle between two stitches. And then remove that. And then remove the bandage and change the frozen blood, which is made in the wound.
There is not necessarily a needle left on the pain, but so that it does not return to the bladder, and the other needle above only if; when this is removed, the needle nears the end of the pain, the cause returns to its place and takes over the wound.
And for this reason it is necessary when you have the needle above that you raise the cause to those parts above, or that it should return in your favor, and take over the wound as we have said.
Capitol. lxvi.
Extraction of pain from women.
Pain in women is less frequent.
If you see pain in any of those cases, then healing for them is difficult, and it is prohibited by manual methods.
One of them is that the woman's force lies with her uterus.
And the second is that you don't find a woman who knows how to express herself to doctors when she is pregnant, or if she has had abortions before.
The third is that you don't find women who know this art, especially the operation by hand.
And the fourth is that the location of the section near the pain in women is distant from the location of the pain, so you need to anticipate with the section, and there it's fear.
If necessity compels you to this, then take that you have a woman doctor who knows and is available.
If you are lacking that one, then consult with the closest doctor or someone subtle, or present a female midwife who is proficient in women's affairs, or a woman who has part of this art.
Then make that presentation, and command her to do everything you ask her, from inquiring about the pain to beginning; which reason is that she should observe if the woman has a uterus, then instruct what you said in the buttock of her and desire the pain.
Then if she finds that, make her continue with what you said, and then command her to incise on that.
If it is not a case of verge (possible reference to female reproductive issues), then command the midwife to insert her finger into the patient's abdomen and inquire about the pain. Since she places her left hand on the bladder, she should compress that area well.
If she finds that, then guide her to gradually remove that compression from the opening of the bladder to the parts left at some distance within the power of her virtue, so that it reaches into the depth of the thigh.
And guide the treatment on that location at the tip of the patient's abdominal cavity; you must reach into the depth of any part where they are standing and center the pain in that spot, so the complaint is not worsened by the pain as they move them.
And the section should be minimal at commencement; then guide her to insert her hand into that area. If she feels pain, adjust the position of the area according to the quantity that you know will alleviate the pain from there.
And know that the stones of pain are lumps: those among them are few and large, sharp and rough, long and round, with edges.
And therefore, know how many stones there are of you for this, so that you can discuss about what you want regarding this.
And if you want to release the tension, adjust in the place where the cut is made and let it out for an hour until the pain disappears, then proceed with your operation once the pain has subsided.
And prepare for yourself the tools that are mentioned in the removal of stones in men, so you can be assisted by those during your operation.
And if you want to release the tension, and you know that the expulsion of the tension is from the artery that is cut, then you sprinkle powder over the area and strengthen it with powdered herbs and stricture descent, do not overdo this; let the pain remain and do not remove it, as the patient's condition will improve. And then treat the wound.
And once the intensity of the pain subsides after a few days, and the wound heals, then you can proceed with your operation once the pain has subsided.
Captulo LXII.
On section about inguinal hernia.
An inguinal hernia is nothing but an addition of moisture in the white testicle, which contains the sperm and is referred to as the testicle. It's named the testicle.
And sometimes it occurs in the proper sack where nature provided the place for semen production, once it opens that already has another semen; and it's the passage of the reproductive system between the white testicle which we have mentioned, not this but a small opening.
And the generation of this hernia occurs due to weakness affecting the reproductive organs, so it inundates this matter onto them. Sometimes it happens through hits that are made on the testicles.
And this moisture has various colors; the color of it might become yellowish or blood red, or reddish, or blackish paste-like, or watery white, and this is the most common.
And the signs by which one can know where this water accumulation is located in this case: if it's within the testicle that we mentioned, then the swelling will be round and somewhat elongated like the shape of a testicle, and the testicle becomes visible, as moisture encompasses all sides.
And if the moisture is within the proper sac, then the swelling will be round at the part of semen production, and that's why we judge there is another semen.
And if the moisture is between the passage of reproductive organs and the white testicle, then you'll find that it's centered.
And if you want to know the color of the moisture, then you expose the color of the moisture inside the swelling by pressing into it; and according to where it stands in the mark left by pressing, judge about what is inside them.
And when we come to treating them, then guide that if possible, the patient urinate and let their body fill up.
And afterwards have them lie on their back for some minutes or another reason, and place your hand under their wet towels.
And afterwards sit on the left side of them, and command the assistant to follow them on their right, who extends their hand between both sides up to the passage of reproductive organs and the part of the belly button.
And afterwards take the left side, separate the passage of reproductive organs from the middle point longitudinally up to near the navel.
And make the section according to rectitude, equidistant from the line that should be of the testicle's skin, so it reaches into the white testicle including.
And scrape that area, observe and watch for this to ensure you don't scrape too deep; your scraping should come down as far as the testicle's tip more precisely examine during your scraping according to the amount that is possible.
And afterwards puncture the white part filled with water through a wide incision and remove all the water.
And afterwards separate between the two labia of the section with scissors, and extend the white part up to the higher parts; do not touch the passage within the reproductive organs, and cut into the white in this manner that is possible for you. And inside him you examine all or in pieces, and especially his fine left side, for if you do not examine the operation meticulously, it is uncertain that the fluid will return.
If the patient needs to continue this process outside of his body during your operation, when you have completed the section of the catheter, go back inside him and adjust both ends of the canal's opening for the genitals with suturing, and treat that wound like any other injury until it heals.
And if you find that the patient is affected by other illnesses, then cut the vessels which are above the retractor, and remove the patient, and afterwards treat it as we have said.
If the fluid is added in two parts, then you know there are hernias; therefore, dissect that part as you did with the other equally; and if it seems to your eyes to be an operation, then do so.
And then you cleanse the wound, and between each section immerse wool in oil or rubbed oil; then place another piece of fabric that was immersed in vinegar and oil above it, and spread this over both genitals and the belly; pause with sheets folded under and powders, and lie those beneath him according to this shape:
And place them side by side on the two sheets and fill them with moistened wool according to this resemblance; have their ends placed where they are pressed either from a table or a wet piece of wool, attach them at the waistband's structure in the drawers, one end take into the backside between the buttocks and the other end another to the foot of the trousers, two ends above the thighs on two knees and two ends again others over two hips, and all tension should be adjusted at the waistband of the drawers.
And in some cases where this hernia is treated artificially with a cautery instead of section with iron; and you take a fine surgical blade to dissect the canal for the genitals, and it should be ignited according to what we have advised that the white part containing fluid is exposed, and then you apply the cautery like this: And it resembles Greek letter.
And then pierce that canal, and it should be ignited while all the moisture is evacuated.
And then extend the catheter with forceps, scrape with forceps, and scrape with a fine burning cautery; dissect it according to what is possible so as to remove all of it; and protect yourself from the patient that the fire does not touch him.
And know that this operation is safer and farther from the wound discharge than with section, and better than operation through incision.
If during the operation or when applying cautery, or after wound discharge, you encounter any adverse effects, then consider what treatment would suit such an occurrence for your patient, and apply that healing method as it is said.
If the patient is weak, and does not anticipate a second operation due to its horror, then administer a puncture according to what I advised you; and it's when we confirm that you should do so, through what we discussed about meanings, that this hernia is watery.
And consider that you should raise the patient over an elevated surface, then puncture the abscess at the lowest part of him below the waist with a diagonal incision, and complete the puncture according to the length of his body.
And let the opening be wide so that all the fluid is drained away.
And place your hand on the site diagonally and smooth that area, so that the remaining fluid can drain out. And treat it internally as soon as the wound is healed.
If a complication occurs during the drainage of fluid at that time you puncture it: and this is not done unless because when white pannicol in the wound opening causes complications and prevents water discharge, then consider that you should place on the wound a tool with which fluid from dropsy is extracted, the shape of which must precede; or adjust within the wound pressure against an object that extracts water from dropsy.
And know that the fluid returns, and it is somewhat stabilized around two months or about these; and when it is added, then puncture according to that method, so that the patient will pass his days.
Chapter LXIII.

And know that during the operation for this hernia, there is a fear of pernicious loss in the major positions; so from my perspective, it is better to let you pass and save yourself through that.
And I am recalling the operation for that and the specifics of the abscesses.
Therefore, I say that abscesses occur in the bodies where the genitals are combined, and this is done due to these causes: or by a sudden excess of pressure, which accumulates in the genitals, or by impact.
And the color of the abscess is according to the color of his body, and it does not appear in his pain, and this is a heavy abscess.
And softness indicates an inflamed abscess, whose color is dark, and it does not move in him.
And in some cases it is caused by inflammation of the vessels, and from that inflammation already perceived his memory, or due to inflammation of the veins.
When it is due to artery inflammation, it is known by the spreading of the abscess when you press that area on your thumbs; and do not confuse when that touches.
It is the one caused by vein inflammation that should not be diffused for any reason, you must press it with your thumbs.
And it is possible that on this type of injury a section can be made and on the other muscles; so you cut into the tendon of the veins, and then press onto the parts above, extract that from the white belly, deliver the suspensorium of the vessels, tie them up, and cut the suspensorium pus as you deliver it from all sections of the foot part.
So if the foot is already on those muscle areas, then you should remove the foot and cut into that area.
And if there is adhesion due to any reason of the belly, or between that which is in the joints, then you should remove all that adhesion and cut into it through a round incision.
It is when it's a native formation of flesh in the area of the adhesion which is behind it, then you should cut all that is from him, and remove the foot as well, as we have said.
So when your operation is complete, then fill the wound with wool soaked in olive oil and vinegar; and afterwards treat that according to another treatment until it heals.
Chapter LXIV.

It is an abscess enveloped by some kind of a leaf-like sheath resembling a sprout, and it causes difficulty in exercising movements and walking on the thigh.
And in the treatment of this thigh ailment, one should consider with caution what comes before it.
However, when they say operation in that as I did in the first instance.
And they say that when you make the thigh raise on an elevated surface; and then put the suspensorium of the testicles over the parts left; and place your hand where you are pressing with the thumbs against the belly which is pushed towards the groin; and have those other servants ready, and extend them with vigorous extension.
And then cut through the broad surface diagonally across where the vessels are, exposing the vessels.
And afterwards cleanse all parts as we have said in removing arteries which are in the veins.
And then place in those an arrow with a double thread, tie that at the first point where you encounter life in the thigh region, and tie it again elsewhere at the end of them. And then cut those at the middle point in a straight section according to the length of the body, and remove that which is aggregated from the liquid, rotten, and corrupted.
And then treat the wound with the treatment for other wounds where you wish to be healed by what falls into the vessels which are of two kinds, not being harmful.
If life occurs in all the bellies, then you should cut out or cut through the testicles if cutting them is what causes it to stop with respect to the vessels, for lack of nutrition due to the incision of the vessels, and make them stand still or cause it not to be young again.
Chapter LXV.
Regarding the treatment of intestinal hernia.
The occurrence of this hernia happens through a section that occurs within the belly extending over the abdomen from parts of the abdominal wall, causing some of the intestines to escape into one of those sections.
This rupture can be either from the belly or its removal, and these two types occur due to various reasons: impact, by jumping, by shouting, by lifting a heavy cause, or by some other reason.
The sign of this is that it occurs little by little over time when the belly causes gradual expansion. It does not occur suddenly and there's an abscess equal in size within the womb, as the belly squeezes out the intestine.
The sign of this is when it happens due to a section in the belly; at the beginning there's a sudden onset of intense pain. There's an abscess that appears differently than the surrounding area near the abdominal wall; this is because the intestine moves inside and the body above the belly is pushed upwards.
Sometimes, there's an outward protrusion in the intestine along with the tissue, and this condition is called intestinal hernia.
Some occur due to wind, others move into the intestine's opening and get stuck there. This causes great pain in the thigh, while some develop into unpleasant and more intense pain especially when pressed.
In treating the symptoms of this thigh ailment, caution is advised because you should avoid causing bruising in that area.
The method of operating on this is to command the thigh to return the hernia to its cavity with its hand inside its natural indentation if it returns towards itself, then wrap it around its neck between your hands and raise its legs.
And then cut the string that joins the testicle tendon to the areas above, and cut the testicle tendon entirely along its length; and place two folds of the section incision according to what you need for opening the section among them.
And if it's the section according to the amount that you can possibly make a hole in that, let it be done.
And clean that area until the sack of the testicles is exposed, while revealing the white hard lump from each part.
Then insert your hand into that place where it severs the testicle, where there is the white testicle, which is located in front of the penis, and between the testicles according to their position, and free yourself from that adhesion that is behind the penis.
And then move your hand towards the testicle parts on the sides, and with this extend the white part of the penis using your left hand, and raise the penis to that side of the section; and command the surgeon to extend the penis upwards as you dissolve the adhesion behind with a complete solution.
And look closely with your fingers so that there is no cause for the hernia being enclosed in the hard white part. If you find any cause from him, then remove that towards the belly of the patient.
And then pierce the part in front of the testicle's tube by section where it flows with blood and health, as we have recommended in what we said.
And then apply oiled wool, and pause on the wound; and apply the thread (and some wraps of white tissue is burned, which we mentioned earlier regarding the incision of his urethra, where several wraps would burn those) and smooth out the thread so that it falls by itself.
If his healing is delayed, then immerse in water and pause on that as it falls according to what we said.
And then treat the wound with another type of treatment for wounds until it is healed.
Chapter LXVI.
Regarding ventral hernias.
In this hernia, it is not observed that any has been burnt upon the treatment of it.
And the first ones would say that it is done as we have recommended in the hernia that is on the belly; which is to tie the vessels near the section towards that part with ease for him; and then dry out around the middle area in the vicinity of where I open that, within which the vessels fall.
And treat the wound as we have said until it is healed.
Chapter LXVII.
Regarding the disorder that occurs in the intestines.
Some threads may tear in the intestines as we have said, and lift the area.
And do not let any cause of hernias occur in the patient; and if they do, it's rare; and return them all times.
If the time is prolonged with this, there will be an opening in the penis between where the hernia descends into the penis; and it happens due to the extension of the penis which is in the intestines as we have said, which cause is that the penis is extended, and then the area becomes swollen and inflamed and lifts.
And the treatment of him is with a cautery as we previously described this.
And some threads are treated with iron according to this manner: and that the patient lies on his two middle ones among your left hand, and then dry out the area of the wound opening from the swellings until it reaches the width up to three inches.
And then strengthen the white penis that is below the tube so that it is revealed.
And then take the thread and place it on the most elevated part of the penis, and press it to the bottom of the belly.
And then touch the two most prominent areas on the tip of the penis's thread, and adjust one of those to the other for suturing.
And then remove the end of the thread, neither cut out all from the penis, nor extend the penis or any other cause like what I've come to know about in treating intestinal hernias.
And then treat that with the treatment of wounds, and when you pierce the threads, clean it up and restore the wound until it is consolidated; where the penis is contracted and not adjusting the swelling from the rupture.
And cautery is better in this place, which is closer to health.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
Of soothing the chain of the testicles.
Pain felt in the chain of the testicles in some men is alleviated by heating, as it softens the tissues that are between those areas, and it requires monitoring for him.
Then it is necessary for the one who treats him in his recovery that he lie on his side according to his height, and unfold the entire chain that is softened over the natural chain; and close two lips against the suture.
And if you want, as in the beginning, with an excess of the softened chain make three stitches or four and secure a tight suture.
And then cut between the stitches; and proceed with treatment for other wounds until they are healed and the pus falls.
Section 69.
Of castration.
Know that castration in our law is condemned, but because it has been written to me that I remember this freely; and it is not necessary to remember this simply for two ways, of which one is when the doctor is questioned about this in science, that they know how to treat him who may occur; and the other way is that we have had the need for castration of other animals due to our offspring's illnesses, like with mares, and cows, and pigs, and similar beasts.
And so I say that castration is done in two ways: either through gelding, or through a rupture of the testicles.
And in the case that it is done through gelding, the method of the operation is to make them slaughter the beast in deep water so that his testicles are softened and swollen, and hanging. And then take those with your hand while they dissolve and do not appear the traces of the operation.
And in castration done through rupture and sectioning, you should have the beast and press the chain of the testicles of him with your left hand.
And then lay the suspensory and cut onto each hole where you make one section so that two holes process.
And then cut those pus that you have removed from any wound. And do not leave over any cause of the scrotum on the horse, but rather the subtle scrotum which is on the veins.
And this way of castration is better which is done through gelding, for it only leaves a slight cause of the testicles so that the animal desires copulation.
And then treat the wound until it is healed.
Section 70.
Of the treatment of hermaphroditism.
Hermaphroditism in men occurs according to two ways: the first is when one appears with an expansion of the space in the chain of testicles, it's like a male chest that has female hair on which there are pubic hairs.
And sometimes urine flow from that one is in the chain of the testicles.
And in the case of women, it's a special one: that is, the male part on the pubis resembles two testicles in men, somewhat reduced in size and positioned to one side as if they were two prepuces in men with two testicles.
And the treatment is of three kinds: two for men and one for women. And you should cut those adjusted tissues so that the discharge of that can escape, and then proceed to treat those with treatment for other diseases.
And in the second type of men who urinate there, which is in the chain of the testicles, there is no cure or operation for him.
Section 21.
Of coughing and swollen flesh due to female causes.
Severe coughing is adjusted to natural causes that are tightened and should be closely observed; some cases become exaggerated in certain women to such an extent that they spread like in men, penetrating into intercourse.
Therefore, when you have the excess of coughing with your hand or a spoon, cut it.
And do not complete with cutting, especially at the beginning of digestion, because it does not allow for the flow of bile.
And then treat that with treatment until the disease is healed.
Undigested flesh is the flesh that does not enter the mother's womb and fills it up instead, and somewhat protrudes to one side according to the likeness of a cow (for this reason some initially called it "tail castration"); so when you cut like you would cut coughing, treat that until it is healed.
Section 72.
Of the treatment of diarrhea.
Diarrhea is when the male part of a woman isn't perforated or there's a small tear. And it is either natural or accidental.
Accidental refers to illness that has preceded, and such an accident is caused by improper body parts or by a subtle and thick disease.
And it occurs in the womb region or in the patient's ribs, or in excess pus within them, or in pus below them. Prohibit coitus and prohibited pregnancies, and prohibit childbirth, and I strongly prohibit menstruation.
And the knowledge of that is made through observation of the pulse, if the rise is visible, then it's high; more so if it's not visible, then you search for that near your own fingers or near the artery.
More so if the rise is due to subtle disease, and it's close to the two lips, then you touch and release that.
And you place your hands on the two lips of dust, and then place your index fingers under both breasts.
And the woman should be on her back, her thighs spread apart, and then extend both lips until that subtle disease is released and the rise becomes open.
And you take wool and dip it in oil, then place that on the affected area, and leave it there for a day to ensure that the incised site does not harden.
More so if the disease is thick and dense, then you should incise that at a lymph node or at the leaf of myrtle.
More so if it's due to inflammation, then you suspend that with a hook and incise that.
And use the medicines that stop bleeding and reduce swelling like avocado, and dragon's blood, and resin, adjust with egg white.
And then administer a large lead tube for so that the wound does not heal lightly.
And keep that there for several days and administer lime water.
And then cure it with the other curative procedure until it is healed.
And sometimes accidents happen during the natural process of other organs, and then you should incise according to this manner. More so if it's due to a bad abscess, an abscess that is in the womb should not be made against iron using any other method.
Capitol 73.
Of the treatment for hemorrhoids, uterine tumors, and red boils that occur in the womb of women.
Hemorrhoids are the result of veins in the anus area that continuously exude blood; and as for old hemorrhoids, they happen like this.
And I have already explained about the various types of those and their symptoms, as well as to which ones they are treated and which ones are not treated.
So it says that hemorrhoids and them, when in the womb region and do not show up through feeling, then in those there should be no treatment with iron.
More those which are in the opening of the womb over which you can feel, these are the ones that are treated.
And you should have the woman lie on her back and extend her hips or with a hard sheet, or with a rough cloth, then incise those at the axilla.
And then apply the powders that contain the bleeding of one of the internal powders for reducing swelling, like avocado and similar to those.
And then soak her feet in water for an hour, and after that leave it in cold water.
And if the bleeding persists, then have her drink a decoction of sumac and of mare's tail grasses and of wormwood and of similar things.
And then take ground barley flour, mix it with honey and wine to add flavor, and make a poultice from that on her back.
And if the bleeding stops, then it's good; otherwise, do it with two suction devices and on her nipples make incisions.
And then take wool and submerge it in colostrum or in the juice of elderberry or in wormwood wine, to stick it on the area; and then treat that place with ointment until it heals.
And treat it until it heals.
Capitol 74.
Of the operation for accidental rupture of a sack in the womb.
Various types of abscesses that occur in the womb, such as bad ones, abscesses due to pregnancy complications, ulcers, inflamed glands, ruptured tumors, hemorrhagic swellings, gangrene, and other abscesses. And I have already explained these illnesses, their types, and their symptoms, as well as their treatments in the previous sections.
And you should know that I mentioned in this treatise about the abscess caut where it comes from when it's related to healing abscesses, and if you want to know how the operation is done with iron for it.
Then consider if the pain of the abscess at its beginning is sharp on percussion and expectoration and fever, and sometimes it turns red and if you can feel it, then do not touch it with a perforation operation, but treat it with whatever helps during maturation until the intensity of the accidents ceases.
And at that time you should make the woman cut on a board with two edges; and lie on her side and adjust her feet to the lower part of the belly, and let her thighs spread out, and place her arms under her elbows, and tie them in a manner suitable for her convenience.
And the midwife should follow from the left side and administer the tool where she has opened the mother's orifice, the shape of which will come in those causes that will be done nearby.
And when you want to administer this tool, fix it on the top of the mother's womb in the female patient, so that what enters from the tool does not exceed the mother's opening and guides the patient. If the tool is larger than the mother's opening, then you should sprinkle dust on the texture of the mother's opening so that it prevents any part of the instrument from entering entirely into the mother's opening.
And you should make the vertigo that moves in the tool on the left side and above, so that the minister holds the instrument and rotates the vertigo inside until it opens the mother's orifice.
And when the excitement appears, and it is touched with the hand and is hot and moist, then you should dry that which should be held at the head of them with a damp cloth.
And when the fever is expelled, then you should place on the wound a cushion submerged in rubbed oil or yellow oil with some camphor; and let the calf rest in the section above the mother's opening.
And expose the mother, and over the navel, a clean wool cloth submerged in water where thyme has been boiled.
And let it be treated about two days with the ointment that suits, so that it becomes healthy within that time.
And some sores are washed by the mother and the wound with water and honey that is stirred, and then water in which herbs or lime blossoms have been boiled, and then return to the application.
And if the wound is inside the swollen mother's womb, then you should refrain from treating it with iron, using instead the treatment that we have indicated in this section.
Chapter 75.
To teach midwives how to best medicate their patients when pregnancy deviates from a natural figure.
It is essential for the midwife to understand the natural figure of childbirth by observing her patient's symptoms. When you notice a pregnant woman trying to expel her child through her natural passages and wanting to smell the air, this happens due to the process occurring within her body, hastening the birth process. If she is having contractions and the baby moves downward toward her pelvis or hangs below her navel from either side of it, you can deduce that this process follows a natural figure, with the baby moving down her body towards her abdomen.
So when you notice those signs, then understand that her abdomen is compressed by herself as the baby descends slightly heavier when it passes over her head. Let her perform the second stage, and eliminate any excess fluid for good recovery.
If this part is otherwise unnatural and unmanageable, when the baby sits on its feet and the body of the patient sits in front of her head and her feet, and one of her hands or under her foot. Or when her head sits and her hand is there or on her abdomen, and she is lightly turned onto her back, resembling figures that are unmanageable.
It is necessary for the midwife to be knowledgeable and discerning in all these matters, so as to avoid error and deception.
And I am showing you every figure of those cases, and how the organs are in those cases for what they signify and their state.
When the fetus is sitting on its head naturally by expulsion, and it is vigorous to the woman making childbirth difficult for her, and if the power of her labor has already weakened, then make her expel or have what women possess expelled from her, and evaporate her sweat with fennel oil baths and oily washes.
And the midwife should intervene between her small intestine and anus in that second stage or dry that part with her finger within where there is moisture. And press on the belly of the woman so that she expels the fetus.
If it does not expel, then you should cause the woman to be rubbed with chaffs of poppy and fennel seeds.
And later command her, with a gentle persuasion, to be compressed and have her sneeze with a good disposition; and open her mouth and both nostrils for an hour, when the fetus will soon pass through.
And if both parts of the fetus are passed at the beginning, then you should gradually reduce those to facilitate small movements. If you do not heed the instrument, then have the woman lie on a board and raise her feet, and gradually move the board towards the ground; and let the woman be held so that she does not fall due to the concussion.
And if the parts are not being returned and labor has stopped, then insert those again and extract the membranes of the fetus or lay them out on the woman's hands with a cloth and extract it evenly; when that will be passed immediately.
When the fetus is in its feet-first position, then it should be guided towards this. And gradually make the fetus turn small, and adjust that, and take one foot and extend those slightly and gradually.
When the baby is cramped in between the thighs, then you command it to expel, and make it sneeze with force, which if possible should be done through a natural opening if God wills.
And if it is not expelled through the method we have recommended, then you gradually return the fetus little by little inside, until you pause it according to a natural figure, which at that point should be naturally expelled through a slight position.
And if it is forbidden to do all of what we have recommended, then take some bandages and dissolved rubber, beat them thoroughly in the mortar for good beating, and at that point line up the female's waist, under her belly button. And gradually make it cut in tepid water, until it reaches the flanks.
And when you stop bleeding from your parts, then have it subfumigate with mint and place that under them. And when you've had the sub-fumigation for an hour, then have it sit on a stool, and at that point make it sneeze and extend its mouth, lift from there, and press the lowest part of its belly slightly, which should make the fetus naturally expelled soon.
Fetus' position hanging longitudinally from one of its breasts. Guide it in the reduction of her hand, though if you can't reduce that, then raise the woman and let that go.
And if it doesn't go, then have her lie on the bed, and shake her thighs with forceful shaking, and at that point administer to her medicines which I mentioned earlier of purges.
And if the birth has come, then have her sit on a stool, and at that point study about reducing the hand, and adjust the fetus according to natural figures, and make the woman sneeze and command her to compress herself until it is expelled naturally.
Fetus' position on the back, spreading its breasts, and the surface of her body is two-thirds that of her mother's. Make sure the midwife holds the fetus' hand and gradually rotate it little by little, so that it becomes easier.
And when they are equal and after that you pause on the waist of her as we recommended using oil and purges.
And at that point you command her to push little by little, and when you've done this, then have her sit on a stool and command her to be leaning towards the right side of her stomach, and at that point you command her to compress herself; and make her sneeze with force. Fetus exit after preparation from the side.
When it proceeds from horror of the mother according to this method, consider this, and at that point you must apply the second one into your fingernail until the moisture is evacuated.
And if the fetus is suspended over her face and neck, then you must apply that of the umbilical cord, so that it is not retained and hangs.
And at that point guide the fetus to its parts inside so that you pause it according to what is felt, and command the woman to compress herself several times, and it should be expelled naturally through a slight position, if God wills.
Birth of twins or multiple fetuses. Know that twin births happen naturally, and sometimes they occur three or four times, but this is unusual and rare; mostly these are due to natural causes, not living beings.
Count them, whether they are multiply or a single, one by two, and distinguish those within the ligament at the umbilical of each of them. Some births happen naturally like one fetus through normal delivery, and others happen through impossible births as we have recommended.
And if some are difficult among them, you must give birth to them and proceed according to what we have said about the non-natural figures, then treat those as we have recounted.
And if the midwife is skilled and makes what she does with ease and subtlety, and also with delay, and adjusts according to every figure as she was prepared by her method leading to health.
Recollection of what forms in the womb from embryos and are aborted.
Some lesions are formed in the major one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and more than ten, and you should verify that a female abortion does not produce any, and another of all forms, which is caused by the measurement of the noble sages.
And all this is covered in the science of midwifery that suits it to that little resemblance to that, and thus adapts itself to that according as it covers.
Capitol seventy-six.
Regarding the extraction of the fetus when it is dead.
When you care for a dead fetus with what we have discussed in the division of medicine and it does not come out externally, then consider using operation by hand. You should judge whether the woman is of good health and not under any circumstances that are feared to result in loss.
And you should consider that the woman is laid on her side over the bed about her back, and that her head is inclined to one side and her legs raised.
And the minister should have that from both sides or be tied in bed so that the body of him does not extend during the extraction of the fetus.
And then you wet the mother's mouth of him with hot oil and with sweet honey and with fennel and seeds of it.
And then oil the midwife's hand with those oils and honeycombs, and place her hand under comfort in the mother, and prepare on her hand the location where she will insert her fingers into the fetus.
Prepare conveniently in this way: then you should consider if the fetus is prepared that descending upon its head, and then you put your fingers into its heels, or at its neck, or at its mouth, or at the palate, or let him hang his beard, or at the cleft of it, or at the appropriate places on the back, or leave the hypochondriac.
If the descent is upon its feet, then at the knee joint, or in the middle of the back.
And you should have the finger of your right hand, and hold the curvature of it in that place which is between the last two digits of your left hand, and place your hand with ease and put the finger into one of those places that we said, until it reaches the root cause.
And then hold and place another finger or the third if necessary, so that there is equal pressure, and not extension according to its straightness merely.
And it should be tender all around, so that the discomfort of it is relieved in this way as when digging out teeth for their removal.
And consider in this what is between them that the extension may be softened; and if any part of it is held back, then consider that the midwife should oil some of her fingers with oil and insert these expertly and turn those that are held back.
So if the part of the fetus is expelled, then the fingers should be moved into a location that is more pus; and do this until all the fetus is expelled.
If the hand is inside facing the other, and it is not possible to reduce that by squeezing it, then consider having a sheet enveloped over that; and proceed to remove that until all is expelled, and cut it or at the joint of the hand or on the side.
And do this for the other hand and in both feet.
If the head of the fetus is large, or encounters squeezing in the passage, or it is that water is cramped at its head, then consider inserting between your fingers a thorn and open the head and expel the water, or search for that with an instrument which is called "the plumb", whose shape will come close to the shapes of other instruments in this chapter.
And similarly do this if the fetus has a large head by nature: and then consider cutting that with string or take that with plumb as we said; and then extract the bones with forceps.
And if the head is inside and squeezed at the cleft, then it should be opened so that the wetness in the feet can be dissolved.
If it is not complicated, nor obstructed by squeezing, then consider cutting the head as soon as that suits you.
And if the stomach organs are ruptured or in its hydrocele, then consider that you punctures it where there is wetness within it.
If the fetus is above its feet, then consider that the pressure on it is slight and the direction of it to the mother's mouth is slight.
If it is squeezed at the belly and feet, then consider that you remove it with cloth which will envelop your hand, and that you cut the belly and feet where there flows what is in those.
If the other limbs are still and turn the head, then consider that the midwife inserts her left hand; if the mother's mouth has been opened, then insert your hand in the prepuce of the penis, and close it around the head, pull that with your fingers into the mother's mouth, and proceed to insert one or two fingers, and pull him with those.
And if the mother's mouth is affected by an abscess and it happens to someone, then ensure that it does not get worse than it should; before that, later administer an infusion of wet fatty causes. And apply bandages; and follow the patient with waters that soothe and moisturize.
And if the wound is on his side, then if possible do it with stitches: and let that which we have said be applied to the living wound.
And if that is not possible, then immerse it in powders, and extract it.
And make sure there are no causes from within the second kind.
And when you have completed all your operation, then apply what we have said about the treatment for abscesses caused by inflammation that happens in the mother.
And if there is discharge of pus, then apply withtive waters and proceed with the other treatment.
And I have seen a woman with a dead fetus in her womb, and another pregnancy was conceived on that spot, and the fetus that resulted was also dead. It happened to someone for a long time an abscess in their abdominal region; and it swelled inside until there was an opening, and it began to leak pus.
And I was called upon to treat him, and I treated him for a long time, but the wound did not heal.
Then I applied some strong-smelling plaster on him and submerged him in water for several days, then submerged him with another object; and I was too amazed to find that there was indeed a bone.
And then I realized that they were from the bones of the dead fetus.
And then I cleansed the wound, extracted bone flesh from him, and the woman was in her usual place positions, and already saw it in such a manner for a long time, corrected him by half a foot.
And I do not object to being strange, but rather that in this is knowledge and help for what the surgeon does by his art in treating injuries.
About the forms of the instruments necessary for extracting the fetus.
The form of a rod by which the mother is opened:
This is the form of the forceps in which they are equalized, on which equalization two instruments are placed at the ends of two sticks. But this instrument should be made finer for twisting, and it may be made of metal or wood.
And the thickness of any stick is two inches and the edge of each stick is one inch wide; and the length of each is a hand and half. And in the middle part of the sticks are two adjustments for these metal sticks which are already made, of which the length is about a hand and a little more than an inch, and the thickness of each is two inches or a little less than that.
And these two additions should be inserted into the mother's mouth so that when you rotate the two prescribed forceps, they open to those.
Another form similar but more delicate and light:
It is made of metal sticks or wood according to the appearance of forceps. But at the extremity of it are two additions like this, and the length of those additions is about a hand, and the thickness of each is two inches.
And when you want to use those to open the mother, then you have her lie down on her back with her feet hanging, and open that which is between her thighs. And then open your hand with the tool in such a way as to do it like scissors evenly according to the amount that you want of the opening of the mother's mouth when she measures what you want.
The form of the forceps that were said by the ancients:
The form of a pusher which pushes the fetus:
The form of a midwife which contains the large head:
And it is similar to forceps with teeth at the end like this, and some are made long like forceps according to this form, like this, which has teeth like teeth of a scraper on which it is immersed and contained. The form of a midwife for few:
The form of an instrument having one spine:
The form of an instrument having two spines:
The form of a pliers having two ends, from which the head is cut off:
The form of two spoons lying side by side:
All those instruments are exercised, and when more are multiplied by the species of them and they are prepared by the surgeons, according to their operation being lighter and more suitable for you, as well as considering their quantity in terms of people.
And do not work with those instruments anymore than you are supposed to be equipped with them, for the need of those is not justifiable.
Regarding the extraction of the second kind:
When the second kind is retained you command it to remain, then make sure that your orders are given to the mother to keep her own child, and later perform that sneezing with conditions, and strengthen your hand on the mouth of it and on its nose, and if for this reason comes out, well done.
And if not, then you take a spoon and make a puncture in the cover at one place, pause there and pour some boiling water into the mother's mouth, just like with remedies that are bitter, rough, anise, chamomile, scented with Arabic spices, cinnamon stick, and saffron. All these herbs or some of them are submerged in water in the spoon, then place that over the fire.
And place an ear syringe in the mother's mouth, let that be where evaporation occurs inside her thorax.
And make that sneeze just as we have said, and the second one comes out forcefully at speed.
May if this treatment works and doesn't worsen the situation, then you should instruct the midwife to immerse her left hand in saffron oil or in pine tar emulsion, and place that under her chest where she should sneeze out a second time, and as soon as she does so, take it immediately piece by piece. If this is connected to the mother, then place your hand according to what we have recommended, and when she finds the second one, remove it gradually piece by piece according to correctness, making sure that the mother doesn't fall due to her own force of the action. Afterwards cover where it has been loosened on both right and left ribs for ease.
And if the mother's mouth is constricted, we have already recommended this treatment with sneezing and using a spoonful of herbs.
May if it is not relieved by all the causes we have recommended, then guard yourself that you do not fatigue in repetition of abstraction. Rather, cover what that which escaped from her goes to the woman's thigh and place a plaster with ointment and fourfold medicine; for this will soften it over several days, and will dissolve and be removed.
When it is placed, let there be an elevation of bad odor to the head and stomach, and this leads to the illness; then cover that fragrances should be administered under fumigations and suitable things for that.
Such as the ancient ones already use under fumigation of thyme and dried figs.
A form of tool for the instrument by which a woman is under fumigation should ensure the retention of menstruation and secondly:
It is made from reed or herb.
And the subtle end is placed under the chest and the broad end over the fire, and the fumigation is placed above the arms of the fire.
And keep that place where that fumigation is consumed and repeat another one.
Regarding the treatment of an unperforated infant's anus.
The child squirms and its anus does not open, which is too narrow and full. Then instruct the midwife to puncture it according to her instruction; and if not, puncture it with a sharp needle, and guard that it does not touch the wound.
And apply over that wool soaked in vinegar and oil; and then treat it with ointment so that it remains moist.
If you fear it is full, then place an ear syringe for a few days through the child's nose, and leave it when the child wants to drink.
And it can happen that the anus becomes full due to consolidation of pus or abscesses; then cover that this consolidation should be drained, and treat it with what we have said about treatment and lead (as a metaphor for medical practices).
Regarding the treatment of the fistulas that cause leakage.
The fistulas that occur in the lower part of the anus cause lower inflammation and roughness, which occur near or on the outside of the anus.
And it is a fistula or lumps.
And when that inflammation is old and drained of white or yellowish moisture, and some cases involve these fistulas penetrating.
Those penetrating are known by what escapes from them during their release and due to windiness; some of these cause the mother discomfort with their release, and forcefully escape from those worms.
And some of these fistulas are found in the space penetrating into the bladder and into the belly muscle; and some of them penetrate into the junction of the thigh and into the opening of the vagina.
And for the kind of penetrating into the anus and not penetrating, you should insert your finger in the anus, and place a subtle tip of reed or iron in the fistula when there is no obstruction.
If there is obstruction in that, then insert a subtle lead or horse hair tip into it where you feel the thread or hair in your finger.
And if you do not feel that at all nor does any cause of elimination or worm or windiness proceed as we have said, then know it is not penetrating, and so take care with the treatment.
And when the fistula penetrates into the bladder or into the belly muscle, then its meaning is that this urine escapes from it and prevents that in this place where medical intervention should be consolidated.
When pain penetrates into the joint or into the bone and is felt in the circulation, then there are signs that indicate that it has invaded this area. If within the bone there is not a tumorous growth causing pain in the circulation of the joint; if it causes continuous pain for a long time; and if it is not healed with medication, nor does it harden under grease.
And in all those fistulas penetrating inside, the cure is not complete for everything, and the cure of those requires labor and dexterity on the part of surgeons under which they are performed.
And for the one that is not penetrating and is not old, recovery through iron is awaited as you are about to hear from my report, and what I already have and testify.
And it is that when the patient lies between your hands under him, raise his servants inside their areas; if the thighs are inclined towards the patient's belly, then insert a lead or an ember into the area, or in case of the gouty fistula, find where the disease penetrates.
And if that is the patient around the collarbone, then you should insert your designated position in the collarbone.
And if you feel in your designated position that the disease has already penetrated on its own and been discovered, or if what you feel is between your designated position and that siphon or flesh, then you will certainly know that this one penetrates; and from there do not work on it, because it is not within it to heal, as we have said.
However, some say that it can be cured in certain people.
And regarding the treatment for which young hope is placed in you, it's that you apply subtle fire according to the size of the fistula, as previously mentioned, and insert this lit flame into the fistula near the collarbone; then repeatedly do this two or three times until you know that all those fleshly parts adjusted by fistulization resemble a feather from a bird.
And then treat that with ointments wrapped in bandages until all those fleshly parts are healed. And also treat it with medicines for the affected flesh and its consolidation, and if it is healed, it's good; otherwise, then it is not healed within a certain time period for other treatment.
And if the disease enters and does not penetrate into your designated position which is in the buttocks, and between that and the disease that is slowly spreading flesh or siphon, and places the fistula where it seizes the surface of the skin, then dry the skin from the beginning of the fistula. And you see if it dries out on the disease, and within the fistula until the drying reaches the place where the extremity of the disease penetrates, and through the disease is freed and heals.
And then cleanse those fistulized flesh parts which resemble a feather from a bird, and do not damage any of them.
And if there is a discharge of pus that comes between you and your operation when touching those tissues, then let it be like that, and with the slightest instrument burn it with fire or with acute medicine; and burning it with fire adjusts good habits: this is healing of those adjusted tissues, and elimination of pus from the excess moisture.
And then treat that with bandages wrapped around or in thick cloth until the place becomes warm. Then subsequently cure the wound with ointment on hard flesh that generates and consolidates.
And in medicines where there is restriction and discharge; once this happens, it has been restored and is healed, and you do not fear reoccurrence.
And if the fistula has already penetrated into the anus and is extended from your patient's body surface, then insert your designated position in the anus and inquire about that.
And so if you find the disease and between you and it is slowly spreading flesh or flesh, and it is approaching penetration, then this is not an operation in him but according to hope and belief.
This problem can be addressed in three ways: or you can cauterize it as we have said; or dry out that area until you achieve the patient's cavity so that you are able to insert those and discharge is possible; and do not burn from the drying to avoid entering the tear containing the anus, and you act over the buttocks according to your desire; and then proceed with drying over the patient as previously mentioned, or on disease or another instrument of sharp extremity, and then cleanse those fistulized tissues that are in the cavity where you can through scraping; and strive to restore the entire wound by drying, and if pus is still not consolidated above it and continues to leak from the opened fistula at the entrance of the anus, and a little pus leaks over the buttocks. And sometimes the fistula is completed in this manner: when you introduce the disease into the fistula, and near the anus within the skin towards the buttocks, around the entrance of the anus, then it takes on the characteristic of an perforating extremity, as if a needle was used to puncture wounds in this form:
And intervene in that layer enveloped by many veins or around those; and then intervene, trying to enter with the vein into the fistula within which it achieves its own cavity.
If it penetrates into the edge of the testis near inside, then you remove the vein from that tendon so that you insert your fingers in the anus; and extract the end of the vein and adjust both ends at once, strengthen each one, and let it rest for a day or two, and as much as the vein penetrates into the flesh, strengthen there where those parts are cut by the veins which lie between the two ends of the vein and fit together.
And then treat the wound until it is consolidated and healed.
If the openings of the fistula are not penetrable, then have that penetrate in any way you prepare, as long as it is moving in the preon, which means that you do not make this for fear of piercing the membrane; and then let it heal inside where it needs to be healed.
The shape of the spiked object that is used for the cut fistula: the curvature of which becomes sharp on one side and not-sharp on the other, so as not to pierce unnecessarily what isn't necessary, just like sometimes.
Sewing of hemorrhoids where there is bleeding in the process of that.
Hemorrhoids are according to two ways, or they resemble the buttocks like charcoal, or they might be similar to raisin fat. And of those they are small and large, and the bleeding from those happens at times and it is one, and they are spots, and they are in the anus, and at the ends of that.
However, those that are in the anus follow fewer moist days, of which they have yellow water or a little blood within continuous pain, and according to the color of the body.
And the treatment for that which is inside the anus is to command the patient to squat and express until the anus opens and the hemorrhoids appear under your hands. Then you squeeze with your fingers or whatever you have under your nails, and you press the veins that belong to it.
If the nails are not held in these by their moisture and softness of them, then take them with a stiff cloth or with leather or woolen cloth, and remove them with your fingers, and press these towards each other, sprinkle some powdered remedies near the cut for there to be no cautery upon them; or cauterize these according to what is preceded in the chapter on cauterizing. And then treat those with the other remedies until they are healed.
And if the anus does not allow for excretion, then guide the patient with a spoon in the mouth where there is a small bite, and wash them with that water which is in the anus that facilitates excretion somewhat when the patient is squeezed.
If the hemorrhoids are outside the anus, then their cause is slight, and you should take them with your fingers, or take them with a knife, cut them, and then treat those with what we have said until they are healed.
And when you have made the cut, consider that you should administer suturing them according to this method: take a bandaged vein and insert it into the needle, then extract the hemorrhoids from the parts above, and have it penetrate through the needle in the edge of the other part, and wrap both ends of the vein around the part leaving off with the needle; and laterally. And strengthen the hemorrhoid by stretching its structure firmly, and then pinch the vein and remove the needle.
And do this to all of them, leave one without tying it, for fear that the excess blood may flow from that one.
And then place over the anus a cloth soaked in oil rubbed or in wadding; and place that under the buttocks, and command the patient to rest. And then let that heal where it lies; and when the pain subsides, treat those with balm or with another remedy until they are healed.
And since they are old and do not heal in that medicine, then consider that you should prick those with the tip of a spike or with your finger where they become moistened and there is pus over them, which prevents their healing; and then treat those until they are consolidated.
Then you should drain those with much pus, the first when bleeding occurs and they are scratched; and then treat those until they are healed.
Know that abominably, this is the key, and not if but notices a roundness resembling a button of a needle throughout the body and mostly in the parts left behind such as the legs and hands, and you should avoid movements because of those pains.
And then consider that it should penetrate what is in the channel of the needle, and be kept with forceps or with a knife, and removed from its edge; and then treat that.
And if you want, cauterize it according to what is provided in its chapter.
The first sentence translates to: "Warts are small, bumpy, sharp, round ulcers on the surface of the body, and warty spots appear on the children's cheeks."
The translation for this sentence is: "And the treatment for that involves spreading and incising that part of it, or if it is a thick paste you apply it as a paste inside the cavity where it is placed." The translation for this sentence is: "And if you want, burn that (referring to gout or another condition), as we said earlier, with fire or with acute medicine."
The translation for this sentence is: "Warts are small, furry or pitted large lesions on the body surface, and when it touches that (a wart), it feels like being bitten by an ant to the person, and it grows around the body."
The translation for this sentence is: "And the cure for that involves taking a needle of copper or iron, it must be strong, place that over the ant until its body fits inside the circle of your needle; then move your hand towards the needle where you will incise it in the circuit of the ant, and place that near the base of the flesh, and eradicate the ant from its nest."
And if you want, do this with an iron needle or according to this form:
Let the part above the needle be drawn with subtlety, silently (meaning it should not pierce through) and enveloped by something that makes its appearance as if shaved off and the rotation of that thing.
And if you want, burn the ant according to what was mentioned earlier in the burning of ethyl in the tip of the cautery.
The meaning of this sentence is: "In terms of the tools that we use for administering criticism."
Some burns are made with iron or copper or melted tin or hammered metal; some burns are made with those small and large tools according to which we use them. The smaller ones for the treatment of little children's burns, and the ones on whose buttocks the skin is loose or sore, the burns from those should be small.
The form of large but few burns:
The head of your needle above where the pouch is tied should be broad according to this manner; and to its distance, wherever the pouch is tied there should be no exception.
And the end of your pus, which intrudes into the anus, should be silent (meaning it shouldn't have an opening), moving in a subtle manner; and on one side of this part there are two prongs, and on the other side one prong, and the size of the prong according to the thickness of the rays and thicker ones being larger.
And make the pouch where you place medicines from the bladder of an animal or from sheepskin, and its location should be at your palm's length.
And make it pierced by two prongs like how they rotate; and the size of that space which is between these prongs should be as described.
And then insert into those prongs a thick piece of raw lead that is as large as ten pieces, or approximately that size. Adjust the pouch to it; and when you place the pouch in this manner, straighten it within the tip of the burn between two distinguishing marks with strong constriction, and heat it on each prong: The quality of heating like that involves filling the pouch with medicine, which should be boiled according to the tolerance capacity of the patient; and remember not to make it too wet nor too dry.
And make the patient lie down on their back, elevate their limbs and place them under their body; then grease the extremity of the cautery with oil or with egg whites or with fenugreek or sesame paste; and insert that gently into the anus for ease. Then let the practitioner take the pouch and express its content forcefully in two turns until everything from the burn is emptied onto the intestine; then remove the burn and elevate their limbs to the wall.
And if the medicine causes vomiting, keep it as long as possible; and if you leave it on overnight for the whole night, it's better in youth.
If you heat that in the stomach ailments and the vomiting of the patient lasts, then you should repeat the cautery until it is healed.
And if there are bloody discharges or pus in the anus, then make the heat gentle and mild, like the heats for which children are treated.
Regarding the treatment of the plagues.
I have already mentioned in the division of the treatment of the plagues what was suitable for the free (context could be referring to different treatments or practices), and I say this also about treating those with me and with medicines according to their compatibility.
So, I say that the plagues are diversified according to how they occur and also depending on the location where the plagues appear.
And the causes for which spots on the body give rise to plagues are as follows: due to the damage of bones, or an incision in a wound or at a joint, or hitting with a weapon, or with a stick, or with an arrow, or diseases that lead to such spots.
The plagues that are on the parts of the body are as follows: such as a plague that appears on the head, or neck, or feet, or stomach, or breast, and so forth for other body parts.
And I recommend the treatment of some wounds for you to follow that reasoning and rule about other wounds.
And I begin with the simple skin diseases, for the recall of compounded ones will come at the start of the next chapter.
So say that when it happens in the cap area for a simple skin disease and not a fracture, then consider: if it's due to gravel or something similar, and has only taken one dose of medicine just like this, making it a large wound and fearing about the patient developing an abscess, then you should puncture and make a small incision above; and do it immediately; and then extract until you reach the source according to the amount of its virtue if not any other cause prevents bloodletting, especially if the source that is coming out from the disease is little.
And for bloodletting in opposition to the affected part; and keep watch on the patient for filling up, for food, and for heavy meals.
Or if there is any reason for preventing from the beginning, then reduce in food and do not approach to meat or drink.
And pause on the disease, if it happens to you in an abscess, apply fat oil or in a drink where it is anti-inflammatory.
Or if you are sure of an abscess, then pause on the disease, if it is near to its source and the air has not changed that powder which I recommend slightly.
And if the air has already changed it, then pause on those ointments inside until it is healed.
Or if the disease is large or due to ingrowing of nails and similar things, and it's not possible to adjust the lips through pins, then adjust those with suture according to what I recommend about their suture.
Or if the disease has already been discovered from bone and skin, but it's not retention of you but a small suspension, then incise that and properly treat the disease with medicines and restore flesh in place of medicine, and command the patient to eat meals containing roughness: cabbage and similar things for them, until it is composed.
And if you find corruption in the medicine and doesn't stick to the bone, then you should incise that completely and remove it, and properly treat that.
Or if in these diseases the flow of blood from an artery or vein can occur, and it's not separated by medicine, then you should inquire about the artery, and if you find that un-separated, then you should incise that with a sharp instrument, or tie it; and if necessity requires that what we have said doesn't coincide, then you should cauterize until the blood is separated.
And if these diseases are simple and small, then their cause is minor; let it be that you sprinkle this powder on them, which when consolidated before the air changes those.
And the method of this powder is as follows: take one part oil of juniper, two parts dragon's blood, and three parts ashes; make it all thoroughly ground and sifted, then spread it over the wound until it's completely filled, and tighten well with good compression until it sticks on that, and coagulates with its own blood.
And then scrape that above with powder and let it heal, and do not disturb it until such time as there's no abscess formed under it, when the medicine has worked inside until it is healed.
And sometimes you do this alone with a cautery, when you don't have oil and dragon's blood available.
And this surgical operation is done in large diseases when it's necessary to apply that over them and stretch it out, for those recent diseases at their source, where the air has not altered.
And if the air has altered them, especially when it's in summer time, then it's not appropriate for this powder to be placed in its usual position, rather treat those with what we have said, so you apply some digested ointments on them, or place these powders of the flour of bread in water and honey until they form a paste; and properly treat those with another treatment until they are healed.
Or if it happens in the fracture disease of bone, and it's small, then you extract that through the flesh.
And I will describe the treatment for head fractures in cases where poisoning is involved.
And about diseases of the collar region.
Or if the disease happens in the neck area, then there's no difference in treatment compared to when it's simple in the head region.
Or if the neck nerve or artery has been incised, then when it's a nerve, there's not an opening but to avoid treatment that causes strong anti-inflammatory effects, such as garlic and substances similar to those which irritate the nerves and constrict them. And don't stop on the disease for any reason because the substance of nerves is fluid and its continuation is in the brain which is the root of all limbs.
And if that which is treated with lighter medicines, such as washing in double water, oil rubbed or non-rubbed, when it's washed with double water and the other minor sores according to this method, then with ointments moistened.
If the wound is large, then you should perform suture or clamp the edges of the wound, and afterwards treat it with powders until it heals.
If the wound is deep or encounters pus in its lower half below the skin, then puncture that at the deepest point of the affected area.
If during the wound there has already been a cut to an artery and blood flow is established, then separate or dry that out, or bind it, or apply a cautery to that if need be.
If you have already cut into the tendons of the thigh or even fully, and the veins under the knee are saved, then you should adjust the edges of the wound for suturing over the artery without touching that; equalize it before doing so and return it to its natural shape, then strengthen it with firm stitches, and leave it for a few days; then treat it with ointments where there is congealing and excitement until it heals.
If the wound has already made contact with bone, then puncture that. And if there are bone fragments in it, extract all those you can from them; and whatever is not healing properly, leave it to heal within the wound, until it turns pale, and make sure it is separated from the body so that it becomes lighter.
And if the wound is recent, then apply the powder recommended over it. If there is a fistula in the wound, then treat it with something whose memory will return to its head.
If it's a wound from a lance or a bullet, and you measure the depth of it, then consider that if there is wind (indicating lung involvement) when the patient breathes; then know that the wound is fatal.
And if there is no depth in it and the wound is recent in their blood, then you should place on him of the first hour's powder, and do not tighten that so as not to allow the blood to remain deep within him and return to his heart causing illness; but place on him an attractive ointment instead, and remove that twice a day.
And if the ointment is not available to you, then cover the wound opening with a cloth so that it absorbs what comes from moisture; and make the patient lie on the wound so that it flows away as is appropriate.
If it has been three days or more since the wound occurred and there are no convulsions or heart tremors, nor tightness in the abdomen for the patient, then consider that the wound is saved; and from that point on treat it with bandages and other good treatments until it heals.
If the patient's recovery is not justified, and it has been open for all this time, then you should know that a fistula has already formed; therefore, treat it from its head.
And if the wound is due to a cut from an artery or bullet, and it is simple on the surface of the leg or thigh, then treat it with what precedes suturing, if it's large, or with powder, if it's small.
If it has already made contact with bone and you've already incised bones in him, then you should twist the wound and hold to extract those bones if they are separate. If they're not separate, then leave them until the wound turns pale, and extraction of them becomes easier.
And for other wounds that occur in other limbs, the treatment is like what we've discussed.
Of the wounds of the abdomen.
The indisposition which occurs in the abdomen can be large, small, or somewhere in between.
And a small disruption is made more difficult by other means, and you know that the reduction of them is much harder; if you don't take care of their introduction to their place immediately after opening it will inflate, making the internal substance hard to handle.
And thus, the best disruption is in-between, where the reduction of the bowel isn't difficult, as it is with the other two types mentioned earlier.
And know that suturing of the abdomen is according to four ways, yet two of these sutures are common and apply also in suturing of other wounds on the body.
And two others are specific for these treatments that also apply to other wounds, yet they are even more specialized in the suturing of the abdomen.
I advise you to have every exposure and declaration when it comes to your treatment and presentation.
Therefore, say that when the wound is small and causes obstruction in it, making its reduction difficult, then this situation is with one of these two methods: either due to the minimization of the disruption as we have discussed, or when there's inflation on the bowel from the coldness of the air.
And so when this happens, you should scrape the affected area that is submerged in a sponge wrung out with hot water, or what you take from water boiling, and cyperum, and spices, and immerse them there in the area of the hernia until the swelling resolves.
And some applications made with this can be found in which it has an anti-inflammatory effect, and it is better than water alone in resolving swelling.
And once the swelling has resolved, then you moisten the affected area with water in which garlic and chamomile are boiled, for this relaxes the internal organs to a certain degree.
If it is necessary to relax the internal organs with this treatment, then break up the disruption with a small instrument that has incisions.
And the first treatment is better when it is proper that it does not dry out, and there should not be activity to dry out close to necessity and deficiency.
From the instrument, dry up its form:
One part of its sharp form, and the other part non-sharp, and the subtle tip, and do not make it as subtle as a needle, before it becomes blunt for a little.
And when the wound is enlarged and goes beyond the organ, you should make its reduction according to its natural form, in its proper place, if possible on that, which is better.
When the disruption is wide, and it is in the lower section of the belly, you should make the patient lie on his back, place his legs higher than his head; and if it is in the upper section of the belly, then you should place his head and feet higher than the sections left.
And similarly if the disruption is in one of the two sections of the belly, then you should keep your judgment and consideration at all times for that reason so that the section with the wound is higher than the other.
And thus you should administer this to large wounds and medium-sized wounds.
And in small wounds, use this as your preparation and ensure that the one who administers it is among your most experienced ones, which has all the disruption under their hand and adjusts the lips of it, and close to each other revealing some reason for another closure nearby.
And this is the common way of suturing: when you take the needle, or count it according to the amount of width of the wound; and let off from the end of the disruption of the ring finger, and hold the needle one, another that you do not put thread in both ends of the chain, at both ends of the ring where the chain is left inside, so that you make it penetrate through that section; and you have added both ends of the chain and both ends of the ring, and they are made into four orders.
And further strengthen with double thread in the circuit of the needle, and some times from both parts at once, and then add the two lips and the wound by gradual addition; and let off the thickness of that finger and put another needle there, and join that with thread as you do with the first needle; and do not stop doing this if necessary among the needles until you have completed all the contraction of the wound.
And let the needles be medium between hardness and subtlety, because the subtle needles barely cut the flesh; and the thick ones are difficult in the chain, therefore you should make them medium in subtlety and thickness.
And do not make the needle fixed in both ends of the chain nearby each other, so that the flesh is barely cut and that the wound does not burst before its consolidation.
And do not make prolonged stitches for the wound to be prohibited from consolidation.
And further pierce the ends of the needles so they do not slip off from under the patient during sleep; place powdered substances over the stitches from all sections, which have the ends of the needles; let them remain until you know that the wound has already been consolidated.
And this method of suture with needles in a common manner is more suitable for small wounds, which until completion of the stitches may involve one or two needles around those.
And the second suture is common: and it is that you administer with stitches all four ends, of the chain and both ends of the ring, in one go, with a needle where the thread is wrapped equally in subtlety and thickness.
And when on the needle you have penetrated these four ends, return the needle to that half section where you started, so that the thread from that part goes up to the wound, so that the stitch is according to a stitch of cloth where the fabrics are tightened.
And pause between each stitch the thickness of half the finger's length.
And this suture I know by men.
And by such a suture I healed the wound that happened to a man in his belly, which was hit with a stick, and it was the disruption of the wound larger than one palm's length, and it stuck around two palms' width from my organ and it was in the disruption in the middle of the limb; and then I reduced that deposit once the organ had been removed for xiv hours.
And the inflammation is consolidated in the space of fifteen days or around, and heal that which is cured; and then apply the medicine for about three weeks, and it is transformed into its usual state.
And the other doctors had judged that it was not healed; and by a miracle of fire, which I did not cure with ointment, which was in the place where the ointment could not be reached or any medicine either, but rubbed over the wound like old butter for two days and frequent washing with honey water inside that fire cured.
I may tell you two kinds of my own suture techniques according to Paul's narrative.
And it is that you start with the suture of the thread, and insert the needle from the outside to the inside of the part.
And when the needle penetrates into the thread and then inserts pins according to straightness and length of the entire body, lets the end of the suture stay in which you inserted the needle; and makes the needle penetrate into the other end of the part that is inside the part outside at the other end of the wound.
And once you have made it penetrate like that, then make another hole in that middle part of the wound on this side compared to the other; let the end of the suture be where it is here, and make the needle penetrate into the other end of the wound on one side as opposed to the other.
And make the former penetration of your needle penetrate into the suture at the end of this thing which is in the part on him inside where all of it penetrates.
And then start from this middle side and stitch that at the end which is on the suture on the other side, and remove the thread needle that penetrated, and then shorten it to that thread where the end of the suture is on this side of the wound; and remove that from the thread which is from him.
And make this once and again, and do this between another stitch so that you sew all that is outside according to that example.
And the whole of this method of suturing is that you sew on a suture made from skin when sewing the threads, so that you stitch the suture one time from the end part of the thread, and then let that other stitch remain until you have finished it.
And the second kind of my own suture technique which Gaulia mentions is through discussion about it and as recommended by others, this involves sewing according to similarity on which some doctors sew, so they include every part up to its natural corresponding part; and apply the end of another from him and the end of the wound to the other end of him, and that is done according to what I advised you.
And when you place the needle at the end of the wound near your own side compared to the outside part, make it penetrate into the inside part in that spot, and let go of two ends of the thread; and then rotate the needle and make it penetrate from the outside to the inside in two ends of the suture.
And then rotate those in turn, and make each of them penetrate from the inside part into the outside part at two ends of the wound other than those on this side.
And this method of suture is better than the common light sewing, and it is a suture that precedes memory.
This is Gaulia's explanation.
And Gaulia would say thus: the suture of the abdomen is rectified with two needles, so you insert into these each a thread, and start with the needle that belongs to you, make it penetrate in between this other side according to the suture of those which sew bodies equally.
And know that when the disruption is in the middle location of the abdomen, then this suture is more difficult compared to other locations of the abdomen.
And Gaulia's method for treating wounds is judgment about the other wounds.
And this is the reason that when you catch the wound recently on its own mark before the air alters it, and return the intestine and stitch it up and properly fix it, then place over that powdered carnal.
And if the air has already altered the wound, then place over that some ointments which are at your disposal so that they harden and settle the threads, and be consolidated by suture; and then treat it similarly as in treating other wounds so that it heals.
And if you do not have these medicines at your disposal, then place over that immediately, because it starts to bleed like blood, like butter, and switch this twice a day as instructed by me, until it heals, whereupon you would not need any other medicine when the wounds are simple.
And if you fear that the wound might communicate with the main injuries, then cover that by soaking wolf's hair in oil of high quality, or in used oil, and place this between the elbows and keep it in contact with these areas.
And if you feel pain or putrefaction in its intestines, where this many days pass by, then treat that with vinegar of black stinging nettle, and especially if the pus is developed within the intestine and causes passage penetrating into its cavity.
And know that the one from the larger intestine is a lighter pus for healing than the one in the finer intestines.
And it is difficult to heal the one that is called "gout" which does not respond to plague treatments; this is due to the large number of veins in it and the vastness they have there, as well as the subtlety of its nature and its proximity to the nature of nerves.
Perhaps when dealing with the plague material is the fabric, and if you manage to get that recent one, return it according to your judgment along with which you reduce the intestines equally.
Perhaps if it has spread to the patient's area and is now a rust or black color, then strengthen that at the root over the affected spot, so that fluids of sickness come out, because in the fabric there are veins and arteries.
And then insert another at that ligament, and place the two ends of the thread hanging from your exit point where you left off with the plague area for you, so that the concern about it is alleviated by you, exerting force on the fabric and the emission of the arm of the plague.
Reminder of the plagues when they occur in the intestine.
When disruption occurs in the intestine and it's small, then it is possible that healing can occur in some individuals. This is why I saw him being struck in his abdomen by a lance and he had gout from the right side of his stomach, and the gout was old and made a fistula, causing discomfort and flatulence.
So I pursued the healing of him even though it was not confined in his treatment, but I sought to identify what was diseased and where the place is consolidated.
And I pointed out the consolidated place, observed over the place that experiences an accident of ill in his abdomen; and did not incur any other such accident and messed with his digestive system by eating and drinking, but instead took baths and exercised according to your instructions.
And some experienced people say that when dealing with gout in the intestine and it's small, then you should tie it according to this manner: You take large pieces of ash; then adjust the two edges of the gout and place one piece of ash that has an open mouth over the two edges of the gout; therefore, when it covers them and strengthens its mouth, cut off the head of him, which adheres and does not dissolve.
And then place another piece of ash next to the first one, and do not stop doing this with pieces of ash one after the other according to the amount of all the gout.
And then reduce that and get rid of the gout; crush those excess pieces in the intestine until the intestine is healed; and do not harm the patient with discomfort.
And it is possible that the intestine can be tied with this subtle material made from beast intestines which is stronger in thread; and you take the tip of these intestine threads, and if they are clean, then place the tip of them on another thread at your side, wrap around it, and then insert that thread into needles and substances for that particular intestine, and reduce that during the disruption.
And this way of stitching with ash is merely according to paths of trust and hope.
Perhaps if the gout is large and wide, especially if it's in one of the finer intestines, where then there's only a slight irritation rather than complete healing.
Regarding the treatment of wounds and fistulas.
Know that all gout and abscesses when they heal and become old, and make a ulcer, which is not consolidated and keeps up the arm continuously, and does not get resolved, then regardless of where it is in any body part, it's universally named as a fistula and we call that condition 'wound'.
And fistula according to truth is a hardened, durable, white lesion that doesn't cause pain and which has the consistency of fear of being cut off; for this reason, certain roots, i.e. fear, are named in this way.
And there are some cases of it being wet, which causes pain; and much moisture is eliminated in a few hours. And sometimes this moisture turns into a lump, it's small, it's thick, and subtle.
All those causes have been shown, along with their signs and treatments using medicines as discussed in the division.
And thus I will provide you knowledge on the treatment of fistulas which are made through surgical operations using my method.
Know that fistula can occur in all parts of the body; those are the ones that enter into major veins and arteries, or nerves, or the spinal cord, or an intestine, or bladder, or any part of the back, or any joint composed by components like hand and chest. And these give proximity to the main limb and similarity.
And so those of these fistulas that occur in this manner are from the diseases of hard recovery, and do not receive a cure, and occupation with them is work and ignorance.
And if there is some of these fistulas whose depth does not reach to the places that were mentioned, and you hope for its cure, and want to gain knowledge about it, then attempt with a tool or try it out. And if the fistula follows straightness, then take hold of it when you're doing so.
Now if the fistula is twisted, then investigate it with a fine lead, where lead in their body rises and curves you should straighten out the twist.
And if the fistula is moving freely, it isn't within your capacity to apply it over them with effort.
And thus you must cleanse the opening for its openings, where the moisture by which you cleanse that goes to other openings and flows from them.
And inquire carefully according to which manner it is possible for you to know if here are the nerves or not, and whether the size of the fistula is distant or close. Or whether this is a fistula with multiple openings which spans all of your strength on this very thing, through your questioning of the patient, by touching the area, understanding its significances and causes of accidents in the abscess.
And when you have assessed all those causes accurately, then proceed with the treatment according to your confidence: it is that you now consider if this is a noticeable fistula nearby or in some location below, far from the joint, nerve, artery, vein, or any other place I've mentioned to you and stated.
And then you dry out the fistula according to what was previously mentioned about its narrative, and keep this that is in that filtration and corruption of flesh, and this which has been born from the opening of flesh, or part and similar things, and treat that inside when it has healed.
Now if the fistula is of great depth and follows straightness, then dig into it as deep as possible, and reshape it from all its corrupted flesh. Then prepare bandages soaked in sharp medicines and insert them inside the cavity of the fistula which you have understood through instruments.
And do this inside certain passages where the sharp medicine will corrode everything that is rotten in the cavity of the fistula due to corruption.
And then restore it with ointments which generate healthy flesh when it has healed.
Now if it is not healed by this, then you cauterize it as we have advised.
Now if the cause of fistula is bone and you must certify this, then inquire about it and dry out this according to our advice, if you do not eliminate any cause of vein or nerve or main limb as we have said.
And if the bone is discovered to you and there's corruption and darkness within them, then remove this entirely from where the corruption is present. And then treat it so that their flesh heals when they are made well.
And if it is not healed in this manner like you did before, then know that you have not eradicated the entire corruption. And thus you uncover them again thoroughly and carefully consider their condition and reshaping of them with your latest strength increase, then proceed to restore it.
And if it is healed, that's good; and otherwise, know that this corruption is in the deepness far from the body, which has not been achieved, thus with it you have nothing to do but leave it.
And if the bone is corrupted and small, or it is within your capability to pull this out, then you pull it with delicate forceps that are suitable for this task.
And if they are pieces of bone, then carefully perform the extraction of all these, and for those leave none behind for your strength.
Now if there is some contradiction with any cause of moisture, and in their operation you have neither fear nor mistake, then incise those ligaments or flesh if they are here, and deliver the bones.
And if it is not your preparation to leave the bones of your time, then rest on this wound so that this wound remains there, and leaves this inside where this is around those bones and ligaments, and keep the wound from consolidating, and hold back the section you have incised in your operation.
And if you fear, rest on this palm submerged under a heated oil, or this palm submerged in an Egyptian ointment, or any of the healing ointments. When these ligaments have healed and the bones are separated from them, then relief is provided by this extraction.
And if it is a large bone like the bone of a rib or thigh or similar to those, and what from them is corrupted is only their flesh, then remove this just as much behind so that this darkness and corruption are removed, and then proceed to heal this wound.
If a large portion of this patient is corrupted, and the corruption has already reached the bone marrow, then it is necessary to close that area and the entire location where the corruption has spread within the body. Then treat that internally until it becomes consolidated.
I advise you to follow this method when dealing with someone in their bed, so that you place an example and helper next to your operation.
Treat a young man around thirty years of age, who suffers pain in his leg, and from the divisions within, it is about the matter inside the body that has spread to the leg, and this is matter of abscesses into large abscesses, but do not attribute the cause to extrinsic factors.
And then treat the extension of that for the error of doctors during which the abscess bursts, and take care of his moving materials, and his treatment is carefully performed until the change becomes fistulized, and do incisions in his pus-filled openings where all excreted moisture and body's humidity are.
And then the doctors' treatment lasted for more than two years, and I did not intervene in those who knew about it, as I was called.
And see the change of this patient and the fluids that flowed from his several openings over a large area; and already, the body of that man was completely stiffened, and the color of him was yellow.
And then I introduced a thread into one of those openings and led the thread to the bone.
And then I examined all of those openings and found that they were connected to every part of the body.
And then I pricked myself and incised into one of those openings where I found part of the bone, I removed that corrupted material, and it was earthy, corrupted, and decayed; it had already corrupted a portion of the body in which it penetrated to the marrow.
And then I prepared that which was discovered by me and removed from the exposed bone.
And I confirmed that it was not in the bone but that corruption which caused it and removed it, and I had already extracted it.
And then continued to restore the injury with consolidating medicine for a long time, but it did not consolidate.
And then I repeated the procedure and uncovered the bone again after the first discovery, and found continuous corruption within the bone.
And I removed what appeared to me from that corruption, and then proceeded with the treatment and restoration of it, but it was not restored.
And then I discovered it on him again and did not cease to gradually drill into the bone carefully and complete the restoration of it, but it was not restored until I drilled around his palm, and he extracted from its marrow, and later restored that with medicines, and it slightly consolidated and healed.
And it is not necessary to repeat the operation of this section for him but due to the disposition of his veins and due to the limited tolerance of his breath and the lack of his death, which was happening constantly at all times due to excesses in spontaneous defecation.
And so, it is healed through complete recovery, and nothing replaces hard flesh in the location; good disposition of him has been made within his body and returned his virtue; it interacts well with his dispositions and does not oppose him during movement or harm him in any cause.
If the bone is protruding in a location of the body that has been operated on, then consider this method for further action: you should grasp firmly the part near the tip of that protruding bone, and instruct someone to extend it horizontally. Prepare a thick piece of linen several times thicker than the first piece; then place that linen over the flesh where the bone is exposed, extending its tip so that you can pull the flesh towards the parts around it, uncovering the flesh over the area you wish to cut so that the saw will not cut through the flesh.
And place a table or board under that exposed bone properly; when you do this, it is not forbidden to use the saw which does not cut through the corrupted flesh.
And make sure the saw is cutting over the corroded area gradually, if it's in the hollow of the corrupted bone and doesn't appear in its physical manifestation, forcing another opening due to the saw's action.
And if the bone is corrupted but not protruding, before it continues at one point from another, and the corruption is in its middle or part of it, then you uncover the flesh from all sides completely; then place a board under that, and proceed to saw through the first part where the corruption exists, with the continuity of the sawing continuing for the other part.
And make the saw cut according to the location of the corruption as we have said.
And if the corruption is at the joint, incise that corrupted joint, and saw through the bone where it continues from the other side.
And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it is not due to the joints themselves but due to something else.
And if the corruption is in the elbow of the hand or on the chest, it's difficult; however, consider how the corruption appears to you and where you can open it, then expose it according to any disposition that is possible for you, and correct each case as necessary with whatever tool, so long as it doesn't contradict your veins or nerves.
And know which is the incisor and the saws to sharpen these bones are according to the position of the bones, and the preparation of those, and their thickness, and the subtlety and size and smallness of those, and their hardness and their rarity; because you must prepare every type of tool suitable for that operation.
And know that you should consider this operation regarding the type of tool for which you would require; when you have extensive study and long experience in understanding methods of this art, and evidence from the methods used in illnesses, so by then you will already possess what is convenient according to these tools for every illness.
And I will instruct you at the end of this chapter regarding the number of tools that you should have, as well as those which you will perform according to your prohibition, which you will experience on others. Type of saw:
Shape of another saw:
Shape of another large saw:
Shape of a needle: Let the tip of this needle follow the shape of the star-shaped keyring's head, and its points should follow the shape of the points of a star-shaped instrument.
And do not simply rub the heads of the joints when they are corrupted, or when there is a large and broad mouth.
Shape of the smaller blades:
Shape of the lateral blades:
Shape of another well-made saw: it should have the curvature of a large arc towards its top and the sharpness of its iron, with the member at its base made in a decent downward slope. Shape of it:
Shape of the blades where there is a concavity:
Shape of another subtle blade:
Shape of another curved-ended blades:
Shape of small blades resembling tentacles:
Shape of another smaller incisor:
Shape of another incising tool; this resembles a needle, and its end is like a saw, and it is exhibited in various locations along the bones:
Shape of a needle which conforms to the ratio of that which is pierced by the bones:
And its end is triangular and sharply pointed.
And it is made of Indian iron, similar to all the causes we have mentioned for razors and incising tools and saws.
For the extremities of incision and the securing of bones.
The extremities are pressed or due to an intrinsic cause or extrinsic cause, or because of the treatment you have given to that corruption with curative medicines and no cure was effective, or sometimes the corruption spreads from one part of the body, then it is necessary for you to incise that part inside this, so that the infection reaches the corruption, in order to prevent the patient's health from deteriorating through this to death or a greater malice than the misfortune of the limb.
And the sign of that which you apply is that the limb turns black inside, as if it has been burnt to ashes, or you place the darkness inside so that the burning spreads through that limb and consumes everything in it; then take care to incise that.
And similarly, if it is caused by the impact of certain venomous causes such as from a scorpion in water or from viper or from snake and others like them.
And if the corruption or impact is in the end of the finger, then you incise the finger and do not allow space for the infection to spread into your hand.
And similarly if it reaches your hand, then you incise that part of the wrist, and do not allow space for the infection to spread into your arm.
And if it penetrates that point, then you incise the arm in the elbow joint.
And if the infection goes beyond that and often around the elbow, then death of the patient occurs; applying another cause to that is a quantity of virtue in treatment.
And similarly do for the chest when infection penetrates that part of the chest, then you incise there near one of the ribs.
And if it spreads through the rib cage, then you must incise all of the chest. If it penetrates towards the intestines, then you must incise the abdomen in the area of the intestine.
And if the infection has already reached into the intestines, then it is only removal and leaving the patient to death.
And the way to incise or cut is that you grip one muscle at the point where you want to incise, and hold another muscle over it. Extend your other hand's fingers towards the left side of this point, and extend your hand's other fingers towards the right; then separate the flesh between these two muscles until you can reveal all the flesh; then cut or cut it in that space.
And make sure to hold a cloth over all sides by yourself so that it doesn't touch the area being treated, and bring the patient's injury properly adjusted and with pus in the wound.
If there occurs a flow of blood while you are working, then you apply the cautery gently to that area, or place some blood-restraining powder on it; and afterwards resume your treatment until it is completed.
And place the affected member in an appropriate position, and treat it while you are making it better.
And I urge you to understand what happens when someone is bitten in the foot, this incident which I and you have discussed, which occurs in him blackness in his foot due to a mixture that was similar to fire's combustion.
And that corruption first happens inside his right hand, extending throughout the foot.
And then that person prepares to release pus which helps the healing process go towards the limb with the intensity of his/her movement and pain, causing the foot to be immersed into the joint, leading to healthy recovery.
For a long time this process happens in him with that corruption within the hand's index finger.
And then it reaches me, and I focus on understanding the excess of that which affects my hand from the medicines' impact; close to the body's transformation. The excess does not affect and begins moving into another finger starting from the hand.
And they ask me to immerse my hand in his/her, and I don't want to do that fearing the impact of that excess, more than worrying about the immersion of the hand's death, where the virtue of the patient was towards healing.
And when he recovers from me, returns to his land and informs me that the person prepared and immersed their entire hand, and they were healed.
And I have not included this story merely for the sake of providing assistance on what relates to this disease, and as its meaning which is meant by it and according to which it is carried out.
Regarding treatment and the quality of enemas with medicines.
When gangrene occurs in certain flesh-covered areas and the space of the gangrene extends until it collects pus; then it bursts and perforates, causing the pus to escape from him. The area becomes empty as if it were a vessel, and the infection that escapes is like thin fabric, without reaching deep corruption, not spreading into bone or nerves or muscle tissue, it is called a sinus, and it is not referred to as a fistula.
However, if the space extends until corruption begins in any limb, then it is called a fistula and not sinus.
And the treatment for this is to immerse that thread entirely like it's twisted, and especially when it's thin like fabric, making sure not to stick to the area due to its corruption.
And if you hope that the thread will stick and that this corruption hasn't reached its ultimate consequence, then you treat it with an enema.
And you regard it as a sinus, and if it's large, the arm that smells is made of Egyptian oil, so you treat it with an enema using this Egyptian medicine which consists of oil and vinegar mixed in equal parts, they are placed in a container, and then put on fire until the medicine boils and then cools down to honey-like consistency.
And then you take what is necessary from this and dissolve it in water and honey; you treat the sinus with it, strengthen his/her opening, and let the medicine stay inside him/her for the duration of two hours.
And afterwards, extract this at speed; and do this for several days until the sinus is transformed and the pus is recovered.
And in some cases, you treat with water from ashes when this medicine is not available to you; and then take ash from onions, put it in water; afterwards, let that soak and treat the sinus with it until you confirm that the sinus is gone.
And if the patient doesn't tolerate this Egyptian medicine or water from ashes, then you treat it with water and honey where it's mixed with vinegar, and treat it with vinegar and honey where the property of honey is to transform and cleanse, and wine makes the sinus adhere, especially when there's excess of coagulation ability and drying in wine.
And as you do this in some instances and confirm that the sinus has been healed, then treat it with what causes new flesh to form within him/her.
And you take dyafinicon grease and dissolve it in rubbed oil and vinegar that coagulates; or you treat with various medicines and other ointments whose properties I have already written about in the treatise on ointments.
And if the opening of the sinus is tight in which the enema tube cannot be inserted, then you gradually enlarge it with a small iron, pause with a warm cloth wrapped in Egyptian ointment or basil ointment until it's enlarged.
Similarly, if the opening is wide, then you stitch his/her lips and let him/her have a quantity inside which an enema fits.
And if the opening from which blood flows is elevated towards the top part, then dry it in the lower pus area where it's located for the blood to flow into you. For when the arm is constricted in the sinus cavity, flesh will be formed within him/her.
And if it is not possible for you to dry the sinus inside the bone cavity as desired, then you should pierce that prepares the member for preparation so that the arm flows lightly from him according to your suitability and ensures no obstruction of the arm remains in him.
Let it be that which is above the sinus opening, which he increases at all times so as to prevent what needs adjustment of his arm. And in order that you know whether what flows from him of his arm is much or little, or if it is digested or not.
And you should also consider the location of that sinus, whether the patient feels pain or not, and if it is in his abscess.
And as your treatment is prolonged in this manner, and you observe the material that is discharged over the sinus opening has already adhered, or forms adherence, then continue to remove it or let it heal by itself, and when you remove the dressing, change the bandage and renew the ointment.
Let it be that if there is ample space around the sinus where the virus is subtle, then don't discard the patient's adherence, which allows his healing to proceed, which are certain individuals who take longer for tissue regeneration in their various sores, and among those are those who do the opposite.
And if the arm remains indigested for days around the sinus, then know that the sinus does not adhere; and if the adherence to the sinus is delayed and causes prolongation, then you adjust in drying of the medicines; and if the medicines are dampened in their substance and lose their efficacy, they should be dried as if with lion's balm, when it is adjusted overabundance of addition of zinc.
And the main thing that needs to be understood is that you take lion's balm as an ointment and dissolve it in refined oil, use its substance on him, apply this over him, and then use it.
And when there is no arm involved in that action, use lion's balm as an ointment, honey when it cools and becomes thick, use him on the patient; or take myrrah and aloen and grind these together with some honey, heat this over fire and spread this mixed honey over a cloth, then strengthen this covering around the sinus; and spread this with the thickened honey which you have heated, grind this over a cloth and strengthen it.
And some times these are administered to the patient in his long Latin language and according to the wisdom of celestial lilies (and indeed they are celestial lilies) as well as ground oatmeal, centaurium flower, then use those simples or adjust them, grind this together and sift it over the honey that I have recommended; and use these.
And if the sinus persists and is not healed by this treatment, then know that corruption has spread within him, it may now be probing into bones or other hard parts of his body, then you treat it with tubercular therapy as described above.
Regarding the treatment of infected skin and nail, and insertion of cuts in fingers and sectioning.
Panarici is an abscess that affects the nail of the foot or hand, and often extends to other fingers, and if it persists and healing takes time, it may be treated with a cauterization from within the abscess, or if it becomes corrupted, you cut into his finger near the nail bed, then proceed to corrode through the entire nail, push its corruption inward toward the bone which smells unpleasant for him, cut off the end of that finger and his color changes to black.
And so when you have that as we said in the division and if your treatment does not show results, then dig through all the excess that has accumulated under the nail and proceed to cauterize the sore area near this, for rapid healing is beneficial in such cases.
Let it be that if the bone is intact and the nail is healthy, and you have already removed the excess which encompasses the tissues inside, start poking him and guide this, then proceed to place your finger slightly under the angle of the nail where you poke through the flesh, push this further into the flesh making it easy to do so, pause over that part where remains from the flesh of the burning corrosive medicines until everything is well done; then treat this with balm until it heals.
Let it be that if corruption has already penetrated into the bone, then proceed to dig out the bone in this area and remove it, for no healing will occur when there is corrupted bone within him.
And if you notice the corrosion and the corruption spreading through this finger, then proceed to cut into one of the joints according to where his memory is pressed, then treat it from within until he heals.
Let it be that if there is percussion or friction at the nail, and there is intense pain in this area, then proceed to begin by bleeding out the patient from his thigh, then dry the nail with a sharp blade horizontally above this spot, make sure not to let the drying touch the flesh beneath the nail, for it could cause extreme pain in him leading to the development of excessive tissue adjustment in that place; then treat that area with what relieves pain.
A condition is described that naturally occurs in some men, where their flesh is very thin everywhere, and their bones are also weak. Or perhaps it's the thinness of their nails that's mentioned here.
And such things are found in the joint area of him, or his nature is in certain joints like nuts in a set. It could be that what's natural in some of these joints is not harmful, whereas what's natural in the joints that are thin and weak causes disease.
And for those who are naturally fleshly, the section is mild, so when you insert that, it should be on their flesh at a shallow angle.
A condition is when something is naturally found in the joint area, healing is difficult; so beware of removing it.
In the case of what's naturally in the joint, be sure to follow these steps: when you begin inserting it, place the flesh against a round incision opening into the bone, and then proceed with cutting using one of those appropriate saws. Then ensure that the area being treated is properly healed.
A condition to consolidate which occurs between the joints or due to the natural disposition of man in having arthritis, or through the consolidation of disease, or through burning by fire, or through resemblance. Then ensure that this consolidation allows the joints to return to their natural form.
And place a pause between their layers by immersing them in rotted oil to prevent them from consolidating too easily, or separate these with another, or insert a thin sheet of lead inside for consolidation according to your method.
And similarly, if consolidation occurs in the hands' joints, then you dry that consolidation according to its preparation and ensure it conforms to the shape of the body part.
From the incision made for vice, they are varicous.
Vices are varicose, and they are swollen veins filled with melancholic excesses which occur in the body's limbs. The main manifestation of this is in the chest area, particularly for those who travel, work or carry loads.
Then ensure that you administer the heart's purge of black cholera by making several incisions for forceful expulsion, and then bleed the patient from the basilic vein.
The treatment of such diseases involves two methods: the first is to make an incision and remove that black substance, and the second method is to elevate the vein and extract it entirely.
The section of this is done in this way: take at the beginning the chest with water caudate until that large substance is dissolved, which becomes liquid in the chest. Then strengthen the patient's chest towards the top part of the thighs under the joint area towards the bottom of the pubis on a board, and then dry the vein in a location or two or three sections widely apart. And lift the black blood towards your hand at the bottom end of the chest inside it, above it up to it, with the amount of substance you want and sufficient for what is needed, which will be removed by the power of the thigh.
And then instruct him to avoid those foods causing black cholera, and command him to abstain from such things.
And continue the treatment through bloodletting when the veins are full, and this is noted by the thigh.
The lifting of them occurs in this manner: if you have opened the thigh, then immerse it in water and soak the thigh with caudate water until it reddens and the veins become swollen; or if you are unable to use water due to lack of water, by having the body exercised when the limb is rubbed.
And then dry the cord along the right side of the vein in section from the front or behind it. If you should reach the bottom under this thigh, use the pubis; or if at the lowest part of the body, use the ankle.
And then cut the cord with scissors and scrape the vein from all sides until you feel it, and you should notice its appearance which becomes darker as it declines towards blackness.
And thus when you have removed the cord and from the cord you see that white thing which is the thread.
And then place them under this light so that it's raised and shining from the cord, and hang them up on a nail or a hook.
And then dry another section close to that section for three fingers, and scrape the cord from the area above the vein until you see it.
And then lift that and insert that in the last section which is the ankle, and then extract that and lift it until it reaches the second section, and then extract that from the section above that.
And do this until you remove that from the section which is further up or any other of all sections, until it is completely removed; then insert that.
And if you don't follow to extract and lift it, then insert a needle with thick double thread and tie that, or insert under this light and rotate your hand in all directions so that it shines. And be careful not to insert too deeply; if it breaks, you will find it difficult to lift that part again and it can cause harm to the thigh due to that injury.
And once you have extracted everything completely, then place over the site of the wound wool submerged in oil and rotted oil and regular oil, and treat that until it is healed.
And if the body is contracted due to a kind of twist that surrounds its parts and does not follow rectitude as we have said, then you should cut through all parts of the twist and at the places of surrounding in it, and suspend it with threads under which you lift everything entirely.
And be careful with your section so you don't penetrate the vein and don't disturb that area, as it will be difficult for you to lift that part; use your judgement in that matter.
Shape of the incision when there is a dry body:
It is not as hot to the touch as with needles nor does it have a sharp tip so as to harm the vein; and it has great flexibility like wool, because if it were too thin, it would cut into the vein due to its thinness; having said that, it should have enough excess thickness as we've said.
Regarding the extraction of the leg vein.
This vein is formed in the regions of the lower abdomen like Al-Ategy in the desert region of Arabs and in the dry lands of India where little vegetation exists and where neither grass nor herbs grow.
And this vein is formed elsewhere in other parts of the body, such as the abdomen area.
And its development is due to fermentation that occurs in the body like poison within the system, along with worms, vermin and parasites causing damage between the fluids and the flesh.
And the sign of susceptibility to this condition is when this vein inflames in the abdomen, causing swelling; and nearby, there's an opening from that inflammation which looks like a cut from a plant.
And when you see it at the extremity, then think to place upon that a weight of lead whose weight is equal to that of one dragon. Within two dragons', and lift and lay flat the suspended lead from the belly.
And for each degree of pain caused by some cause outside the parts, wrap that with lead and let it hang. And if the pain persists, then you should cut into one part of it and wrap that; do not cut that right at once as it will rupture inside when it comes out, because if you cut that it will be contracted and enters the flesh causing pus formation, inflammation in the area, and a bad ulcer.
And when it's treated gently and is extracted slowly piece by piece, so that it comes out of the back end of it without any cause getting caught in the body.
And this vein can occur in some individuals that span their length up to several palms and beyond, it is already known to me that someone has reached up to about twenty-two (xx) palms.
And if it is cut during treatment, then insert the rod into its channel and pierce that from long through the body, so that all contents inside are evacuated, and administer fermentation to the area for several days with medicines; afterwards treat that for abscesses.
And this vein causes some pain in ramps, especially when it appears at the joint of the chest or on the chest, and produces an opening, and comes out from any opening branch.
And then treat it as we have said in the division and according to what was mentioned above.
Regarding the section concerning the formation of worms under the skin, it is referred to as "bovine discomfort".
This ailment is named in some territories as "bovine discomfort" because it causes frequent symptoms in cattle that have worms inside them, and there are many of these worms located between the fluids and flesh, they move up and down throughout the body, and this manifests as a sensation spreading from member to member as it disrupts the fluids and releases externally.
And its development is due to the fermentation of certain fluids like when worms, snakes, and roundworms occur in the stomach.
And it is found due to the malice of this condition, when it moves through the body and rises to the head, and reaches the nostrils; then forcefully passes into it and destroys the nose, causing numerous symptoms.
And when you want to treat and remove it, do not act if you do not see its movement and appearance at your touch, then proceed by grasping what's above it and what remains below it firmly, and constrict tightly around it, and afterwards dry off from it and extract it.
And if it's torn in the flesh and you don't restrain it, then place a cautery with fire on that area where it resides, and the main concern is corruption of it which causes destruction as we have said.
If it's passed to the head near the nostrils, then apply firm pressure on the eyebrow area with strong constriction, and afterwards dry off from that region, then extract it; and remember for the patient to undergo transformation of their body through medicines that expel bad decaying fluids, and avoid foods causing fermentation.
Regarding the section concerning discomfort due to inflammation.
This ailment is named as "nafir" in our land, it's pain that occurs in some limbs and spreads from member to member.
And I have already seen this second one as I will report later. I was summoned to treat a woman with discomfort in her village, and I found her arm inflamed near the funis vein of the arm, and after it swelled for an hour, I saw that swelling move up like a worm going upwards towards this place, but less intensely than being hot, as if it were live silver flowing from one spot to another.
And then feels the pain in that spot and gets stuck in the muscle, stays here for one hour.
And corrects into the other body where it reaches the other arm.
And I was told by him that he moved around through his entire body as I saw; and I was too amazed at the exchange of parts and the speed from member to member. And I had already seen this before in my patients according to that manner, however I have seen movements where pain is found being exchanged from limb to limb. May not see this like in the males as in the females.
And I do not consider this to be only because of the female body's vulnerability, with its veins exposed, and in this case it manifests that sensation of wind being exchanged.
And it is necessary that it does not appear according to this backward flow in those who are susceptible and have moist blood with swollen veins.
And as you desire the patient's recovery, and they feel that pain, then it doesn't appear to you as it would seem to the naked eye like we've said, so you strengthen them there and let them slightly dry over that area where that constricted wind sensation is evident, and cauterize the spot.
May if you don't see it in your patients, then you treat that with the discharge of blood and whatever expels wind, and you use pills infused with garlic and other types of pills and similar remedies.
Of feather extraction.
Feathers are diversified according to species, and according to the locations in the body where they exist, their diversity is that some of them have large points, small ones, concave ones, and dull ones, being solid; others have three angles, and there are those with tongues; and there are those that are sharp.
And of the symptoms of fever are when you notice in the feather, it pierces through the bone, and is set on fire by the fume which is above the brain, which happens due to excessive heat, blindness, dizziness, nausea in patients, inflammation and nausea of the tongue, spasms and confusion in understanding, vomiting caused by anger, and when the word is cut off and speech is destroyed, it is visible at the site of the wound as a wet white spot resembling dust, and his appearance is similar to moisture in meat.
And if you notice these symptoms, then refrain from the treatment and removal of the feather, unless it is visible.
The symptoms of the feather when you find it near the left nipple, so that it is close to a hard cause and cannot be seen; and forcefully the movement of the feather is similar to the movement of dust, and the spread of the wound shows a black spot, and dies there coldness in extremities, fever sweat, fainting; and thus know that death descends completely.
The symptoms when the feather has pierced the lungs are a sensation of blood foam in the wound, and the vessels close to the throat become congested, and the color of the body changes, it breathes a large spirit and asks for air to be breathed.
And if you find the feather in the vest which is in the feet, then the pain is close to the small bones, it causes a great painful sensation and sighing, and not all of the muscles are swollen.
And if you find the feather in the stomach, then there is a certain indigested food causing discomfort in the wound.
And if you find the feather in the abdomen, and it is set inside, there is a wound opening, or the skin, or intestine which is ruptured; and there is no hope for the treatment of this case given the removal of the feather.
And if the feather is found in the bladder, and urine is discharged outside, it causes processes from within that go outward; and forcefully there is pain over the body, then know that this is fatal.
And the other limbs such as the face, neck, shoulder, assistant, ribs, backbones, collarbone, and so forth, are saved according to the most advantageous positions when the feather does not reach a vein or artery and is not poisonous.
And I will explain this to you based on what I have seen about these feathers, so that you understand regarding the treatment you should use.
The reason for this is that in a person who was hit by a feather on the eyelid of their face near the nose, I would remove it from them on the other side, leave the ear hair of them, and they recover, and there is no damage to their nose.
And extract another arrow from a Jew which penetrates him in the center of his abdomen, leave the eyelid and keep it, the arrow was already hidden and could not be found from that source except for a small tip at which it adhered to its shaft, and it was a large arrow among the arrows of the sharp Turks, with iron as its head where there were no sockets.
And if it's the Jew, and doesn't hit his abdomen in a bad accident.
And extract another arrow from a Christian man which was penetrating his thigh, and it was an Arabic arrow, that being the one with sockets; and then I pierced that between two veins, already submerged in his thigh; and then I sharpened that, and then extracted that, and saved the Christian.
And extract another arrow from a man which was penetrating his abdomen; I considered that he would die by that. Then, since it had been three days and there was no change in his condition due to any cause of his symptoms, I pierced the arrowhead and set it free, then saved him, and did not allow him to suffer an accident again.
And I saw a man in whom an arrow penetrated his thigh, the wound had healed on him, and because it had been seven years, I pulled the arrow from the crease of his leg.
And I saw a woman in whom an arrow penetrated her abdomen; the wound is healed inside her, and it has not changed in her symptoms ever since, and the woman does not experience any discomfort during some of her natural operations.
And I saw another man to whom an arrow penetrated his face; the wound has healed and he removes the arrow, not experiencing any pain or similar sensations here.
And extract the arrow from the king's prince's man which was penetrating his mid-nose area and had already descended to the right side a small one, making the entire arrow hidden.
And I was called upon for his treatment around the time of the insertion of the arrow within three days.
And then I felt the wound of the arrow extraction strongly; and then I inquired about that with a delicate probe, and did not feel it; but he felt it pulse under his right socket, and then I hoped that that pulse was at the tip of the arrow.
And I sealed the area with an ointment that enhances both attraction and digestion, confirming to me that this spot is where we should apply it so as to reveal to me the site of the arrow, for its removal.
And it did not occur at the significant spot where you obtained that place; and I continued to apply this ointment on him for several days without any accident happening; and the wound has healed meanwhile, and he can feel his nose again after being out of that space for several days and then tells me like this.
And then I placed on the wound a corrosive medicine for several days until it healed; and upon this probe, I carefully examined that, and felt the tip of the arrow, which adheres to the shaft.
And then I adjusted the opening of the wound with that acute medicine until it became visible to me clearly the tip of the arrow, and passed this way for about four months.
And then when the wound had become enlarged, and it became possible for me to insert tweezers into him, I made him more aware, and did not give way to nervousness; so I did not continue to sharpen or adjust on that with methods of tools until one day about that using forceps placement operations according to how those appear at the tip of the head, then extracting it; and then restoring that wound.
And some doctors would judge that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored; and I restored this and the wound has healed, and he is saved with complete health, and does not suffer at all in him for any reason.
And I advise you of the quality of extracting some arrows for you to take this rule and meaning on what I have not mentioned, where the divisions of this art and the definitions of that are not understood in this narrative or do not understand those freely.
And the artisans wisely compare on few; and upon what is presented compared to what is missing; and finds a new operation and new instrument you must descend from the causes of foreign matters in that art when it happens.
And therefore I say that arrows are not discharged from the members in which they are placed, but according to two ways: or by piercing the place where it enters; or by opposing the other end.
And that which is discharged through the place gives an entry, or that arrow proceeds from a meaty location, it is thrown and discharged.
And if you do not heed the time when you catch it, then cover that for several days until the meat around it subsides and is relieved of the pain and its exit.
Similarly, if it is inserted in bones and you do not heed to remove it, then leave that for several days and repeat that with piercing and movement each day, and it will already be discharged.
And if you do not heed your sense for such days, then cover that you perforate in the circuit of the arrow at all parts with subtle travel until the place is enlarged by the arrow, and then extract that.
And if the needle is already hidden in the body's location, and hidden from feeling, then you inquire about that with temptation, and if you feel it, then pull it with such instruments as are convenient for her extraction.
And if you cannot do it on her due to the constriction of the wound and the length of the preon, and here there is no bone, nerve or vein, then cut into the wound so that she can be made wider and able to extract the needle.
And if it's on her earlobe that is pierced, then you cut into the flesh in which it is stuck from all sides with all the means you can do; consider this, if you cannot remove the flesh in the fracture of the earlobe and in the twisting of those within where they fit.
And when you administer the removal of the needle in any location where it is, then you use your twisting and forceps from all sides so that this compels; and subtlety in deep subtlety so that the needle does not break and that it is made difficult for you to remove it and that removal.
And if you cannot do this at your time, then let it be for a few days until the parts that are in her circuit recover, and continue with this which later will ease. And if it gives you opposition bleeding, then administer what we have said about treatment in her chapter.
And protect your virtue from the risk of cutting a vein or nerve, or string, and use all possible means in your hands to remove the needle; do this with ease, tranquility, and slowness as I have instructed you.
And thus make the needle move according to herself so that the lower body follows the figure according to which you should place the insertion of the needle in her, for this is more advantageous. And if this is not possible to you, then administer what is possible to you through the figures.
And about the needles that are inserted against the other side, or that have already progressed in some part towards the outside parts, or if you feel the extremity of the needle due to the sensation of the part higher than the initial point and sometimes make it more prominent; then consider this; and choose the section according to the quantity in which the forceps are taken; and pull gently on that.
And if it is stuck in the bone, then twist your hand against opposition so that the needle penetrates into the bone, widen yourself, and pull out that needle.
And if not, let that be for a few days, then continue to work on it until you feel something.
And if the shaft of the needle is in there, then push that towards her.
And if the shaft is inserted and you wish to administer thrust, then insert that, if it's deaf, use a concave tool so that it enters the cavity in the head of the needle and gently push that towards her.
And if the needle is concave, then forcefully push that with a tool entering that, for the needle is eased by that.
And if the needle is elongated, then hollow out all the flesh in which it lies, if this is possible for you, and proceed to treat that with what suits.
And if the needle is deep in the foot, or in the abdomen, or in the bladder, or on the side, and it's close to where you're touching it with temptation, then touch that with temptation, and if it's possible for you to grasp it from there, then grasp it from there and be cautious of cutting a vein or nerve, extract that needle, and if necessary stitch up the wound, and treat it so that it heals.
Shape of the forceps in which the needles are pulled:
Let their ends be like a goose's bill that they make when they take hold of the needle, so as not to let it go.
And from those there are made special loops, large, few and intermediate, according to the size quantity of the needle and its weakness, and the width of the wound, and the constriction of it.
So that way, as I do, it brings joy to their spirit in the curved tunnel of pain, guiding them towards relief.
From bloodletting through veins.
The veins for bloodletting, from which it is customary to perform bloodletting at such and such points. which are in the head at the sixteenth point. These are the two pulsating veins, they are close to the ears and called auricular; these are two herbs that are in both temples visible; and these are two veins that are in two tear ducts of two eyes which are called aspiciens; and a vein prepared in the middle place of the forehead, and this vein is at the end of the nose; and these are two guigues located at the throat; and these are two veins that are on top of the tongue; and these are two veins that are at the bottom of the tongue; and - these are the veins called algecic -; and these are two veins leaving the tongue. These are the veins that are bloodletted in the arms, they are .5; Among those, there is one cephalic vein, which is at the base of the wild heart. The people call it "the blood vessel of the head", and it's also silent. It's called a middle ear vein, and composed of a branch of basilica and another branch of cephalic; and they call that "the whole body blood vessel" among the people, and basilica is a vein placed in the domestic heart, which is called "citrullus", and the vulgar call it "blood vessel of the belly"; and arm veins, it's placed on the pulse point, it's this one where bloodletting takes place, it's the one that appears above the elbow through an obvious manifestation; and salvatella, it's the vein between the said auricular vein and the smaller one mentioned, and they are in their two ramps.
And in the chest and ribcage there are three veins; one of those is left behind by the curvature of the heart's wild side. And the second is sophena, its location is placed below the ribcage of the domestic heart. And sciatic vein, its location is beside the ribcage of the wild heart; and in the ribcage are other veins similar to those.
The youth of the veins that are close to the ears is in ancient inflammation, migraine, effusion and old ulcers on the head.
And the quality of causing that is according to what I recommend you: it should be on the head of the sick person, and rubbing the head of the sick person in the back of the neck at the place where both veins are pressed under a wide band with good friction; then strengthen the sick person's neck with one bend where the two appear close to the ears in two prefrontal locations on the head; and do that as you recommended, and if you feel the pulse of those as I mentioned, here there is temptation.
Then you take the surgical knife, and that is the one that is applied, then you insert those veins into the channel between where bloodletting goes to the mouth. And then you lift your hand to the vein and channel up to the higher parts, and cut the vein starting from an oblique incision. And let the length of the incision be as much as two fingers or around that amount; and let blood flow out from the wound as much as you want.
And then strengthen with powders and leave it in there until it is healed.
And this has been explained earlier in the beginning of this book about how to make incisions and their cautery treatment.
These are the two arterial veins that are associated with bloodletting, they have ancient migraine, bad and frequent ophthalmia, and acute excess flows of body fluids in the eyes.
And the quality of bloodletting those is according to what I recommend you: strengthen the sick person's neck movement where the two veins appear by their obvious manifestation and demonstrate that there is a pulse at your mentioned location; then you will feel temptation.
And then lift the channel above the vein up to your mentioned location, and introduce the bloodletting incision there obliquely. Then raise the vein in its place; and cut it as you did with the other veins. And let the blood flow according to the amount of your need.
And then release the constriction of the neck of the sick person, place your mention location on the vein for an hour, and then rest there with powders while strengthening it above with firm pressure, and leave it in until it is healed.
And this has already been explained in detail before about them and their incisions, as well as the excision at the beginning of this book.
And the quality of bloodletting for the frontal vein is close to the bloodletting of the cephalic vein in ancient face diseases, migraines, fever, and infected ulcers.
And the quality of bloodletting for it is according to what I recommend you; that means the sick person should strengthen their neck with one bend where the vein appears. And then take the instrument which is called a sanguinaria (bladder hook) of which this is its form:
Place the tip prominently on it which is at the top of the sanguinaria over that vein and hit it against it obliquely or otherwise according to its manner, let the blood flow as much as you want; then release the puncture in the neck and strengthen it until it is healed.
Sometimes operations are performed at the abdominal cavity, however it is not advised that the surgical instrument be of a sudden extremity as with other surgical instruments, but rather from its side extremity. The surgical instrument in question moves across perpendicularly, where the bone is close and strong, causing the surgical cut to penetrate when it is delicate.
Direct the flow of the two veins that are in the tear ducts of both eyes towards the eye by means of the tears from the eye and the pus within the eye, and to the cheeks on the face.
And the quality of the surgical cut is that the patient supports his head on one pillow, and brings the surgical cuts closer, while you stand over them.
And the surgical cut is made across longitudinally for a short distance with one surgical instrument for several times, where there is no flesh in that area; and if the surgical tool is delicate, then break its end firmly.
And proceed to make the blood flow as much as necessary and then pause over those cuts, hold them for a night, and gently stretch those areas.
The surgical incision made on the nasal vein is associated with acute fever and strong sweating, as well as facial illnesses and migraine that occur in the face, especially when they are old.
And the quality of his surgical incision is that the patient supports their head and positions it towards your left hand, taking the delicate and long cut under which you place it in the middle location on the nose according to straightness, where the vein does not appear at this point, and when the bleeding starts immediately.
Make sure to finish your hand at the small surgical tool gradually and make the blood flow according to your need; then gently lie that area for a night, once it is restored more quickly.
Direct the flow of the surgical incisions towards constriction, towards the onset of leprosy, and towards various facial illnesses, itching, and bad corrosive ulcers as well as erysipelas.
And the quality of that surgical incision is that the patient should support each one on their pillow; and the surgeon stands above the head of the patient, and the patient lies on a mattress.
And proceed to make the surgical incision along its length with an ample small surgical tool gradually; and then remove blood according to time quantity or according to what you need at that moment; and proceed to do something similar for the other vein.
And then gently stretch the muscles and hold both veins with mid-pressure in order that the patient is not over-heated, leaving them to rest by morning when the disease has healed.
And the treatment of surgical incisions on the veins of the alerigic type corresponds to small pustules and papules in the mouth, decay of the gums, bad ulcers, and cracks, as well as bad ulcers that occur in the nose and in the area around it.
And the quality of this surgical incision is that you should cut in front of you while supporting the head on one pillow, and gently lift both lips to examine which veins belong to each lip (one from the right side of the upper lip, and another from the left); then the demonstration for each is by the darkness of either side, and this is more so when there are thin black veins in their circuit; thus you would cut through each with a cross-cut incision.
If you have any doubt and do not know which one it is, then you understand that the cut should be made on the larger of those, and from the clear pus present in those.
And make as if to cut both veins that are above the lips.
The two veins that are in front of you when looking at the tongue are approximately near the surgical incision of the cephalic type before those located in the gums, towards tonsillitis, and to various illnesses in the mouth.
And the quality of performing this surgical procedure is that you should follow the tongue between your most forward servants and lift up their tongue, then observe the tongue itself, identifying each vein on either side, and the color of both tends to be darker.
And then cut each one; and remember that you should not finish your hand on those surgical incisions, as those are arteries.
And your veins that are surgically treated on the side belong to those areas that typically exist in all men, and their surgical incisions are performed according to two methods; or place them with a mirtilate or olive surgical instrument gradually getting smaller; or make them with a knife-like surgical tool, which they call an anessil, this is the form of theirs:
Let the size match as you wish, and it is suitable to open the concave full veins that seem large in appearance, and towards those containing thick blood clots.
And this surgical incision is of lesser width and has a delicate tip, suitable for surgical incisions on thinner veins that contain subtle blood.
Let the youth perform the bloodletting on the basilic vein, which is one of three veins: remove the disease from the patient's body that affects their limbs and abdomen, as well as from the belly where the pain resides.
And direct the bloodletting expert, when performing this bloodletting, to guard over it and maintain a careful attention on it, where there is an artery beneath. If they err and misjudge during the puncture of bloodletting, that artery will be incised and blood will flow out from it, thus ensuring not to bleed too deeply with a sharp blade before stopping the bleeding immediately like it should be done.
And if the basilic vein does not appear for a clear manifestation, then when you notice that it is not there, change to another one, or try looking for any other option; or bleed from where it ends on your arm, which is clearly visible; and apply bloodletting with the tool of the expert in this manner just as we have described.
If you want to perform bloodletting on the patient's inner elbow, then proceed in front of the bend of your arm where you know the location of your wrist bones. Then press your hand onto them, and adjust your position with your arm; press down the vein at the concave section of bloodletting just as we have described. Be sure to do this without hitting the area of the artery.
And when you press down with strength on the area where you have pressed your hand, there is an inflation in that spot under pressure, then that inflation corresponds to the artery. So, avoid that area accordingly.
And if the blood flows during bloodletting like in a child, and the blood is thin and light, then you know it's the blood of the artery; then pinch it and keep your hand pressed on that spot for an extended period. Then hold your hand as we have instructed, and if the blood stops, where the vein has been separated, then strengthen your arm and let that area be.
And watch over the patient's wound from infection, and keep a careful eye on them not to let it get infected for some days until they recover.
And if the blood does not stop, and you should not use medicine for that; then when it's visible to you, you will incise the artery if possible; where its extremity is contracted, and the blood stops. Or take some time with your hands, do this again, and hold one strong on the area of the vein near the bend in your arm and within a powder by the other day.
And if the blood stops, then it's good; and otherwise, treat that with the medicine as described before in relation to the memory of the place where the powder of blood flow should be applied.
And stopping the flow of blood in some positions due to the small size of the wound and the limitations of your arm movement can be challenging.
The bloodletting from the dark vein is done by youth, extracting the blood from the upper part of the head and the lower part of the body; for it is made up of branches from the basilic vein and cephalic vein, as we have described.
And when performing bloodletting, let the expert who is skilled in this be attentive during the process, where there is pressure in your bloodletting; because wherever you feel that area has a nerve. If they correctly judge during puncturing and find the nerve, it might cause a state of confusion or unwellness, making recovery difficult, and if only partially treated, recovering completely will be hard. This particular nerve becomes noticeable through feelings; so, when it is hidden by certain people and is subtle but not shown, then while performing bloodletting with your tool at the spot closest to the skin edge, avoid hitting the nerves in the strength of your action.
And if the vein is between two nerves, then you should cut the vein along its length.
The bloodletting from the cephalic vein involves extracting the blood from the head and relieving the pains in the limbs.
And when doing this correctly, if you want the bloodletting to use an olive oil cautery or a myrtle wood one; which is the preserved pus of all veins, that does not leave your artery or nerve.
However, for some people, strength is recommended, even if bloodletting doesn't occur during the first press. In that case, do not neglect to notice that lump.
The first point is that you should know bloodletting should only be administered for the maintenance of health, with hope for recovery and caution against illness. It should be performed using one of the veins typically found in the armpit: cephalic, dark, or basilic veins. Bloodletting should start at the beginning of spring, on an empty stomach during springtime and autumn, and before meals during winter when there are noticeable signs of rejuvenation.
And bloodletting should be performed and end by the time three hours have passed since dawn or the first hour of day.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors. And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out. You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands. When joint pain occurs due to convenience and necessity at any time of day or night, everywhere and in all circumstances, that is when botulism may be administered.
And let the elephant not receive botulism until it is fourteen years old, and the pregnant woman should not be given botulism unless after a quarter of a month from the seventh month, and elderly people should not be given botulism those who have already passed sixty years.
And if someone wants to be given botulism by any method, let them change their intestines before the botulism is administered with a lion's purgative. If in those there is a retained wound, so that the veins do not pull the superfluities during the botulism of the intestines, which are cleansed and do not contaminate the main members.
And let no patient receive botulism during the time of their fasting, nor from illness or intoxication, nor from disease caused by excess or lack of food and drink, nor from fever or stomach pain, nor from pregnancy, childbirth, or any activity that dissolves their health, either bodily or animal.
And in considering the subtlety of the humors before this if the complaint is large, with foods and drinks, and with medicines if it is feasible for them.
And in between baths if any cause does not prohibit it, or if you exercise through some exercise so that the complaint becomes subtle.
And let the botulism be given to them in the feet of the day, around the time of three o'clock, as we have said.
And ensure that the foot of that person be watched on every day with all animal disease accidents, such as distress, anger, fear, and all bodily accidents, such as work and excessive worry, sex and similar ones.
And according to their desire, make the causes be present in using that which they have a custom of with aromaticity and fragrance, as well as perfumes and similar things, depending on the amount of possibility.
And let the botulism practitioner be on a cushion that is better than the cushion of whom one should give botulism.
And extend their arm, and rub that with their hand the botulism applicator for two or three minutes; and strengthen it with leather and encircle that for two minutes.
And for the tightness that is prepared, if the tightness does not equate or if the tightness is from superfluity, then prohibit any discharge of the complaint; or if it is from softening, then prohibit the body of the complaint altogether.
And for the tightness, let him who should be given botulism rub his hands together between them while the veins are inflated, and declare it to their feeling.
And for the botulism practitioner, let them apply a little ancient anti-inflammatory oil to the botulism on their hand. Then place his last finger of his right hand over that vein and leave it there until you feel the vein protruding slightly. The position is such that the veins are identified; thus, when you find that as you pull on the cord you see veins escaping, from those you know that the area is full of wind. When you place your hand near the area where botulism should be administered, it relaxes and then contracts against the hand, revealing what's underneath. The practitioner should not press directly on the vein; if they do, that means the area needs more space, so the practitioner will need to adjust accordingly.
And thus, let it be known that the botulism administrator must remain firm and be concerned about all these causes.
And then discontinue the application of the botulism. However, if the vein is punctured in one minute, then it's enough; otherwise, continue this process for another minute while staying at that location or applying pressure over them if the location isn't moving.
And if the area becomes red, or if the patient feels dizzy, then let it rest for a day or two, and do not apply pressure, as firmness may pull out pus. Do not take a bath either.
And proceed to perform the botulism again if she desires it.
And if the pain is slight and there's subtle discomfort, and you fear that not enough pain will occur, then continue with the botulism at that place according to rectitude and adjust in the application slightly. Do this with pressure before the area becomes red, as for men, once it gets red, you should have few applications.
And if you see that it has already turned red, then do not continue over them, for there is no excuse for any cause; pause on them for some part of the oil opening, which delights the body from the pain. And it's better in this area than oil and that other oils.
And similarly administer an oil opening in every botulism when botulism of the veins is required to prohibit the body from pain, and they do this with terebinth resin and anointing as delighting and soothing when it's stopped on one part over that area, where the pain becomes subtle and is stirred up when it's large.
And if in the area of botulism a large pus forms, which occurs in several minutes, especially for those who have not bled except that moment or at the opening of the vein slightly, and then you apply heat, pause on the area with a sponge soaked in water and salt, a little scalded. Then strengthen that for an hour until it's dissolved.
And perform as described near the insertion of that vein from the patient or from another vein.
And if there is any darkness or greenness in the place for a few days, do not notice this; and if you wish, apply over that some cause of aloes and myrrh dissolved, or some cause of juice from thyme or calamus or similar substances.
Swollen lymph nodes resulting in abscesses and swellings, you should perform bloodletting from the basilic vein.
And place your hand on that, and if you then feel softness, keep your compression on that; and then that swelling is bad and harmful. And from now on, be careful to apply over that any substance we have discussed, for it will bleed out of the sanguine artery.
Apply plaster to that where it is bound up, so the area is sustained, and then attend to that with another treatment while it heals.
And know how to extract from the blood for every man according to the amount of its virtue and according to the color prevailing over the blood as it appears.
For if the blood is black, then let it bleed inside until there's a wound; and similarly, if you find it thick, let it bleed inside until there's thinness; and similarly, if it's sharp, inside where its sharpness will be.
And consider for the one who is full and strong and needs blood extraction in a particular area, expand the bloodletting from the vein and let the bloodletting be deep.
And for the one who is frail, do the opposite of that, and know how to extract it in numerous areas, and let its extraction be thorough.
And the best thing that can be done in bloodletting from a vein is to make a cross-section cut, not to pierce.
And this method of bloodletting saves from the flow of blood and injury to nerves, it is commendable and more safe than bloodletting according to width and length.
And it is customary for this to lead to a sudden fainting, you should perform bloodletting, and know that you should treat that before bloodletting with a little of wine in the blood of balsam or simple oxymel; and draw out the blood from the body in three areas or four.
And if it is due to fullness, then take before bloodletting for infusion in a mixture of myrrh or in flavored honey water containing spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger and similar substances, or in flavored and fragrant aromatic waters.
And if a fainting occurs you should perform bloodletting, and it is because of his movement in the blood channel, then know that he should drink water from meat and flavored very subtle wine; use of aromaticity with spices, and limit his food to that.
And use the other causes we have discussed in the division for fainting by evacuation.
And if someone wants to purge their arm and dissolve their blood again, know that for this man the bloodletting is by evacuation method, and his virtue being cold, it will purge the blood gradually, according to the quantity of its virtue over consecutive days.
And if someone wants to purge their arm and relieve their blood again, and their body is strong, then perform this about 7 or 9 hours after the first bloodletting.
And if someone wants to drain their body's blood in the opposite direction from where it declines, know that this should be done on the second or third day.
And if that body already has purged blood and is sharp and causes a fever, know that you should drain his blood in one go and let it be from his strong flow of blood, have the incision expanded to cause fainting, since you will have kept all the conditions for bloodletting; and place your hand on his pulse so as not to die at a point of fainting. The number of areas where this happens depends on how unaware and negligent the bloodletter is.
And do not consider when you wish to move the arm and relieve the blood again, as soon as the outlet of the vein is closed and makes it difficult to purge the blood, that you press below that with vigor and bend slightly its extension, which this is too harsh.
Let it bleed again; or keep that at the sharpness of bloodletting which is coagulated in the outlet of the vein; or place over that with thuja oil, or sage, and press gently on that so that the blood will come out.
And if the vein is inflamed, then let it be and do not touch it until the abscess subsides.
And if necessity prompts you to relieve the blood again and it is not an excuse, then prick that at that place or on another arm in another vein.
The vein called "arm cord" is bloodletted in the location of the dark or the basilic vein, when they are not congested or hidden, which it consists of those.
The quality of bloodletting for him is that the patient immerses his hand in hot water until it turns red easily and the vein becomes manifestly visible.
And place your strength over that with ligature and moderate constriction; and perform bloodletting according to the transverse small cut, not laterally or longitudinally.
And make your incision wide and place your bloodletting instrument at which you will bleed it on the joint of the hand a little.
And if the flow of urine is forbidden, then you should extend your hand into the bladder and let the urine run within the water until you achieve your need.
If you were in the days of summer, then you are excused from extending your hand into the bladder water, and during winter, the urine vessel is held in bladder water.
And the bloodletting from this vein is considered safer than from all other veins; it does not have a pulsating vein or nerve for you to avoid.
And bloodletting from the wrist of the right hand corresponds to illnesses affecting the male reproductive organs.
And the quality of bloodletting for you is that you strengthen your hand or with your own hand, because you have it placed in bladder water, while the vein is swollen and can be demonstrated by pressure; and then bleed there across. And if you incise all of that, do not bleed there repeatedly.
And remember not to finish your hand at the bloodletting instrument, for otherwise you will damage the nerves of the fingers without flesh.
And then extend your hand into the bladder water and let the urine flow through it; if you do not extend it in the bladder water, the urine will clot in the opening of the vein, and this is forbidden for flow.
And as the amount of urine is extracted according to need, then you press over the vein with oil and salt so that it does not become solidly clotted; similarly do this in all straight lines.
And for the young person of bloodletting from that on the left hand, it corresponds to illnesses affecting the male organs.
And do something similar for the bloodletting in this case as you did with the other one.
And the young person of the phrenic vein for bloodletting is to illnesses that are in the lower part of the body, such as male reproductive organ illnesses, and retention of menses, and to illnesses of veins and ulcers of thighs and old chest ailments, and they correspond to illnesses.
And the quality of bloodletting for this is that the body submerges its chest in bladder water and does friction within which veins appear; and lie over the chest joint with the vein's apparent location; and on that, you should find its branches when they are swollen.
And then bleed it from the most extensive branch or reduce it so that you can add its increase to it, which is better and more salty.
And if you bleed there on the chest surface, then you avoid the nerves that are around that area of the chest, and stop your bloodletting at which you are bleeding across, as if you wanted to incise it.
And let the bloodlettings be useful.
If urine emission is forbidden, then extend the leg of the patient in bladder water and let the urine flow through that while it is being emptied.
And if the bloodletting instrument fails in the first attempt, then try at the bloodletting again on its own part where there is salt; and do not fear for your illness, but be careful of the nerves as we have said.
And similarly do it with the phrenic nerve on the other chest equally.
And for the sciatic vein, as we have said, it is to find its location at the opening of the wild part.
And the young person of bloodletting for this is when it's in the groin due to disease or injury.
And the quality of bloodletting for this is that the body enters into a bath and washes and strengthens the leg of the person from the heel of the foot up to above four fingers along a long thin bend, which does not appear except like this.
And when it appears, then you bleed that according to each organ that is within your ability and according to across-cutting, which is better; or incise it through incision or cut it off through cutting, where the location is salty.
And it is in swollen men with a large mass; and if you find that, not appearing upon touch all over, then bleed some branch of it, and that which appears behind the earlobe on the hand is it.
And guard yourself from the nerves, and let the amount of urine flow as you desire.
And then relax the constriction and place your hand on the location of the bloodletting somewhat, strengthening that which is only slightly healed.
Regarding aspiration and the qualities to use those.
Ventosas are from stones, or thorns, or splinters.
Ventosions are done in two ways: one of them is through incision and extraction of blood, and the other is after incision then suction.
And this type of suction that follows incision is done in two ways: or with fire or with heat.
And the twelve locations on which bloodletting and suction are administered include: one where bleeding is performed followed by suction, this is alnocrati, it's the last part of the head; and a mid-location between the two parts of the neck; and suction from below the jawbone up to inside the mouth; and suction from both spatulas; and suction from alohoster, this is on the tip of the tongue; and suction from two points, these are one inch apart; and suction from both cavities; and suction from both thighs.
Ventilation does not expel the disease from the narrow veins spreading in the flesh, and thus it does not reach its virtue through those veins; similarly to what happens with bloodletting. Nor should ventilation be performed with fire or hot iron in any illness caused by overfullness inside where the entire body is not evacuated.
If necessity requires ventilation for illness or continuous pain, administer it at all times during the month and at its end, in the middle of the month and at any other time.
And therefore when in any cause of those, especially if it is towards the end or middle of the month, then command that ventilation be performed since it has passed the day or three hours.
The reason for neck ventilation is that when it affects the gravity in the head and where it settles in the breaths; more importantly, consider this as an entire evacuation of the whole body.
And this ventilation is at the site of bloodletting for the cephalic area.
And it's not appropriate to use someone who is full of congestion or in which there is phlegm, as this causes great harm.
And that's why it's not recommended to use those elderly ones, and in those with ailments on their heads.
It's detrimental for the one who keeps using that on them to experience forgetfulness; thus, it's recommended that you instruct the person performing ventilation to leave their hand near but not too close to where you've indicated, fearing the generation of forgetfulness.
Ventilation of alcohol is at the site of bloodletting for the dark vein and basilica: thus it leads to asthma, constriction of airways, and splitting of the lungs; it also causes coughing and overfullness.
And it's advised that the alcohol-stuffed suction cup is small; otherwise, if placed too long, it causes weakening in the body and stomach.
Ventilation with aguardiente leads to sudden head pain and eye diseases, as well as migraines, pre-seizure symptoms, and inflammation; it also causes toothache. This is performed at the site of bloodletting for the basilica vein.
And it's advisable to instruct the person performing ventilation not to press their hand against a scarification, so as not to pierce an artery and allow for the flow of pain.
Ventilation for an extended period on the chin leads to alcohol in the mouth, decay of gum tissue, and appearances similar to other illnesses that are present in the mouth; it is performed at the site of bloodletting for alhieric which is found in both cheeks.
The ventilation performed on the two spatula areas leads to caphatan, which is caused by overfullness of heat quality.
And the ventilation of the two divisions inside the nostrils corresponds to the bloodletting of three veins: the basilica, dark, and cephalic ones. It draws out pain from all those numerous veins that are in the body, as well as the narrow veins of other veins into which it spreads between the larger veins to reach the three veins.
And command the person performing suction not to proceed with scarification, as that area is exposed skin, and you leave it with nerves and arteries underneath.
It's also a suction cup for when someone is affected by hemorrhoids and causes anal bleeding as well as ulcers in those areas.
And it's recommended that you instruct the person performing suction to use a large suction cup and one made of iron since the area requires intense drying; it should have thin, firm suction cups and be scarified with scarification.
The small rib suction cups through apparent diminution draw out pain from the entire body and cause old stomachaches, back pain, and bladder issues; they also induce menstruation and result in coughing and exacerbation. These are performed at the site of bloodletting for two Sophenas and Alahorcoben, as well as two cavils.
However, it weakens the entire body and causes a syncope in vigorous men.
And when using Alahorcoben suction cups, it is preferable to use them alongside the two rib suction cups.
And the quality of the position of suction cups is to place the suction cup at the beginning view and slide it over warm grease, without prolonging the position of the suction cups, rather pause them slightly, remove them gradually, and let the fluids come to the area evenly. And don't stop repeating this until you see the area already turn red and swell, and that the symptoms of pain become apparent.
And then you perform the scarification gradually and continue applying the grease little by little, while considering the disposition of the body.
When that man who has tough, hard flesh gets cut, it is advised to cut him only once and not press too deep, so as to prevent the wound from becoming ulcerated.
And instruct the scraper to widen the scraping and do it gently, always suctioning for ease.
And if there is swelling in the wound, then you should scrape twice, where in the first scrape you open up the pathway for infiltration into the wound and its fluid content. In the second, perform an inspection of the acquired fluid from the extraction of the swollen material.
And if the wound is filled with a thick pus, then it should be scraped again for a third time to achieve the remainder.
And finally, when we wish to extract some pus little by little or just a small amount, suffice with one scraping.
And if we wish for the extraction of thick pus, we scrape with multiple scrapings; and if we know that the pus is thick, then you should scrape with a wave-like scraping technique.
And the term of scraping ends at the depth of the cut just like that.
And for the one whose cut is thick, hard, dark, and his pores are stretched, you should make the suction cup locations more soothing, more open, more decisively resolved; if it's in summer, something like aloes oil or violet leaf oil, or sweet almond oil, or camomile seed oil; and if it's in winter, then oils of narcissus, or lily oil, or chamomile oil, or mustard oil, and similar to those.
And if the excess is thick, dry, then the oil should be bitter, or balm oil, or aloes oil, or anise oil, and similar to these.
And if the scraper has ample hard flesh pores, then it should be forbidden for oil and you should take these near the suction areas of the suction cups with water or with a dark water from sunflower oil, or water from onions, or water from leeks, similar to them.
And for the one whose pus is of thick moisture, wash his suction cups with vinegar or water from mallow and sumac, similar to these.
And for the one whose excesses are thick, wash his suction cups with old vinegar or with water from sansevieria, which is marjoram, or from infusion of fennel, or chamomile, similar to these.
And it should be that the suction is kept in front of bathing; moreover, you should administer it close to the heat of bathing for an hour or two, and it should sleep near the suction.
What is required is that the blood-sucking tool be regulated before suctioning.
And when considering the meal: if the person who needs blood-letting has a hot temperament and is upset by his thick pus and inflammation, then you should have him take cooling causes, such as vinegar salads, and watercress with vinegar, and milk, and sarsaparilla, and julep, and similar to these.
And let his meals consist of things like chicken, and rabbits stewed in wine, and meat seasoned with herbs, and similar to these.
And for the one whose complexion is pale, have him drink absinthe, or absinthe made from sarsaparilla seeds, and sumac, and wine with a fragrant odor between old and new; and it should be recommended that he use moderation in drinking and eating, and pause his meals of chicken, cabbages, peas, small rabbits, and pigeons.
And it should be that the amount of drink on the day of suction and blood-letting is greater than the food.
And it should be that they are given to drink for some hours before certain people take tyrothricin, or muscle medicines such as magnesium, or before suction or blood-letting, or nearby, so that the main limbs are comforted and pus is made subtle; do not have them take those baths.
Let the suction cups that are scraped be placed on the belly and gout, on the navel, under the joints, and on the wide buttocks, for these limbs do not endure scraping themselves.
And it should not be due to pus from limbs themselves but the accumulation of pus in the breast during gouty inflammation of the breast's pus; and we use this for dissolving the thick, viscous wind in the limbs, such as suction on the abdomen and umbilicus; which invigorates the limb and calms it down and alleviates the pain that resolves the wind.
And when it is used on the lungs upon their affection or coughing, through the force of suction it helps a person's breath and eradicates the cough from its place.
And similarly when it is used on the belly and chest, it helps to dispel wind in those enclosed.
These suction cups are administered with broth alone; some are given with fire instead.
And some are given full of hot water in gout diseases affecting the chest.
And this is why suction is filled with large pus, it's either hot water alone or water in which herbs suitable for this purpose are cooked.
Shape of suction administered at fire: make the size of the opening to two fingers, as we have made it; and the quantity of the air should be that of a palm; and place it at his back, in the area where is in the circuit, that of him, most part of him, pull it gently according to the amount that enters into it one needle.
A surgical procedure of using an herb or citrus fruit, with large cuts, lion, equal and smooth until none cause the member to move its position upon it.
And at the best of the middle section of the herb or iron, where the candle is placed under the burning fire.
And this is the large suction of this one that we have prescribed; and the little fluid from this according to the illnesses and the state of those who use this.
And the suckers of children and exhausted ones are different from the suckers of youths and with large bodies.
And the quality of placing this suction on fire over the member is to extend the coal on fire from wood moderately in front of a small candle of wax, and place that one over the middle section of the herb across at the middle location of the suction, so that the fire be lit around your part not to burn the patient's body.
And then place it on the body of the patient, and it should be over the pull that we said, within which when we have the suckers and don't need them anymore but they make vapor over that pull, then the suction will soon dissolve.
And according to its manner, heat the coal, and repeat this if you need more of this.
In suction used in the illness of pleurisy, with water, which does not have a transverse herb or pull, and is not administered but when it is filled with water, and placed only on the body.
And this is how it is: And this suction, the bigger it is, the better it is, so that it can receive large quantities of water.
Captulo .xcvii.
Suctions are not administered on the muscles of the body but only in those parts where there is no possibility of placing a suction instrument due to their small size, as with the bladder and gum and similar organs; or in limb-free skin, as said for the mouth and those like it.
And the quality of using those which you have found bloodletting suckers that are in the waters of boiling water.
And then leave them soaked in hot water for the day and night, making sure none causes irritation inside their stomach; and after that, evacuate the body during bloodletting and with suckers; and then rub the patient's body until they turn red; and finally place them on it.
And when they are filled and the case is ready.
And if it is possible to draw pus from the place with suction, it is better in youth.
And if not, then wash the spot with vinegar and add hot water; and then rub and squeeze it.
And if the body of the patient extends to the place where the bloodletting instruments are, and this is what comes out, then you insert a cloth in water that's been heated, and place it there so that the discharge is absorbed.
And if the blood is multiplied, then sprinkle on it powdered vitriol or ointments and other substances that have a stanching effect, until the blood is coagulated; or place the ashes of cooked beans over the spot and leave them so that the beans adhere to the spot, until the blood has coagulated.
And indeed, if necessary, repeat the use of bloodletting instruments, when it is possible to change those.
And if bloodletting is forbidden from suspension, then rub the area with fresh blood or leave a needle in the places where it makes blood come out; and then place them there, so that those when feeling any blood do it immediately.
And when you want them to stop, sprinkle a little powdered aloes or salt or ashes on them and cauterize immediately.
And thus begins the therapy for the remaining part: of restoration. This chapter is about essential treatments in the art of medicine; it's the restoration of fractures and accidental dislocations in bones.
Oh, son child, know that people of the medical profession and the laymen and those who are going to spend their time ignoring the works of the Ancients or even reading a single word from them.
And for this reason, this method of the sciences on earth is private; and I have not forgotten anything that has been done over time; and I did not exhibit what I have learned, but rather through the length of reading the works of the Ancients and studying their understanding, where I extracted the science from them.
And moreover, direct towards experimentation and study throughout your life.
And I have already described in this chapter all of my science and what has been passed through my experiment on that; thus abbreviate this to you others and deliver this from the occupation of long explanation; and abbreviate this at the end of the abbreviation; and demonstrate this at the end of declaration; and form this into various forms of movements that are administered in those, as done by adding declaration, so as I have done in two previous chapters.
The first chapter.
A summary and gathering of what needs to be fractured bones, from those of which prior mention is necessary before we begin reciting the fractures of members and various things pertaining to each. Please note that in the prologue of this chapter, we mention summaries of the discourse; and chapters whose understanding requires the craftsmen to be guided towards truthfulness about those; they are you and those who are eager to know or learn this noble art and others from you.
And so say that when you come across a fracture or dislocation or twist or jamming, then you should proceed to the beginning with bloodletting or treat that area, or at any time, if no cause is prohibited, such as vitiation of the vital force, or it is what happens to it with effusion, or even in decrepitude, or it's time for strong heat, or strong friction.
And it is good to be content with food consisting of herbs like fennel and meats of rabbits and crabs; and forbid heavy meats and fill instead with all kinds of food that fills the veins of the body, within which you can ensure the prevention of an abscess, and if you are not afraid of the effusion of matter in the limb.
And then return the patient to their first state where they usually are.
And when the broken bone begins to be restored, then it is noted that the patient should eat nutritive foods with mobility and bulk, in which viscosity exists, such as bread made from flour cooked in water, broth, caps, fish, bellies of cows, hams, fresh meats, and large and similar types of food, and under this regimen a slight and milky coagulation of bone pus takes place.
And know that broken bones in adults and those of the elderly do not remain broken as they are according to their nature and become consolidated due to the drying out of their limbs.
However, nature adjusts and commands that for every cause similar to glue affecting a broken bone throughout the body there is fattiness that adheres and strengthens it internally; at times of coagulation and conglutination over time, within which comes the end of strength and firmness; such as heat at the beginning, within which no cause prohibits him from doing his work.
And for this reason it is necessary to abstain from foods of the patient, foods in which there is gravity, viscosity and thickness, as we have said.
And know that the species of fracture are various according to the diversity of the limbs, where a fracture of bone of the hip is different from the fracture of skull bone; and a fracture of limb bone is different from the fracture of leg bone; similarly, all other members are different among themselves.
And I conclude this recollection of every species of fracture, detailed in its chapter separately from the other.
A variety of fractures internally. And there are diversified species of fractures within the bones; which is caused by curvilinear fracture or another that happens in its star-like positions. Some have been divided into fractures according to the length of the bone: these are fractures of the satagia, stars and addictions both originating from and not originating from them, as they are made when writing is prepared, and it's a fracture with swelling and disruption in the head, and it's small fracture.
And for every species there is a specific remedy or trouble in its restoration according to that which will be the distinct recall of it in its respective places.
A sign of bone fracture. And thus it is known that bone fracture: there's a twist in it, and its prominence and attachment to feeling, and it's when you press it with your hand.
And when there's no obvious twist nor is it felt under your touch when you press the bone with force and the patient doesn't experience much pain, then there isn't a fracture here.
There may be a twist or small fracture, so it's noted that you should feel it with your hand and under compression of the whole; then there's a pause on the subject of medicines where one recalls the recall at that moment which is suitable for this location; and it's straightened by subtle constriction.
And know that when the place is curved and isn't split into two or another thing doesn't happen to it at its star-like position, such as if it's expanded completely throughout its circumference, then it's noted that you should start from your time with rectification of this location which happened at this moment with an abscess cautery.
And if it caused an abscess cautery, then smooth that over several days until the abscess ceases; and then equalize that according to any method you can of elevation and invention.
And know that restoration of this and union of this are much more delicate than in the bone where it happens at satagia.
And then strengthen it according to what will be recalled for you about it.
And if in the bones it's at satagia points, then an extension of this broken limb from two parts is necessary, whether it's the hand or the foot; or with your hand if the member is small; or with two strings or with one string and the hand.
And make your position where you place the limbs evenly according to their natural shape, while the parts are being stretched out from the body's length, then ensure that you force those additions back into them and according to any method you can apply in their places.
And observe so that your strength does not cause injury or damage to the patient during your operation, and proceed according to your ability by fitting one bone to another according to the best methods.
And when in that moment you profitably touch with your hand there, and if you notice any difference cause here, correct that one and adjust it according to the quantity of your virtue.
And avoid excessive extension and compression, even as doctors often see boils produce a pus-filled blister through their operation, or cause a constriction in the limb like what we have seen through their boil operations.
And the quality of the compression of the limb is that which I recommend; for you should know that limbs break differently in their size and in their grandeur, and in their form.
And for those that are small like the arm and so on, where they resemble these, then make sure that the wrapping is of very thin cloth.
And for those that are large like the thigh or chest, make sure they have a padded and hard covering; when you tie the padding tightly around the large strong limb from all sides in equal compression, so that no mark appears on it.
And gradually begin your adjustment of equilibrium, pause pleasantly according to this, over the location of that fracture on three or four layers depending on which member it is; and strengthen your hand a little on this layer.
And gradually move towards that upper part of the location of the fracture, and strengthen moderately so that you do not force your compression where you have strengthened the location of the fracture. And gradually extend the layer of the fracture location a little, and soften the compression gradually as you take control of a large part of the location.
And gradually take another bend and cover that second boil over the stretched location with a layer, and move towards the layers near the most upper part of the fracture; and in your operation, adjust and soften this compression according to what we have said about the first layer above.
And gradually pause between the layers of stopping or cloth which matches the curvature of the fracture, if there is any curvature in it; and otherwise, do not cause any damage.
And gradually pause on the other bend, and gradually adjust over these star-shaped layers which have been made just now, if there is no swelling or pus blister in this area, then pause where that pus is; and leave it for a few days; and then strengthen on this the stars.
And the stars of the middle part should be made from red wood, and formed wisely; or they can be made from palm branches; or from wooden sticks; and each star's width should follow this shape and this figure:
And make sure that the star placed on that fracture is larger and slightly thicker than the other stars; the length of the star according to how it reads in size and grandeur for the member; gradually strengthen over these stars towards another bend as per your initial compression; gradually lie down properly as we have said about compression, so that your compression is more at the location of the fracture, and the longer it extends from the fracture, the less the compression.
And ensure that the threads are medium in size and fineness, and use many of them; if the threads are large, as I have seen in some instances during operations where they place the threads of ropes from the curvature, this is a great mistake when making the compression equal.
And thin threads are not convenient either, because you won't achieve the compression with them that you want, and make sure there is no more than one finger's width between each thread.
And if the patient is disturbed by the ends of the stars near the compression in those sensitive areas, then pause these with a cloth or finely spun wool so that it does not cause injury.
Some fractures are due to injury, involve disruption in the chain of events, and I will recall that in that particular case according to singularity.
And know that breaking all limbs is not healed by laying them under stars on the first day; the cause is that when a limb, if it's large, can't be placed over its stars rather than around three or four days or more, depending on your confidence in the occurrence of abscess after cautery.
And this is the way of plastering which the ancients used to restore, which are placed over fractures, dislocations and twists.
Method of plastering similar to the abrution of fracture restoration, suitable for complex injuries and mostly for women and children, which is about what does not generate heat or friction: it consists of using flour powder, which is the heart of the flour that produces movement in the walls of the mill.
And do it as described, or else sieve that through egg white, and let the mixture of this not-thin nor delicate set; then use that.
Another method for setting bones and joints dislocated or twisted: prepare a mixture of asafetida, lapdanum, acacia, olibanum, and myrrh, which is ground into one thousand grain sanders, all of it equals to half a dragon. For each dragon's weight, add equal parts of frankincense and aloes, also equal to half a dragon; then add twenty grains of clove and sift them with water or with the white part of an egg if the patient is very delicate; and then use this plaster, which has good composition and heals slightly broken bones, restoring them to their original state, and gives strength to men's limbs.
Another method for setting broken bones and twisted limbs, which restores them: prepare a mixture of myrrh and white alum in one dragon's quantity; add equal parts of frankincense and aloes, also five dragons' worth; include acacia from the sixth dragon; use Armenian mastic twenty dragons' quantity.
All of them are ground in a mortar for the wound to heal, they are sieved, and they are mixed with water or egg white and then administered.
The method of plastering joints and bones that are separated from their places, and the occurrence of pain in those areas as well as fissures and fractures: take catgut thread and immerse it in vinegar and olive oil, then place it over the affected area.
This plaster does not have healing power, it only serves to remove abscesses after cauterization and expel pain properly.
Another method of plastering that restores broken bones: take fig leaves and papaverine poppy seeds; mix both and create a plaster from them.
A shortened method of plastering that facilitates the restoration of bone fractures and when you want to resolve the remaining abscesses: use grated alum, chamomile and violet flowers, flour from ash, all in a quantity sufficient for one person. All of them are ground and some are mixed with wine if the member is not injured.
If it has been injured, then soak that in wet colander water or water and use it.
Another method of plastering for faster resolution than the first one, when abscesses occur requiring limb restoration: use a mixture of alum powder and linseed oil, burdock root, poppy seed, clover flower, marjoram, violet flowers, chamomile, all in equal parts. All should be ground and mixed with sauze water or double-strength water, or wine, according to the quality of the limb and its color.
May Ypocras, when not dissolved freely in its liquid form that is placed over the broken limb for restoration, should instead make a paste of wax and oil without any other cause; it's recommended to have a medium between coarseness and fineness.
May it be observed that when Gualia is placed over the broken limb for restoration of its function, the causes leading to desiccation from quality such as myrrh, ashes and things similar to those we have mentioned are seen.
A method of plastering that helps with injuries and pain: use a mixture made from ash, hair removed from human bodies or horse hoof trimmings, and alum, in equal parts. It should be ground, sieved, and mixed to form the plaster.
The amount depends on how it is determined whether the inflammation has subsided and if there is no pain or pressure, nor a broken bone in its proper place, then you do not disturb the patient for days. And if there occurs intense pain or swelling in the area, then you should remove it immediately, and keep his plaster on.
And take a cloth and a sea sponge that is wet, then immerse that in boiling water, and use that to wash the affected area until the pain and swelling subside; then let the limb rest for an hour; place on him wool soaked in vinegar and oil or rubbed oil, and cover him with it until you are sure of a boil being cauterized, and that the swelling of the limb subsides, and alleviate his pain.
And then iteratively apply that tightness and plaster without straining your first effort, and gently work on it until it is healed.
And if you observe that the boil and the fever and the pain and swelling and all accidents have already subsided completely, and you need no more plaster or tightness, then continue applying this as you did at the beginning with equal measures.
And if there is no cause for the limb among those we have mentioned, then do not remove it but let it be for about three to four or five days; And some burns require that everything be left for twenty days according to your observation of the removal of pain in the limb, as we have said, during which the fracture adheres, and it comes close to the coagulation of the flesh over there.
And then adjust in the tightness more than in your first tightness altogether, and adjust according to the increase of the patient's food, as long as it is preceded by his recovery.
More so if you see that the fracture location has dried and tightened more than it should, then know that nutrition is prohibited from reaching there; hence, wash that area with boiling water for all burns; this must be done in total over three days; loosen the tightness a little, and through this operation supply nutrition to the limb, which gets healed slightly.
And as those who restore fractures of the limb do another round when it is not restored to its original state, according to whether or not it has healed properly and according to the twist, this is an error according to their operation, and a great fear; if they were right, then those would have exaggerated in their ancient books and treated that open area.
And I haven't seen any of them do this, so it's more reasonable to think that this doesn't happen.
Section two: About fractures when they occur in the head.
The types of fractures are blows, and their shapes are varied, and the causes are distinct. Some fractures occur due to impact from space, and this impact remains within the skull, which leaves the bones intact, similar to what happens in a rod, therefore this type is called intracranial; or the force impacts a part of the bone, and it also damages the flesh but does not penetrate into the inner part of him; and this type of fracture is called absolute lifting.
And the outcome of these two types of fractures is either severe or slight. For fractures that are compressed or squeezed; and the cause for him is impact on wood or hammering onto stone, similar to this situation.
And this fracture is penetrating, which approaches the inner part of the skull that leaves the bones intact; or it's in the surface of the bone. The outcome for these two types of fractures is either severe or slight.
And for the fracture that occurs within the bone, in the tiny subtlety of the hair-like structure; thus this type of fracture is called 'capillary'.
And this is the fracture that occurs due to impact or hammering on stone, which brings some layers of bone into the parts inside, and it happens in concave places like when they occur in hammers during impact; it's the part of their entry into the inside parts.
And this is predominantly caused by such incidents in moist bone bodies, like children's heads.
And for all these types of fractured bones, they are like separate stars. And I will come back to the healing process of everything in its place.
And we must know all these types of fractures through detection on them and by inquiry into their various signs and symptoms of corrupted flesh that is on them.
And the capillary type is known by this that it's revealed on the bone surface and removed, and there's a trace left on him during which the fracture appears black.
And in the healing of fractures, consider the patient's condition, and then if you see these symptoms according to their obvious manifestation, such as vomiting from cholera, extension, loss of understanding, loss of appetite, fainting, acute fever, smell disturbance, fever sweating, and manifestations of these symptoms in major positions, if so it is not healed.
And if you see abnormal symptoms, you expect recovery, then you start the healing of him.
This is the cause that if you have come across it at the beginning as it is injured and this happens during the winter months, then after studying in the bone's inner part before day fourteen according to any position.
And if it's during the summer days, then after studying until the seventh day that what is left inside the bone has been corrupted by the inner part, and that incidents occur as we have recounted.
And if the fracture has already penetrated to the brain, and is in small parts that are being separated and moved, then you should scrape the irritated area with small movements and rubbing, according to what I will advise you.
And you must cleanse the buttocks of the patient, and expose the bone according to custom and your manual skill, and as per the shape of the wound, and make it lighter on the patient.
And if it happens that you need to determine the bone location, pus or abscess flow, then you must oppose yourself as per this method, and thus you fumigate the spot with oil that has been infused in vinegar and rubbed. You make the wound rest within until the abscess is numb, and ensure there are no blood flows; and afterwards start from around the bone circumference and towards its excision.
And you should proceed according to one of two ways for surgery.
And the first way is that you incise the bone with a straight blade scalpel, and this is its form: And then administer another scalpel of this type, slightly less than the first one; and this is its form:
And then administer more of the longer scalpel than the second one.
And scrape that you must know how many different scalpel blades to use, among which some are longer than others; and some of them have shorter edges compared to others, with their tip being more acute. They should be made of steel or iron.
And use them for ease in striking the scalpel blades to avoid hitting the bone and causing damage there.
And if the bone is strong and hard, then you should pierce in front of where you will use the scalpel blades when you administer them on the grooves, which you call non-deep grooves.
And they are not called otherwise than those that do not reach the end of the bone test because it is close to them; so that at the groove there is a round extremity or edge near which the sharp tip of his head resembles an edge or a small circle, which should not be submerged and pass through the thickness of the bone.
And it is convenient for you to use many of these grooves, each one of which suits the thickness of any bone, within which there should be an acute extremity at all times when testing the brain, and the quantity in length and width should be according to the amount of thickness of this test.
And this is the form of three types of grooves: The quality of piercing in the circuit of the broken bone is that you place the groove on the bone and turn it with your fingers until you know that the bone has been penetrated; then move the groove to another location, and leave behind the amount of thickness of the ray or roughly this.
And then you should incise with the scalpel that is between each ray of the bone, and make it slightly soft on this as shown when lifting, so like what we have said, while excavating the bone, or with your hand, or due to some other reason using certain tools that you will have adapted for this, such as forceps and delicate tongs.
And make sure to exercise all caution so that the scalpel does not touch any part of the intestines.
And when you have pierced the bone and separated it from the intestines if it continues with this, and extract it, be sure to place this in the roughness of what is on the bone as another tool resembling a scalpel, but indeed make it more precise and more delicate than the other scalpel blades.
And if there is any fragment of the small bones petrified and calcified, then take this with ease from among the tools you have; then treat the wound with remedies and ointments as we have said.
The other method of surgery is simpler and farther from pain; it was taught by Gualia and through great praise. And this is the discourse about it: It is necessary for you in the beginning to start uncovering the part of the bone in the location where the fracture is more intense and more evident, within which when you have uncovered that part and placed its extremity of this scalpel slowly and happily, here is how:
And this is the case of the conical part which is thick and does not penetrate any organ, and the sharp part lies in two opposite directions in length, as you see; that the conical part fits to the intestines against its acute inclination on the bone.
And then you strike on the scalpel from one side with a slight force until you penetrate all the bone easily as it has turned, and you are sure of the inside that it does not hit in the accident that you fear in any way; indeed, if the doctor was urine for all people and the most ignorant among them; certainly, if he was asleep.
When any other cause is attached to the bones of the foot in certain places of the bones, that substance of his enters at the end of the incision into that lens-shaped object, and he will deliver it from him through ease, which is relieved of his suffering and pain.
And if the bone fracture does not penetrate into the foot, and whatever is detached or left of the bone is his skin, it enters him with sharpness and subtle prominences. In that case, smooth out that roughness and eliminate those fine prominences through the preparation you have made for them, using various quantities so that it may be possible for you to apply these in all places according to what they need, and administer the right pus from these following where your operation has gone on this broken bone and its shape.
And when you administer according to your judgement in which you prepare the bone at its beginning with this thick pus, and further use more of the fine pus from him, and do not cease performing this until you reach administering the thick pus and the fine pus from all those.
When in any of the other small and fine capillary fractures or subtle fractures, make sure to administer care according to how you have proceeded with correction of it.
And it is because they do not heal over all those which have been studied in that art. And we have demonstrated on what has been written about large fractures.
And if the foot is stretched when you remove the bone, then make sure to take cloth according to the size of the wound, immerse it in greased oil, and place it over the wound opening; and further take another folded or triple-layered cloth, immerse it in wine and greased oil, and place it over the first cloth; and when you administer a little pus on top of that, do not apply too much so as to not harm the skin. And then apply lime over that gently until the amount that corresponds to the wound is sufficient only.
And leave it like this under this treatment for one or two days until you are sure of the pus being ready to be cauterized; and then remove it and administer medicines against excessive drying, such as lint cloths and flour from corns, and powders of earth and aristolochia, and those similar treatments.
And when you make these medicine powders into dust to apply on the wound, like dry ones; and universally, administer all medicine of its nature which repels without biting.
And follow your virtue according to the cleansing of the wound in your treatment; and it should not be greasy with ointment or any other substance; nor let you add toxicity to him; for when it is placed on the skin of the head, it spoils it and causes it to decay, which then spreads maliciously towards the foot from this evil.
And it spreads in the skin of the head, as his bone changes and especially when treatment is neglected for him, where there appears a dark color on the surface. And thus consider that if accidents happen to the foot as we have said, you know that it is harmful from beginning to end.
And if you do not develop darkness but only due to the medicine that is placed upon it, and this darkness arises from the virtue of that medicine causing this darkness, then make sure to take a part of honey and parts of greased oil each being one-third. and draw these lines with a thread, and further place this over the skin; and treat it with the spices of healing that suit until it is healed.
Third section.
On restoring the nose when it is broken.
Know that the nose is not broken into two parts simultaneously with excessive bleeding, or any of those cracked ones, because there are two bones in it, where your break leaves cartilage, and does not break him but causes irritation, awkwardness, and obstruction.
And if one of the two parts is broken, then make sure to insert your finger in his nose and adjust that break internally as you indicate with your finger, and place your finger's tip outside as well until the nose returns according to its natural figure. And do this by yourself with ease, and make sure not to allow your operation to spread over the entire foot.
And if the break is in the upper part of the nose with excessive bleeding, and your finger does not reach that area, then make sure to equalize at the tip of the ray where there is a small thickness.
And if the break is in two parts, then you should mimic this procedure.
And take care in restoring him on the first day of the break, if it is possible; otherwise, wait approximately seven or half of the cauterization until you can resume.
And then insert a piece of cloth with grease on the tip of the nose if the break is in one part, or two cloves, if it's in two parts, and put as much thickness in the clove to fill the nostril.
And follow the instructions of the ancient restorers that the cloves be immersed in butter, and be worn throughout the day, but they are not seen by me; make sure to immerse the cloth in egg whites like a sponge with powder from moly; then let the clove stay until the bone is set and the cartilage has hardened.
And some cracks should be inserted in the nose instead of a clove, to avoid excessive bleeding that is wrapped with a lion's cloth around it; and if you already have a break in the nose that is strong and allows breathing for the foot.
And this reason is not necessary for you; if you want, do this, if you don't want to, do something else.
And if another pus-filled boil occurs, cover the nose with a wet bandage or cloth, or soak them in warm water and olive oil, or use an herbal decoction.
May it be that if no pus-filled boil occurs, then cover the outside with flour of basil and the powder of walnut shells; and place your hand over their footstop, and do not allow any cause to affect the nose.
May it be that if you break the bones of the nose due to a small fracture or are instructed, then cover so that you divide over those, and remove them with instruments suitable for those; and place your hand on the cut, and heal that with what promotes flesh formation and consolidation, and apply plaster as is convenient.
And if there arises a plague inside the nose, then cover so that you heal that with something else and administer lead tubes into it until it is completely healed.
Capitulum. IV.
On the restoration of the jaw when it is fractured.
When the jaw is broken and the fracture is not infected, consider this: if the fracture is only external, and has not been broken into two pieces but is bent inward from the outside, then its intelligence is slight.
And therefore, if the fracture is on the right side, you should insert your left index into the patient's mouth; similarly, if the fracture is in the left mandible, then insert that indication of yours with the right hand; and push the internal hardness of the fracture inward to make it easier for parts outside, using your other hand from the part outside the jaw; do this properly as described.
And if the fracture of the jaw has already been separated into two, then cover that you administer extension to both parts according to rightness while it is possible for its equality.
And if there arises a disturbance of teeth causing dislocation, then strengthen those you expect will break in filaments of gold or silver or wood; and place your hand on the broken jaw with a cloth, and place another piece of fabric over it, and lay that large star-shaped fabric properly, or one person equal to the length of the jaw; and place that above according to how you have observed the strength and what is suitable for application, while ensuring it does not get destroyed.
And command the patient to rest and be calm, and suspend his diet for a few days.
And if you estimate that it has been altered in some manner, then take the treatment and untwist that on the third day; and correct what has already been altered about you and plaster those with basil powder, with egg whites, or with basil flour, provided you have prepared the dressing of your patient, and cover that with a woolen cloth.
And once this plaster is set and the position of the jaw is not altered, leave it alone, do not untwist it until it is healed and strengthens the fracture; as many marks to heal this fracture are strengthened in three weeks.
And if another boil arises in the pus-filled boil, then administer what we have advised marks to heal in the cooling of your patient until it is healed, and make that boil larger again.
And if the fracture is infected, then consider whether it is a piece of bone separated or stuck, then you need to distinguish which pieces are with what suits for their removal in the treatment of those disturbances.
And if the openings of the infection are strengthened, then you should expand them with a bloodletting needle according to the quantity of your need.
And when you have finished those pieces and from them no further removal is necessary, then if the opening of the infection is large, cover that; otherwise, apply one of the plasters suitable for that and form that until it heals.
Capitulum. V.
On the restoration of the furcula when it is fractured.
Marked marks indicate that the furcula at the front of the part has been broken through the muscle, and this fracture is made in three ways.
Or it is broken, or separated, or separated into two parts other than by segments without causing segments; and this makes it easier for the restoration of it; or so that there are segments about you in it, making the restoration difficult; or so that the fracture is infected.
And in that operation, when the fracture is infected, you must have two ministers present, so one has the assistant and follows the broken furcula, and the other extends the neck of the patient at that part.
And adjust the fracture with your thumbs until it is made in the form of its original shape according to what you cover, and do not leave any slight depression or concavity in it.
And if you need more extension, then cover that you place some padding or wool under the patient's neck, and make its size according to the quantity of your need; extend and elevate the furcula and hold the pillow with your hand until you adjust the fracture according to what you observe.
And if you cannot pull the end of the furcula to the parts outside due to it being stuck in the preon, then cover that the patient should be laid down on his neck, and place a hand half the size over the muscle of your patient.
And the minister presses onto the muscle of the patient at the points where the base of the vertebral column is elevated compared to its surroundings, and then you correct the fracture and align it according to your instructions.
If you feel sharp pains in the vertebral column and it disturbs you, then cut over that area and remove those pains with ease.
And if it is trapped in the bone, then you perform an incision on the patient using one of the incisives that you have donned for this purpose, as you previously laid out the vertebral column with such strength to serve the chest; and this is the shape of that tool:
It is similar to a knife with this being its curvature; and its width according to what you need from it, according to the size of the bone or its fragility.
The length of it depends on what is feasible for the operation; there should be two ends like this sometimes, and one end should be wide while the other is narrow.
And if the tear in the wound that you have incised when removing the pain from the bone is wide after the extraction of the pain, and you are sure to expect an abscess, then adjust the two edges of the wound for suturing.
And if the tear is small, or you fear an abscess, then use the wound with bandages and powders according to the amount of the incision in the wound.
And if an abscess should occur, then soak a cloth with vinegar and oil rubbed together, and place it over that area.
And all, that the stick does not penetrate beyond the broken bone; and always cut so you see the back of the patient every day, that when the ligament is softened or you notice the stick has hardened again, then you correct this and strengthen the ligament.
And also have the back of the patient rest on their neck, and place your hand on their back while they sleep in bed every night with this slightly elevated. So that under it is the support of their chest, thus lifting the fracture to its elevation level; or so their arm rests against the back of it.
And do not disturb the ligament if it doesn't happen more quickly or an abscess within twelve days.
And also renew the plaster when you've seen the face of it thus, and adjust in the narrowing, restore that and relax until it's restored and has been coagulated in the fracture of the vertebral column.
And it's strengthened and made comfortable according to the month in twenty-eight days, and in some cases, treatments are done within that time period of someone.
Captulo VI
Chapter 6: On the restoration of the shoulder fracture.
The spatula tart is broken in the patient's left side and you do not break it from them, but rather the edges.
And when the area of your patient is broken - and it's broken in the middle area of your patient - and it's not known otherwise but by touch, then according to how the fracture figure forces you, prepare it and reduce that according to the natural figure in all manner of skill which is possible for you.
And also place on that area flour mixed with egg albumin and stopa leon; and place a double cloth powder; and place over the patient thin table stick according to the quantity of the spatula or more than a little.
May if you have placed the stick in some of the locations of the spatula and it is concave, then you adjust that concavity with stopa leon, and then place the stick according to equality.
And also strengthen from above with a long breath due to the descent of constriction and with tightening of the stick within not being hardened in its location.
And consider the ligament every day; and in all cases when it's softened, have another treatment and strengthen and equalize the stick if it has hardened in its location.
Place the back of the patient on their chest so.
The spatula is restored in twenty days or in thirty-five days.
And when this number is completed, then you dissolve the ligament, and you should know securely that that comes from the bones where it started is not feared nor its dissolution.
And if you are dealing with the place of the bone pulse and put on the chain for it, then you divide over them, hold it, and do as we have said about the fracture of the vertebral column in case of abscess cautery if it happens here.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
Regarding the restoration of the fracture of the foot.
The foot has some injuries that are ruptured in the middle part of it, causing pain here; however, its ends should not be injured as they are sensitive and easily broken.
And for the accidents of it, when its middle is broken, it starts leaking outwards and experiences great pain, difficulty in walking, and nausea; this is evident in the cavity of the broken bone and cannot be concealed from the feeling.
And the restoration of it is that the patient should be placed on his back, with a cushion between their shoulders; they should press against their muscles and align their sides with the hands of two doctors, and delicately proceed in the operation according to all possible methods that suit this situation, ensuring it fits within the boundaries set by these methods. Once the bone has returned to its original shape as per its structure, then the procedure concludes.
And then place an ointment and padding on it, covering it with a subtle table of wax or powder, as you wrap that in cloth; carefully adjust the application over the broken bone to ensure no pressure is applied; bind it according to its circular shape, strengthen that with a proper bandage; and consider the binding at all times, when it softens then strengthen it.
And if it causes dislocation or percussion, or pain, or abscess that occur in the area, then you need to adjust and remove it, remove the plaster, correct whatever happens through this method of treatment; and reduce the plaster if necessary according to your technique; and adjust the bandage so that it is healing.
Section VIII.
Regarding the restoration of the ribs when they are broken.
You should know that a break in the ribs occurs only in large areas that span both sides; and at their ends on the front part, it doesn't occur due to friction with those because they are cartilaginous. And awareness that is not concealed from feeling, you should inquire about the pain associated with it under the touch.
And the restoration should be such that you equalize the break under the touch according to possible methods, ensuring it aligns as per its structure, then apply plaster and strengthen the broken bone with a table if needed.
And if the break in the ribs is leaking outwards, then it causes intense pain and puncture, just like punctures occur with someone who has pleurisy, because the bones cause inflammation; it also causes difficulty in breathing, coughing, and vomiting of stomach contents; and this makes it difficult to heal.
And already the Greeks are skilled at that through methods involving muscles.
And they say from them: take care when handling the belly that produces inflammation and wind, so the stomach is inflated and spread out, and the break is pushed towards the outward parts.
May it be that you do not allow this to cause a minor cause for generating pus in the cautery, if it doesn't happen; and if it already happens, then assist with this.
And they say that it should be placed on top of the windy area and pressed with strength; this is akin to reasoning but however, it's feared that the wind will throw away excesses due to weakness.
And they say: take care that the area is covered with wool that is already immersed in cautery oil, and there are powders between the ribs while it's filled up, making the bandage equal to how you wrap it according to its circular shape; and ensure that the belly is treated with pleurisy of food and medicine.
And if the constriction of the belly causes intense pain in it which cannot tolerate it, and the bone presses the skin due to punctured teeth, we are concerned about the belly; thus take care that you cut over the area, expose from the broken rib, then place an instrument under it that preserves the memory, which comes before toothache, and I will incise the bones with ease, and extract that.
And adjust both edges of the wound if it's large with stitches and treat that with plaster until it heals.
And if pus occurs inside, then you need to remove it and place powdered oil in the affected area, and treat the belly with this so that it heals from the pus inside.
And once healed, place them on their side where they sleep, until they recover.
Section IX.
Regarding the restoration of a fracture of the vertebral column and the spine.
Some injuries involve fractures in the bones of the neck, and there is also friction with them, similarly to those in the vertebrae of the back. And if such things happen to another and you want to know if they will heal or not, then consider this: if their hands are already softened, numbed, and dead, and they cannot move or stretch them, and when you pinch those with your fingers or prick them with a needle and do not feel pain in them, then you should understand that it is not healing. In the states of dispositions, it is fatal.
And if you hurt those and feel the constriction with your fingers and prick them, then you should understand that the neck of the bone is saved and that the belly heals with treatment.
And if you see a resemblance to gout in their neck and want to know if they are diseased or not, then consider their feet.
And when you notice that they have already been treated, it coincides with what happened in the hands. When someone lies on their back, there is a breeze and feces come out of their will, and sometimes they are relieved to lie down and then want to urinate but cannot; then you know that it's fatal, and thus you should not continue with their treatment.
May it not happen that any cause of those exists, the cause is better and more minor.
And the treatment of their condition is that you perform a cooling down on the cauterized boil where you make points over the neck, or at places between the shoulder blades; place a few points there every day until the boil's cauterization subsides.
And then apply a piece of the plaster soothing and exuding, with pressure over it; and command the patient to rest and be calm, and not to sleep on the part where he feels pain until they are healed.
And if it happens that you need to remove the bone splinter or any cause already separated from them, then cut where the wound is and remove that bone; then adjust the two edges of the wound, stitch if it's large; then treat that with some ointment until they are healed.
May it not happen that if the bone in the heel is broken, and it's the end of the leg, then cut where you insert your left hand's palm into the anus, and you break the broken bone with your other hand according to possible second-degree equation; then apply plaster and ash on it, if you need those, and adjust that.
And if you feel bones broken inside them, then apply over that, and stay there, and treat the wound with the treatment that proceeds until it is healed.
Capitol .x. (This might signify "Chapter x" or a similar reference in medieval texts)
Of restoration of the anus.
The bones of the anus are broken, and if they break, then the fracture is merely communication at the extremities of those parts, and they are inscribed along the length and decline into the depths; it happens to the patient pain in that place and perforation, and the change is stupefied when there's a fracture.
And the restoration of their condition is that you stretch your hand over it within which is about the fracture, which is the shape of that.
And if the fracture is only at the extremity of it, then you adjust that according to what seems appropriate to you by equal equation until it resembles its natural shape.
May it not happen if the fracture is in the long or that declines into the depths below, then you have to make the patient lie on their abdomen until your preparation for restoring that fracture is ready. And when you have adjusted that, apply plaster on it, then place an ash or a thread on it, and adjust with pressure over the area where don't fear perforation of the fracture nor movement of the star.
And adjust the curvature with what fills that place until that accepts the pressure according to equality, and command the patient to sleep on their back or on one side.
May it not happen that if there's a boil cauterization, then you cease the extension of them and their restoration until the boil cauterization subsides, and apply what soothes where is that according to what proceeds; then return to the restoration of them and adjust that accordingly.
And if it happens inside the bone splinters or are fragmented, then you take them out.
Capitol .xi. (This might signify "Chapter xi" or a similar reference in medieval texts)
Of restoration of the fracture of the assistant.
The assistant is that which is between the shoulder blade, within the head of the shoulder.
And if it is broken, then the restoration of them can be in one of two ways, of which you take flat ash as follows:
And if there are two ligaments at both extremities, then it should be suspended from the elevated place.
And let the patient lie on one elbow; and have them extend their broken arm over the pole until it reaches to their nipple in the middle, where the curvature of the pole is attached.
And hang over that something heavy, or the doctor extends that to the depths below; and have the surgeon examine the fracture at their elbows' locations; and let the doctor treat the fracture according as he sees fit until the fracture returns.
And the other way is that the patient should lie on their neck and have their hand from the neck extended by one of them; and command two ministers, that one of them holds what is above the fracture at their elbows; and the other holds the pus below them; and each of them extends to their depth.
And if you want that the extension be more forceful, then adjust your hand on the fracture and another ligament, and each of both ministers extends to their own depths.
And if the fracture is close to the extremity of the muscle, then place half of the ligament over the nipple and the other part should be placed on the shoulder joint.
And similarly if the fracture is near the knee, then cover that area and that knee with a cloth.
After this has been done for convenience and the work is complete, then when it has been correctly covered according to application, strengthen it if an abscess does not occur through proper use.
If an abscess occurs through the cautery, then after seven days, lay flat inside the wound, and place woolen thread on it in the middle for it to rest in the abscess area. Then strengthen that afterwards.
The way to strengthen that is to place a plaster over the fracture, and then place a sheet of new fabric around the plaster; and adjust your arm on that support, and place your hand open on his muscle.
And place the sheet and strengthen over the support of the arm so that the arm is in a place of stars, if not prohibiting any cause of the broken bone.
And then use stars.
And it is that you place on the fracture that star which is more dense and stronger than the others; and you place between each star the width of a digit, and the length of the stars according to the breakage with an addition of three digits from all directions.
And then strengthen on top of the stars am the band which I mentioned at the beginning of the head.
And it is that your band over the spot of the fracture be more strengthened. And as much as she lengthens, the fracture's band becomes smaller.
And so if you measure the position of the stars and the band as we have said when restoring the member to its original position, then do it.
And if you fear an abscess through the cautery, then after laying flat the band and the stars for seven days as we have said.
And then consider the ligament in all directions for three days so that it does not occur at the place of pain or inflammation; or prevent food from reaching the limb due to excess stiffness; and correct all this according to what we have said.
If you are confident that no cause will arise from this, then do not release the bandage for at least three days or longer.
And let the patient's back sleep on his bed, and his hands be on his stomach.
And place on the support a full bed of evenly placed wool, and consider at all times of night or day that no distortion nor dissolution of the figure of the broken limb occur, or that the ligament is softened; then correct this completely with your skill.
And let the food of the patient according to the order which we have prescribed before mealtime, so that the food is subtle at the beginning until strengthening starts; then cover what thickens the food for him.
That the strength of the support and the patient's leg lasts for forty days is customary; then cover that they are released and bathing and medicinal ointment is administered, which correct those things.
And if the fracture has been rubbed off, then do not release that ligament and stars for another day or within two months.
Capitol .xii. (This is likely an indicator for Chapter XII in a larger work, but without further context it's hard to provide more detailed translation.)
Of restoration of the fracture of the arm.
The arm is made of two bones which are called two forearms; among them one is small and it's the one that breaks what we call 'the wrist', and the other is large and it's the one that rests on top of the smaller one at the part further above.
And if only the larger forearm is broken or both together are broken, and they break simultaneously.
And when only the smaller forearm is broken above, then the restoration of it is easier, and its healing is much more so.
And when the fracture is below the smaller forearm, the fracture of it is bad, and its healing is difficult.
And even worse than that is when both bones are broken at the same time.
So if the bone that is broken is the smaller forearm above, then it's convenient for the doctor to restore it, you should make a small extension so as not to overstretch when that is equalized.
If it's the larger forearm that is broken, then cover that you should place a more vigorous extension.
And if both forearms are broken simultaneously, then cover that you should perform the extraction much stronger.
And cover that you should restore the shape of the hand and extend its reach on a cushion, and let the wrist be at the top of all other digits, more so than when you count them, and the heel of the foot be two-thirds above one laid flat.
And let there be a cushion in front of it at the height or position of the foot, so that the heel does not hinder work.
And let the minister extend his arm from the part further above towards his hand or on the ligament, and another minister extends similarly above.
And let the doctor equalize the bones so that he shortens it according to the best shape possible.
And if there are deformities in the bone structure, then you should reduce all parts to their place by your skill.
And if there appears in him separate deformity that is piercing the vein and not in your hope for restoring him, then you should fix on him and hold it according to the method which we have said above.
If the fracture is due to disease, I have already dealt with that particular case, and therefore take care of treating it.
And if an abscess appears during your recovery process, then you should apply a cloth soaked in rotted oil and white wax, between firmness and subtlety, and tightly cover that with a sheet where the abscess can drain; and afterwards replace the bandage and apply a plaster made of clay powder from turmeric, and add stars; and let this star be placed over that fracture just a little bit lower and much stronger.
And know that the name of the star on the arm is shown in major positions, or whether the fracture is single or in two together.
And place your bandage firmly on the spot of the fracture strongly and powerfully, and when it is more suitable for the tightening towards the upper parts of the fracture or towards the lower parts of it, place the bandage a little wet depending on how well you remember it in the beginning of the chapter.
And the sheets that you wrap around the fracture should be wet and soft, not hard or abrasive. The wax on which it is strengthened should be of their own proper middle between subtle and coarse, as we have recounted.
And consider the limb and the joint for a few days. And if any cause arises for which correction is necessary, such as the pain that occurs in the limb itself, then immerse the limb in cold water until that pain ceases.
And let the limb rest without strain until it recovers, and then return the bandage.
And if the swelling has already subsided and the bone has healed to those extents, then correct all of this using your strength.
And consider more if nutrition is prohibited from reaching the limb due to excess bandaging. Then immerse it so that you slightly relax that for a little while and let it rest for some days until blood flow returns to that area, then strengthen that.
And if nothing like the causes we have mentioned happens to the patient, then do not immerse him for about 20 days or so.
And let the doctor's hand be suspended from the patient by his strength of vigorous movements, and have him sleep on his back.
And know that this fracture is restored within xxx days or xxxii days, or somewhat weaker is restored in xxviii days, and all of this depends on the complexity of the limbs and the positions of strength.
Chapter XIII.
Regarding the restoration of fractures of the thumb of the hand and fingers.
And know that in the thumb of the hand and joints of the fingers when there is a fracture, it does not happen to them but only bruising due to movement.
And when there is fracture or bruising in the hand, then you should let the patient lie down facing forward and place their head slightly above them according to equality, and then place the hand on that extended.
And let the minister extend the broken bones, and the doctor adjusts those so that they fit into good alignment.
And then immerse it with plaster and wadding, if there is no abscess. And place the star according to the amount of the area, and you have already wrapped that in a cloth of theirs.
And if the crunching is inside the hand towards the palm belly, then make it resemble a bell of cloth, and command the patient to strengthen that with their bent palm; let this be strengthened with long cloth.
And let the star of the heart be on a cloth in which it floats, so that the heart is applied to the palm; strengthen this according to how you see fit.
And if the fracture is on the outside parts, then you should place over the star and another star of that part in the palm, so that the hand is open and straight; then place the bandage, as when the hand is turned towards the heel among joints with fingers.
And if there is a fracture in one of the joints of the fingers, if it's just the joint, then adjust according to how you see fit and let this be strengthened with the palm, and if you want, place your small star upright so that the fracture is elevated and not hindered.
And if the fracture is in the other fingers, like in that middle area or on the index finger, or the ring finger, or the little finger, then it should be level and parallel to the finger where its base is; or they are all level according to continuation, which is better; or place a small star over that spot, as we have said for the joint.
And consider in your recovery and nearby, the position of an abscess, oppose - in your operation - with what you command when any cause arises from those circumstances, according to what we have recounted.
Chapter XIV.
Regarding the restoration of fractures of the bone in the thigh.
The bone of the thigh is broken due to movement causing bruising, and it is declared by feeling as it turns towards the front and above.
And the restoration of this is done so that the joint over the fracture and other joints not affected by the fracture are strengthened, and the patient lies down on their belly and face.
And then, according to quality, the minister extends all the ligaments to their part when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
If it is close to the knee joint line, then this ligament is positioned near the shin bone at the knee part, so that the extension fits in them, and another ligament leaves the fracture.
And similarly if the break is close to the shin bone, then this ligament is made close to the shin bone, and the extension is left at the parts.
Then the doctor equalizes the bone on both of his hands so that it reduces according to natural shape and the bone is joined by good connection; then you should cover with a plaster and bandage, if not causing pus formation in the limb. And if pus occurs in him, then you leave it for some days until the pus is cured, and then return to your treatment.
The bandaging of his limb should be done: cover the fracture with a hard wrap, fold it two or three times, and remove any excess from him; then enclose the joint up to the knee line.
And insert a long needle between the knee and its adjacent joint near the shin bone at the parts left, making the ends of the needle reach over the shin from both sides, then rotate around the joint and knee area until excess wraps are removed.
And place star-like points on the knee in that fracture area, and place one of those points above the bone at the joint.
And fill the gaps between the knee and thigh with thick cloths, so that the bandage can clot.
And start with a strong bandage in the middle over the fracture area using three or four layers, and as you move further away from the fracture site, your bandaging should be smaller, lighter, and wetter.
And extend both ends of the needle to the parts left until it reaches inside the chest cavity, strengthen both ends of the stars from the other side to ensure that the ligament does not shift out of its place.
And lay the bandage over it so that no harm occurs to the limb, neither infection nor pus formation from the needle nor swelling; and if any cause arises from these, then you should treat him immediately, and rectify whatever happens as closely as possible according to what we have discussed many times.
If in the bone there is space inside it where you can place something, then cover so that you equalize that according to what is possible for you; and if not, treat him on this without placing anything and cure from whatever precedes the memory until he is healed.
And in some cases, this knee fracture is strengthened like the other ones adjusted to your stars, as we have said in the guide and on the arm.
However, during the restoration of the knee in this manner, it does not cause limping in the patient; and if restored alone, as when you apply the other joint, then it is necessary that the knee stop functioning due to its condition.
And know that the knee is strengthened in about 10 days or a few months, all this according to the variety of conditions and other treatments.
Chapter XV.
Regarding the restoration of the fracture of the shin bone.
And know that fracture of the shin bone is very difficult, but occurs in many occasions through violence.
And if it occurs to the fracture, then it is merely a crack or rupture in its parts, and on this whole it is stated according to feelings.
And the restoration of it is such that what is broken from its parts within those, is added and joined according to the possibility for harmony, ease, and fabrication.
And then place a plaster and a round star on it if you need that one; strengthen above with bandaging as is convenient.
And consider all the dispositions that we have recommended in other fractures, such as pus formation from the needle and similarity to those, so that it opposes every event according to what is convenient for him until he is healed.
Chapter XVI.
Regarding the restoration of the fracture of the joint.
And know that in the joint are two bones, one of which is thick and named as the joint; and the other is delicate and named easily.
And it occurs with the various types of fracture as it does for both bones in the arm, so its restoration is done like the restoration of the arm equally, and the operation of it is one.
And if two bones are broken simultaneously, the joint changes in all directions.
And if the delicate bone is broken, the joint is changed towards the front parts.
And if the thick bone is broken, find it out yourself, and these are causes that you do not know.
And then administer extension, harmony, and ligament according to this equality.
And yet consider, if the fracture of the joint is distant without any specific symptoms, that extension be mild and lighter, and aid with your virtue.
And in the chest is sometimes a cause for operation on the arms, and that's when you equalize the stars and complete your entire operation, then you take weights of wood ashes which are placed under the causes which were placed in ashes, and they are made by intertwining palm branches; remove those to which a small coarseness applies, and do not let there be any smudges on their hands, and let the length of those match the length of the chest, and from the ash pit leave them.
And then envelop each fold in two coverings according to the length of them, and place one over the chest part from one side and the other part from the other side, and have their place within the ash pit under a spot on the chest.
And then tie the two stars at three points of each extremity and in the middle point. With this structure, movement of the chest is prevented from bending to the right or left side, and it stays in a good position.
And already a handful of ashes according to the length of the chest has been administered; and let the chest be placed such that it preserves this amount of movement.
And primarily ensure you do this in a fracture, and when with that is the proper disease.
And primarily consider the chest in each day and study with that by subsequent study, and you keep it free from abscesses and swelling or from other similar causes; and whenever any cause of those occurs, then place yourself with that which contains to make it healthy.
Chapter XVII.
About the fracture of the tibia and the bones of the chest and fingers.
About the tibia, it does not happen to have a complete fracture; but with the bones of the chest, several instances do occur; and with the fingers of the chest, few fractures happen, and they do not happen to them unless there is some predisposition in the months.
And if there is a fracture in the bones of the chest and sometimes those bones are elevated above each other, then the patient places their chest on the prepared ground like this so that they can move.
And then place one foot on the area that is elevated from those bones, and then press those, apply pressure, and equalize those within which I turn at the spots.
And then apply plaster and cover above it, and place under him a small table on which there are two cushioned heads.
And then strengthen that area of the chest with a descending structure, because you have enveloped that with cloths and with other causes from which you need.
And when three or four days pass for him, then you loosen the bandage, and there you will find the bones equalized, or they are broken or dislocated, and the operation is as known with that.
If any fingers are broken, then restore those, and equalize them as I have advised you on the restoration of fingers in the hand. And then place the broken finger with a star according to the length of the finger, and let there be just a little more space for him; and then place your chest on this table which has been recommended to you, and strengthen that area with a descending structure.
If that which is broken of the bones are two or three or more, then place on each finger a star of its quantity enveloped in lion cloth, and strengthen the table at the lowest part of the chest, and let there be standing over one of the table's heads so that you can reach his abdomen for good retention.
And it is convenient for you that you do not forget that you should not consider all the causes which I have mentioned to you in the other fractures of accidents that we have discussed; and be with yourself with whatever comes.
Chapter XVIII.
About the fracture of the thigh bone in women and the bone in the knee and the penis in men.
When the thigh bone in women is broken, then make that lie down on its side, and then incline that slightly towards one side, and keep it behind.
And then the midwife raises her hip in the thigh bone, and does it like she expects on that bone; and keep the woman bent, and elevate each of her legs little by little, so that all this is outside as expected with the thigh bone facing forward and the broken bone returns.
And then place powders on her back, and when she wants to urinate, raise her hip for ease, and let her urinate, and return that according to the method in which she was mixed at the beginning, and then return to her initial powder.
And do this for seven days or about that time until that is restored.
And if you wish, take an ovine bladder and strengthen over her lower back with a straw tube; and insert the entire bladder into her thigh, and then blow through the tube with force so that the bladder inflates inside her thigh, which is when the fracture returns.
And then let it be covered with hip and stay for several days as we have advised, until it is healed.
And when the bone in the knee of men or women is broken, then administer and restore that which we have advised on the bone in the thigh.
And that which is correct is not concealed in these nearby fractures for few occur, especially to him who has some study and understands my free discussion; because that fracture means for you in the major ways of directional movement during restoration and shaping, so understand well.
When the urine in the bladder is drained, grab it from above, and place the bladder into that; then, place your hand over the patient's abdominal wrapping, wrap them up, and let them be wrapped for three days or about that time. Afterward, they will heal.
Chapter 19.
Regarding the restoration of bone fractures when there is a plague.
It is convenient for the one to whom bone fracture happens with the plague, and much more so if the bone is large like that of the knee or of the leg assistant, or similar to that, where you take care of and use bloodletting there immediately if the conditions for bloodletting are present or can be ascertained in this way, as we have already said.
And if the plague discharges pus, then take care to keep the area clean that you powder with it on the third day, if there is no other cause for concern.
And then begin to restore the fracture on that same day, and do not prolong this treatment, if no abscess occurs.
If an abscess occurs with bloodletting, then you allow the restoration of him within the ninth day, until the abscess subsides, and do not approach him even on the third day altogether, for which you will cause other harmful accidents.
If the broken bone is prominent over an exposed seam, then take care to pierce it and reduce that so as to make it even with your own hands and facilitate less extension.
If extension is not within your preparation and the alignment of him with your own hands, then you reduce that with your own hands to this tool; and this tool which is made of iron, its length being seven or eight dits, and its width according to the size of the plague; and for this reason it is necessary for the doctor to have three or four of these depending on what he needs in treatment for all types of fractures.
And it should be round, and in the slight roughness for so that it does not bend, you must compress upon it during the time of the operation.
And it should have an acute extremity with edges on its own extremities; and the color of him is always tending towards redness, and in the heart of him within the divisions.
And this is how he looks:
It is named in Greek "running out of the harness", thus it is a small palette.
So take care that the elevated end of him faces upwards compared to the prominent end of the bone.
And push that into a narrow passage until the bone returns and it is made even with some alignment.
And therefore force to make the ends of the fracture match each other, and if the broken end is delicate, and does not take that tool for good access, then take care that you insert the tip of that bone into a place where the instrument has power over this.
If you cannot reduce the bone to this extent that we have recommended, then cut it with those scalpels which we have mentioned; or cut it with one of the saws in any way that is possible for you.
And then sharpen that which rests on the surface of the rough and small bones.
And as the bone is reduced, and during this reduction the patient experiences intense pain, then know that the bone has not returned to its natural position; and thus give him a good rest thereafter.
As your restoration to the bone is completed, then immerse cloth in strong black vinegar, and especially if it's summer, do not apply ointment or any other cause near the wound with oil, so as not to cause him redness and heat.
And then administer stints in the time of your completion of restoring the bone, and leave the wound exposed until you shave it with scrapers and use bandages depending on the size of the wound.
And take care to use all caution not to strain the wound over the fracture, as these are the errors that doctors have made in this, and they cause harm or corrosion of organs or severely ill, so it is health. And if your tightening is slight, soft, different from the tightness of other fractures.
And if the wound is large or bad, and you fear those harmful accidents which we have mentioned, and you find pain in that area, then do not take care to pause with those stints over him, but apply with those hard cloth bandages instead of stints and strengthen him with that.
And as the wound begins to heal within one or two days, that when him has produced a scab, then you remove the bandage which you had applied over it with vinegar, and then administer ointments, greases which according to our custom heal wounds, such as tetrafarmacon and similar.
And it is advisable for you to loosen the bandage and examine the wound every morning and evening until it has consolidated and closed, and take care that the redness runs from him towards the divisions left with ease.
If the wound passes through days, and is not consolidated or can be peeled off of him with a scab, then know that here are maggots because you should always seek to remove the scab from this. And from those secretions that are separated and removed, those that are not separated and cause pain when the body is moved, you should puncture them according to whether it is possible for you.
And if it happens that they are pus or ichor, these are inflammatory processes or forms of decay and putrefaction; then you should follow the advice for each one according to which suits the treatment of their healing, with a detailed explanation preceding this in its chapter.
And from this which you cover with the most effective method: when the hard lump is broken and drained, press on the body in the same way as if it were like the bone of the thigh or the support, resembling those found among large muscles; do not presume to be causing injury, nor expect the extraction of any swollen spots through this will lead to death; lay that flat inside where you can place it, so that over time, within approximately 20 days or one month, it will drop out on its own. And then treat the wound if you have seen it, and if not, leave that as it is.
Chapter XX.
On the treatment of a lump that occurs in the residue of any fracture.
These lumps occur this lump in the residue of fracture healing, especially the joints, and is rubbed by its member to form the figure of the limb; and forcefully prohibit the use of the member from its natural operation.
Then consider if the lump is recent and administer medicines that have a stimulating effect like aloes, rhubarb, lime water, vinegar, and oil, all of which resemble these; choose some or all of them, and take those with a stunting effect, or those with white milk, or those with astringent properties, and place this over the lump in a poultice, and apply those to it for proper constriction.
And apply constriction without allowing the lump to relax for several days; then remove this and repeat with another until the lump has become more firm; or place a lead sheet over it that descends, as lead has the property of making anything inflated within limbs smaller.
May if the lump has already turned yellow and been expelled, and if it's necessary to cause an eruption at the location, then divide this pus superior part of it, and remove the excess or drain it into some nostrils until it becomes firm; and treat this while it is healthy.
Chapter XXI.
On the restoration of a fracture when it is restored, and you should treat the limb gently not according to its natural disposition.
When a bone fracture is restored, and you should treat the delicate limb with care not according to its natural disposition; this is not done merely by chance: among these causes are: an excess of lymph solution and ligament realignment that does not occur as it should during healing; or due to excessive constriction of the ligaments where nourishment for the limb is prohibited from flowing; or due to an excess of ointment; or due to excessive movement before its time; or due to weakness in the patient's body and debility.
And the treatment for this is to reduce the patient, make their body tender within which strength multiplies in them; and give baths; and introduce nourishment, joy, and comfort on them.
And place the poultice on the limb, so that the poultice draws nourishment to it, or continue applying the patient's ointment with hot water until nourishment flows and returns to its natural shape.
Chapter XXII.
On the treatment of fractured bones that are restored in a tortuous manner, and you should prohibit the operation for what is involved.
When it occurs in the limb that has already been restored regarding its healing of tortuosity and prominence at the broken bone and lump, and due to this deformation of form of the limb; however, the limb should not be prohibited from its natural operation, so you must take into account that the term for that member is of new broken.
There are already many foolish doctors and restorers who have done this in our land; and this operation is highly disapproved as it leads to great fear of the sign which is fatal.
If there is weakness and lump are recent, then they should be wrapped in hot water in which softening herbs such as mint leaves and parsley, etc. are soaked; and it should be applied to the person with a bandage of softening; or if raw meat extract from parsley is taken and mixed with mule fat, and that is applied; or if lard balls are pressed and wrapped in goose feathers or mixed with olive oil, and this is applied; or if dried figs are used and pressed into the form of dough, etc., all similar to those medicines known as consolidants.
And some times are dissolved with constant light rubbing that is applied to the wettest ones, and full movement of the limb should be given in all parts at all times.
If tortuosity has already passed and been done forcefully and turned yellow and caused it necessitates treatment of it with iron, then you should drain the pus above the rupture and the continuation of the bone be dissolved, and this should be applied that is excess from the lump under the bone with thin scissors, and facilitation should be provided in that with concern and study.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
Regarding the discourse on dislocation.
Dislocation is the displacement of some joints in their place, preventing movement; it causes distortion of the body's limbs figure, bringing about significant pain and injuries to the patient.
So when a dislocation occurs, it is necessary to act quickly to reduce it and do not delay in reducing it; if it's delayed, the limb gets swollen and strengthens, making it difficult to perform the reduction of dislocation.
And for that reason, do not allow it to swell or stretch during the process of swelling, as tense muscles cause convulsions and sharp pains.
When this happens, it is necessary to take care of the patient's flaccidity on the bed, and leave it in place so that he rests with swelling; and have the limb soak in hot water and oil, then reduce it as easily as possible.
And every member should be treated with what is due to its natural recovery at its place.
And I have already organized the chapters on dislocation according to what follows in fracture; from the body's upper part up to the lower part.
Chapter 24.
Regarding the treatment of dislocation of the jaw.
So if the two jaws are dislocated and they don't twist; and the dislocation of both is performed according to two methods: either they are partially relieved from their places by a small movement and become somewhat softer, or they are completely dislocated and completed, in which case they are softened within the joint where saliva flows out of the patient's mouth and it can neither hold onto that nor close its mouth, and the tongue is enveloped inside its own shape.
When the dislocation is minor, then in the larger positions it returns by itself due to a small cause.
And when the dislocation is complete and full, it must be that reduction of it is administered lightly, and it should not be delayed at all.
And if the servant has the head of the patient, and the doctor places his one hand on the site of the jaw dislocation inside the mouth, should the dislocation be from one part; or he puts both his hands at once, if it's a dislocation from two parts, and the others' commands are outside against which they are equal; command the patient to stop moving his jaws and go away from every part; and the doctor makes the jaw equal and inserts the jaw into its place so that it returns to its location.
And if it is difficult to reduce the dislocation, especially when both jaws are always dislocated at once, then administer diaphoresis with hot water and oil, so that a slight reduction of both can be done without delaying the total reduction of both as we have said.
And when they return and are equalized, and the mouth of the patient is closed and not softened, then place on those powdery substances of lint as cerot, and it must be made of wax and oil rubbed; and have it held with ease at the soft parts.
And the patient should sleep on his back, with his head between two pillows, so that it doesn't swell at either the right or left side; and don't force him to eat anything against his will; have his food be forbidden for a lion, until the pains are somewhat softened and the jaws become numb, then allow him what he wants.
And this should be administered with ease, and don't work on the opening of the mouth for food and drink and ventilation until the jaw is numb and healed.
And if it is difficult to reduce two jaws when they are dislocated in any hour and have not returned to their usual positions, then convulsions often occur causing fevers and excessive perspiration, and strongly cause the patient's stomach to become inflamed, and strongly cause colic-like vomiting of undigested food.
And when you perform this treatment, then know that it is a loss; and convulsions kill the one to whom such happens within three days.
Chapter 25.
Regarding the reduction of dislocation of the sternum and tip of the muscle.
The sternum is not dislocated inside the chest due to its continuity with the ribs; and some convulsions are dislocated outside of this place, which is declared by sensation.
And its restoration is that the patient lies on their back and extends their arms. And place your palm over the area with firm pressure so that it will return.
And then place plaster and powder on it, press firmly on it, and strengthen it.
And the tip that is connected to it continuously, does not get dislocated in any day; so you must reduce and equalize it according to what we have said and according to your apparatus.
And then place plaster over it, and powder, and traction, and command the patient to rest and recovery within which they heal.
And with this kind of treatment, the tip of the muscle is reduced when it's separated from its place.
Chapter 26.
Regarding the reduction of muscle dislocation.
Know that the muscle is not dislocated in any other way than three ways, of which one is when it is dislocated at the root of the tendon to the origin point.
And the second is when it's dislocated at the insertion point of the muscle, and this occurs by traction; it's not dislocated at the back parts behind the shoulder; and it's not dislocated at the front parts in front of the nerves.
And most often it's dislocated and displaced outside at the insertion points behind the tendon, especially in those with few muscles, only slightly dislocated; more so in those with many muscles, it gets pushed out with difficulty.
And quite often, it happens to some people due to impact or jolt, and the muscle of them gets inflamed by a bruise or burn, and is dislocated because of this.
Therefore, when you treat it by considering that you are overburdened with them, then proceed in the treatment of him.
And you will know the dislocation when it's at the insertion points behind the tendon; thus, you can distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the muscle soreness, which you find among those with obvious diversity; and you discover in the head of the muscle concavity and behind the tendon where your hand touches the head of the muscle as if one were to grasp it, and at the bottom, it cannot return his hand to its own elbow, nor that part much by all movements.
If it's dislocated behind the feet or around them, then you will find it quite palpable, and it is not hidden.
And from this dislocation, a slight reduction is made when it's fresh and the patient is young.
And the reduction of him is that the minister raises his hand to the top parts; then places your feet under the tendon of him, and elevates the joint with strength in its place, the minister raises the hand of him and extends that one there; then holds it so that she returns slightly.
And if for what we have said it does not return, and it's due to the duration of the dislocation, several days later, you should know that the patient is soaked in hot water and administered a salve that soothes and lubricates like a mixture as if it were a decoction of high essences, fennel, and dill in water, and it should be administered.
And then the patient should be laid on his back and placed under the tendon of him with a cushion that's equal in softness and tension, and the doctor places his arm over the ball, and raises the head of the muscle with strength, and pulls the hand of the patient so it doesn't get hurt at the insertion points, and another minister holds the head of the patient, so it doesn't get hurt at the insertion points; when that one almost returns to its place.
And if you wish, reduce it in this manner: and that you make present a man who is longer than the patient, and stands on his side of that slope, and inserts his muscle under the tendon of the patient and raises the tendon up to the top parts inside where the patient is suspended in air, and another minister pulls the hand of the patient from the insertion points of his abdomen. And if the patient is slight, then you should know that it's due to another cause being suspended, thus considering that severe one, for the dislocation returns immediately.
And it's reduced slightly according to another manner: and that you place in the ground a long rod whose tip is round in shape, like a mortar pestle, which shouldn't be thick or thin, then place the patient on top of this rod; because laid on this rod, the patient wraps a lion skin around its head, the patient stands according to the length of the rod, and then extends his hand from the insertion points of the other side; and stretches the body of him from the other side with strength, so that the joint returns to its place quickly.
And if the reduction of him is difficult due to all the causes we have said, then use this treatment: and that you take a rod whose length equals two arms, and its width should be four digits, and the thickness of it should be like an arm's circumference according to this form:
And then place lion skins on the round head so that the rod doesn't press the patient.
And then place the patient under the tendon of him, and extend his hand or arms over the rod inside the insertion points, and keep the rod on the elbow and arm and the end of the hand.
And then place his arm on a ladder according to its width, and his hand is extended from the insertion points, and the other side of him hangs from the other side, so that the joint comes back slightly.
And when the process of him is completed according to any manner that's possible for you, then you should place under the tendon a padding of wool of equal quantity; and then apply prepared plaster with powder of moli on all parts of the muscle, as it gets mixed above, and then strengthen the tendon in tension gradually; and then mix the plaster over it, and his hand is attached to the neck, and it's left undisturbed, and the patient's hand should not be hurt for seven days.
And you should know that the diet of the patient should be light, during which time the member is comforted, as it's more beneficial for his recovery.
And so, the food should be given more to seven or five and exercise is conducted with movements; and if it is closed and not softened, then it is already healed.
If the joint is dislocated due to moisture that affects it or by other causes, then in that area, a three-pronged cautery should be administered as mentioned in the section on cautery in the chapter.
And if all of this has been done and seven days have passed and the joint is relieved but the joint itself is not closed, and the plaster and stricture are reduced over some burns on it, but it is not closed and swollen, and it cannot lift that arm to the upper parts, then you should know that the nerves of it, which are at the head of the muscle, have already been cut or stretched or softened, and you should know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
After the dislocation of that which is caused by the foot or the back, or parts behind, the reduction is done with pressure and extension on the hands, until it returns.
And another stricture should be administered in that area, and treat it until it is healed.
And if there is a significant healing delay in the limb and tardiness in its movement, then the patient should use warm baths between treatments until that heaviness is relieved and it returns to its original nature.
Capitol Chapter XXVII.
Chapter 27: On the treatment of shoulder dislocation.
You should know that the shoulder joint is dislocated with difficulty and similarly returns with difficulty; it is dislocated in all directions, but mostly towards the front and back. The dislocation of it cannot be hidden from you even when you examine it closely by touch or upon examination as per any figure of its dislocation. And when adjusting the dislocated shoulder, to your statement it is made manifestly clear that the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm, nor can it touch upon its own muscle.
And look to the shoulders, and reduce the dislocation as soon as you reach the pocket of heat with your cautery. If it reaches that pocket of heat, reduction is difficult for it, and one is not fully healed; especially when it's in the parts behind, which is worse than all other types of dislocations, and causes more pain, so burning points are fatal to that.
And the restoration of it, which is possible to reduce when your hand is extended towards two more, and your arm is expanded, and the doctor's fingers are on the shoulder and you place it back onto them, and you push the joint with the heels of his/her own hands or in the center of their palm until it returns to its place.
And if the dislocation is in the forward parts, then it returns as such that you bend your hand towards his/her own hand, while percussing the shoulder in the center of their palm.
And if the dislocation does not yield to reduction, then apply vigorous extension and strong motion.
And that is that two ministers extend the arm, and have that stretching by themselves so that it is not reinforced against the extension.
And then revolve the arm completely in all directions, because it is enveloped with a folded long cloth around their hand or abdomen.
And when the doctor touches the joint with their hand, apply oil to that for it to be those causes which help in the lubrication of the joint and make it easier; then push the joint with vigorous pressure until it returns.
And the reduction of it should be placed upon that plaster where stiffness and elasticity are found in egg white, and stretched on the stricture descent, and the arm should be hanging from the neck, and left for a few days.
And then it should be released; and if the joint has formed in its place, you release the muscle from him/her and let that rest.
And if you see the joint is not strengthened, then you repeat the plastering and muscle, and let that rest for a few days until it is stretched; and then release that.
And if there is heaviness around the reduction of the joint and its position is in motion, then you administer moisture in baths and subtle friction, with compression, until it is relieved; or rest upon the joint on a bed of soft hair; and then bind that, and let it rest over the bones during the day and night. And then stay that way, and keep him/her in baths; and when it's cleaned, then you rub the joint with seasoned friction, and then repeatedly apply this on that area, using a mixture of honey, once, then again, and finally the third time. Corruption has already penetrated into the inner part of the anus, within its limits.
And if you wish, rest on that wet and scorched opening with fat and strengthen above it; do this several times, where that is wet and reduces to its usual position.
Capitol Chapter XXVIII.
Chapter 28: On the treatment of elbow dislocation, concerning the joint between the arm and the hand.
Elbow dislocation of the hand happens occasionally, and the reduction of this dislocation is easy. However, for other joints, the opposite applies: speed is required in reducing it while it's happening, before the pocket of heat appears or when there is a pocket of heat with cautery.
And the reduction of the dislocation is that you place the wrist joint of the patient on a table and have him extend his arm, and the doctor places his hand or palm over the verge of the joint, and pushes it in so that it returns to its place.
However, it may be considered that if the palm is already in the abdomen of the arm, then the patient should place his two hands on a table for extension and reduction; and if the dislocation was anterior, then both of his arms are naturally positioned on the table, so that the doctor's hand falls over that verge of the joint.
And so if it returns straight away, that is good; and otherwise, then strengthen it until the pus yields under pressure of the point and leave him alone; and do not insist with this, because if you don't, no suffering or discomfort will arise in your reduction of him as long as pus passes into him.
However, let the joint be manipulated according to its curvature; and do not blame the patient for any cause, since his hand is softened and cannot be made to suffer any cause; then you know that the nerves are injured or broken, and so there is no need in him but to strengthen it with a cautery near the site of the injury and make him endure this without suffering any cause.
And when the malaise has returned, then place on him the pressure which we have recalled, and leave him and strengthen him for about three days; and afterwards let it be released and leave him alone, and exercise his hand.
And if the movement of him remains and happens in him with some gravity, then ease that with warm water and with friction for a few times, within which it is relieved.
Chapter XXIX.
Of the treatment of dislocation of fingers.
Some remedies cause dislocation of fingers in every direction.
And when one finger is dislocated from those on the back of the hand or in the belly of him, then hold the finger and push the dislocation with your fingers, so that it returns.
And afterwards hold the tip of the finger, and by suspending him you should let off the part where it is dislocated, and leave him alone for two days.
And afterwards suspend him and extend him until his right is equal to him in that day.
And when it is night, lie him according to that narrative, and do not cease rolling him in the day and exercising with movements, and lie him at night; and do this for a few days until he is straightened.
And pretend as if it is so, if it is dislocated in the belly of the hand, and lie him to that part and do this with your first operation, until he is healed.
And similarly do this when it is dislocated in other parts.
Chapter XXX.
Of the treatment of dislocation of the shoulders.
When it happens with any of the shoulders or neck dislocations and so we aggravate the wounded shoulder parts, then in that case there is no cure, for death approaches the patient.
And the sign of this is that the elimination of the patient from his will is externalized, and he cannot retain that; or some remedies soften certain limbs or both sides of him or two arms of him, or one of those; or they aggravate a shoulder in its place, for aggravating remedies are used and aggravating remedies result in moving those four parts.
And that has already been aggravated to the back parts it is called glibozitat.
The treatment of him is that then you need to consider if the glibozitat happened during childhood, for in that case there is no cure nor healing of it.
And in that which happens through trauma or by impact or similarly to those, the Old Ones would say that the methods of treatment are lengthy; but I return shortly from this. But I have abbreviated it from the one about him because of his too much length, due to my proximity to its middle exposition and at which I explain this in various instruments from him, where I show this and abbreviate him.
And only those are cured that happen in his two (shoulders) as I have recalled.
And that the patient should be extended on his face over a pillow approximately level with the wall, and that he be extended until his limbs are moistened in order that his feet not be hindered.
And place a stick straightly, fixed in the ground at the end of the pillow near his head, and another stick vertically on the feet of him at the other end of the pillow.
And have the minister hold the stick, and do not make it firm in a pit; and another minister holds the other according to that manner.
And then wrap around his head and leave the whiskers of lion firmly on him; extend the end of the mane to the stick which should be under his head, and lie that with him; and strengthen the other piece of cloth over his buttocks and the ankles of him, and direct his legs towards the other stick which should be underneath his feet; and then adjust all the cloths and lie those on the other stick which should be under his feet.
And the surgeon extends his instruments to the beginning of the leg, and does not mix the two legs and the muscles in their places where they are stuck, but rather does not make them as firm as we have said.
And the surgeon places his hands on the spine with strength so that it returns, or places one hand on that side and near that place he sets a table, and adjusts his feet under the table as it returns.
If it doesn't return in this way, then take a table whose height or length is about three fathoms, and dig into the wall where we said that there's a place under the patient where the end of the table fits. And then place the end of the table on the spine, and the surgeon places his feet at the other end. He strains until the spine is squeezed and returns to its place.
And if you wish, open both sides where they twist on your hand; and which ones you want to place in the ground must have the head of the patient at the back of the bed of two legs, the length of which is one span, and you need to place his head at the back of the same bed of two legs. And make sure that there's a space of about one palm between each leg, and this should be done in each leg when you pull them towards where they twist, and each one must be firmly set on the ground so as not to move.
And make another leg stand where your body is, and twist it in the two pulls of both legs.
And at the end of this is a pull where the leg forms, whose length is one span as it is twisted; and in the other two legs it's like this.
And then strain the muscles you've stretched in the feet of the patient on this pull, and the muscles you've stretched in their thighs on that pull where you place their hands.
And each turn should have one attendant who twists the turn with their hand, and the surgeon adjusts the spine according to what we've said.
And when the spine has returned and the area is adjusted, then apply an excretory poultice made of albumin from goose liver, and stop. And place it on the poultice until a table surface fits in which its width measures three inches or about that, and its length matches the depth of the fatty area, and over the part of the spine there.
And then apply to the muscle that we said, use the patient's subtle nourishment so it can heal.
And if there is any remaining concern in the area at the end of the healing process, then prepare medicines that soften and cleanse before the table administration for a long time, which we have recommended; and this lead sheet has already been administered in that area.
And there are some worries that occur at the end of the spine in both sides, and they cause concern due to that dislocation; and this is an area which already troubles you so it's not appropriate to think of giving him this medicine, which will lead to his death happening.
Section Title: XXXI
Regarding the treatment of a dislocated hip.
Know that only the joint of the thigh bone and the joint of the muscle should not experience anything other than dislocation, and things do not happen to them as they do with other joints that have small movement and curvature.
And the joint of the thigh can be dislocated in four ways: it can be dislocated internally, or externally, or anteriorly, or posteriorly.
And mainly it is dislocated internally, and rarely externally or posteriorly.
And the sign of dislocation towards the internal side is that when you adjust the healthy leg to the leg, it becomes longer, and the backside (possibly referring to a measurement or feature related to the dislocation) is more prominent than in the healthy state. The leg cannot bend its knee due to which it has to be held with its hand, and the joint where it is supposed to be held without causing any pain indicates that the inside of the thigh bone (or possibly part of it) has been affected by this condition.
And the sign for the one to which accidents happen in dislocation is when his incidents are against this incident.
And the sign for the one to which accidents happen in dislocation towards the front is that he extends his inner thigh according to completion, however, it does not bend that pain that's at the back, and if it is pushed forward it can't proceed further inwards. His urine is retained and he becomes immobile; you should have him walk on his toes.
And the sign for the one to which accidents happen in dislocation towards the back is that he doesn't expand his back side nor can he bend that part forward as if it were bent backwards; his inner thigh is shorter than the other one, his mobility is reduced, and the head of the leg bone should be at this spot.
The reduction of these types of dislocation is that you consider. So, if the dislocation is old and long-lasting, having already been treated with a certain approach for some time, then upon reconsideration of this treatment, it may be applied according to its current state, which means not applying excessive force; consequently, there's no need to think about another intervention in that case.
When it comes to the one whose dislocation is recent, and this is one of the four types of dislocation, then you guide yourself towards what will return the joint and extend that within the parts inside and the parts outside, and move it to the right and left, where strength lies and no other cure is required.
If it doesn't return in this manner, then you should prepare yourself to apply force and extend the patient's muscle from that particular part or at their chest, or directly on what is lying above the muscle under the skin; and another person should extend their hand over there where they can place their hands. And firmly press with your strength against the bone of the thigh, and have another person hold tightly onto the end of the muscle.
And whether it's an extension of the patient or inside part towards the knee joint in the thorax region, or behind part towards the back side.
And if it's the extension of all those in one go where the patient is lifted up to their height of the earth and hangs down.
And this kind of extension is common to all four types.
And so if the dislocation returns as we have said, it is good; and otherwise, then for every type there needs to be detailed instructions on its own treatment.
In the reduction of its own, when dislocated, and the dislocation is inside the parts, you should have the patient lying on their back. And place the muscles over the bone of the thigh in that area which lies between the head of the thigh and the location where the knee bends; and extend the muscle from the side of the knee joint to the other part of the thorax.
And another person should firmly take the arms of the patient, press hard on the fat region under the thigh, and extend towards the outside parts with strong extension, where that returns to its place.
And this type allows for a lighter treatment in which this member is reduced compared to the others.
If you are excused and do not comply with this treatment method for all, then you should have the two thighs of the patient together under strong, gentle pressure on both hips and both knees.
And the length of each is as much as four fingers, and the thigh extends further than the other by two finger widths.
And let the thigh be suspended from the head of the shaft and in the hand; and let the length of that on the ground be as much as two arms.
And command a strong youth to pinch the head of the thigh and suspend it on another young person's thigh; and let the other youth press the thigh with intense strength where that returns to its place quickly.
When it comes to the reduction of itself, if dislocation occurs outside the parts, let the thigh press on the ground as we advised in the yellow book; and strengthen the muscle over the thigh properly and over its feet.
And place two shafts, one on the foot of the patient and the other on the head; and place two adjusted shafts in the middle of the buttocks under which wet cloths are wrapped to prevent the thigh from getting damp where the shaft is between the thighs, so that you can extend the parts left and right without being pulled.
And each person should extend to their part, and the doctor holds the reduction according to the art with their hand.
And when the dislocation is in front of the parts, then let the muscle be gently extended, and according to this half of the story about the shaft; and the doctor holds the palm of their right hand on the thigh of the patient, and presses that against the other hand, and with that pressure holds that extension towards the sides away from the back part.
And if the dislocation is behind the parts, then do not let the thigh be extended to the sides left and right, but lifted onto the ground; at that time let it be placed on a hard cause, as one does with lying when its width is dislocated outside in the position of lying on two widths, as we have said about lying of them on two widths; and let it be over their face and muscles be extended, as we have said, almost entirely.
And let there be applied compression on the table at the place where the joint is laid.
Then as the reduction is completed according to this - and the sign of the reduction on you is not hidden, that being when you extend the thigh in both directions. And when you make those equal movements and the thigh stretches its muscle and expands your excusation, then you know that the member according to this has returned - and at that time adjust the two parts and apply padding and stretch like this so that no part becomes too tight; and keep the thigh rested for three or four days.
And then gently stretch the muscles and apply padding, and compare one muscle against the other.
And when you see those equalities in your view, then you know that the dislocation is already closed, and then let the thigh go smoothly.
If you see any cause for softening, then return and plaster that area, extend it according to your first stretching, and leave it for three days.
Then relax that part, and let it walk on any place for a few days until it is comfortable.
Chapter xxxii.
On the treatment of dislocation of the shoulder.
The shoulder can be dislocated in three ways: it can be dislocated outward from its socket, inward towards the center of the body, and to one side away from the back. It is not dislocated forward.
And the sign of shoulder dislocation is that you command the patient to place their elbow on their thigh; then you know that the shoulder has been dislocated.
And the restoration of all ways is that you make the patient lie straight, so they can extend their elbow if possible; press your hands to their face and place your foot between their feet; then guide the shoulder towards your palms, holding them firmly with your fingers on the dislocated shoulder as much force as needed; another assistant extends their foot while the shoulder returns to its proper position.
And the sign of recovery is that their elbow stays attached to the thigh with ease, without strain or difficulty.
Then plaster that area and guide the elbow to stick to the thigh, then keep applying this method for one week or two, and then relax that part.
And do not let the patient walk around for a few days until they are healed and comfortable.
If the reduction of your patient is not possible for you, then apply strong extension to their legs as detailed in the preceding narration on the treatment of the hip.
Chapter xxxiii.
On the treatment of the dislocation of the ankle.
The ankle can be occasionally dislocated due to minor injuries, and sometimes it occurs due to overextension or inversion. The dislocation of the ankle can occur either inward or outward from its normal position.
And the sign of ankle dislocation is that you notice the ankle swelling proceeding to the part where it has been dislocated.
The treatment for ankle sprain is minor recovery; it should be extended with ease on the limbs and be evenly applied until it returns to normal.
When treating an ankle that has been dislocated due to inversion, you should make the patient lie straight and have a strong, brave assistant place their hand behind the patient's foot at the middle of their ankle.
And then you hold your right hand under the top of the patient's foot, and with your left hand behind the lower part of the foot at the ankle area.
And then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, and guide it with your left hand in two stages, and extend your left side; and push the patient's feet to the right where their elbow should be.
And perform these two stages as we have discussed.
And then push the patient's feet towards their elbow in the third stage, and you are at the ankle region.
So if it returns in one or two stages following this manner, and if you notice the foot evenly aligned, it's good; otherwise, then on that condition, perform the operation again, which is what returns.
So if you are not able to reduce the condition of your patient as we have recommended, then make the assistant lie on their feet on the ground, place a pillow under them in solid earth, and sandwich them between their thighs. You should already wrap the bed around the patient so that they don't slip away.
And then the attendant should hold his thighs for him, and have another assistant extend their foot against the extension of his leg or under the shoulder if there is something lying on the chest; and guide each person so they are extended against the extension of their partner's limb, and the pillow stays between the attendant's thighs to prevent his body from being pulled towards the outer sides of his extended limbs.
And then the doctor equalizes the dislocation using his hands, and another assistant holds the healthy thigh on the outer side, where the dislocation returns with ease.
And when the dislocation returns and you've been informed of the success of the reduction, then stop plastering and stretch that area strongly, and hold the foot against the ankle firmly.
And if you fear or protect from the nerves that are behind on the ankle for which the muscle over it does not become vigorous and injure him strongly.
And then leave that area for two or three days; if the muscle is softened, stretch it again.
And then relax that part on the third day or fourth; and prohibit the patient from walking for 40 days. So if it is forced to go before that space, there should be assurance that the dislocation has not dissolved and corrupted over time; otherwise, do not let anything that cannot receive treatment happen.
And if it happens that there is an abscess in the process, then you should take care to administer according to what we have detailed in our previous account, in another location of healing and treatment, until it has healed.
Chapter XXXIV.
On the treatment of dislocations of the feet' fingers.
Adjust that which is dislocated by a slight extension of several degrees; and that which isn't difficult, before it becomes easier.
Maybe if the dislocation is in any heel bones of one's foot, then adjust so that the patient lifts their foot onto a level surface or on a table, and be standing as if walking.
And then stand on your foot, place your hand on what is under the joints, and apply pressure with your foot with force so that it returns, and you see it already adjusted not appearing in the elevated location.
And then place the patient's stomach of their foot on a table that supports all the foot, which has two ends, and apply pressure with firmness for three days; and then release it and let them rest from walking for several days, during which it strengthens and its functionality is assured.
Chapter XXXV.
On the types of dislocations that occur in injury or fracture or any other time.
When any cause of those happens, and you engage in the treatment of that and the restoration for them, several deaths result.
And because of that, do not assume control over their treatment, but rather someone who is wise in the art, long practiced, merciful and compassionate, patient, not impulsive or presumptuous; and use only those medicines that induce purges for so long until the body returns to its divine judgment, not to yourself seeking health, but to the alleviation of disease, and in which you have some hope. And then exert to quickly make the reduction while the cause is still present before it turns into a pus-causing cautery.
And then if the limb returns as we want, then administer a regimen that induces pus-causing cautery and treat the injury with what suits your patient from the dry ointments.
And if dislocation occurs with a fracture and it happens in the separated bones of the foot, then you will straighten them out, and do as we have said about treating simple injuries to what was mentioned earlier regarding those locations.
And according to your skill, avoid what is in the manual of medicine according to which my preaching has preceded you; that is better for you to serve your Creator, and more permanent to your glory, and more health will be seen by your true self as you see those things in your time. So conclude the words of Al-Bucasis, perfectly from which God may bless. Amen.
