O you children, I give to you in this book what is the end of medical science, by its completion for them and through their exposition, and through their declarations, it seems to me that I have completed that which I have undertaken for this treatise, which is a part of my operation on myself, that being surgery.
For the operation on oneself is confined in our region and in our times to what is private, through which strength escapes the science of it, and its traces remain; and there would have been no continuation of it but for some small descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which rectify most errors and misconceptions among those rules where understanding of it is sealed and extends the effort and skill.
And it seems to me that I will regenerate this order of this treatise according to the method of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and in order for forms of the tools of cauterization and other workshop equipment such as addition of declaration to come about, and to prepare them, which is necessary.
The reason why a good craftsman cannot be found for self-operation in our time is that the art of medicine is extensive. One must be familiar with anatomy before being able to practice it as an expert, which was taught by Gualia who knew about the joints and forms of limbs, their connection and separation; he also had knowledge about bones, nerves and blood vessels, their numbers, and how they are structured; about pulsating veins and quiet ones, and their locations.
And that's why Hippocrates said in his work, more in the small scale, and much more in the art of self.
May we have already mentioned in the introduction of this book; whoever does not know what we have said about anatomy, cannot be excused for falling into error which would result in many deaths. I have seen too many cases like this among those who were formed in this science and abandon their own field of knowledge and experiments.
Because I have seen a doctor who became skilled in creating a syphilitic boil on the neck of a woman, and he incised some arteries in her neck causing much blood to flow that led the woman to die among them.
And I have seen another doctor who was about to perform an operation on a man whose body had been affected for quite some time, and the tumor was large. It spread to him and he used a piece of bladder tissue to remove that tumor; as a result, that man died on the third day.
And I have already attempted to remove it, and I see that due to the size of the tumor and the position of the patient beneath him, he would die.
And I have seen another doctor who was receiving pay from a Duke of our land for surgery, and he attended to a black soldier whose leg had been broken; the surgeon, due to his ignorance, removed the fracture above the wound, covering it with powders and stitches on a hard structure, not leaving any air in the wound.
And then he would remove them according to his wishes, and he would dress it, and after leaving it for some days as ordered that we should remove the stitches; this is also where the leg swells up along with the foot, and it would lead to disaster.
And I have already mentioned this to him and assisted in removing the stitches, thus achieving tranquility and alleviation of his pains.
However, the corruption was already confirmed in the limb, so I could not prevent it, and the corruption continued to spread within the body causing danger to the patient.
And I have seen another doctor who perforated a cancer boil, and it became infected over some days, causing the illness to greatly worsen in him at his lord's expense.
This is because the young male is pure of melancholy humor, so it doesn't require treatment with all means, but rather a body part that suffers from being affected by everything.
And that's why, children, it is necessary for you to have the operation on oneself divided into two parts: one associated with health in the operation itself, and another work where danger exists in major dispositions.
And I have already established this in every place of this book concerning the operation where errors and fears occur; it is necessary for you to keep this and avoid that, so pages do not speak out of turn and deceive you.
And therefore take your tools for service and protection of God, and your patients for happiness and strength.
And use the best way by God's grace to achieve salvation and peaceful succession, and bear with terrible illnesses that are difficult to heal, and keep your tools from what makes you afraid, so that stability in your faith and your name does not abandon you: for more remain to your glory, and even further among men and at last to your sanctity.
Gualia already said in some of his monosyllabic words: "Don't treat bad illnesses with bad doctors, for the fault lies with the doctors themselves."
And I have completed this book according to three main sections.
The division of the book begins, and it starts with the first section of the first part. The first chapter ordered within the feet, in the forms of the instruments and in the tools of the cautery, and what is necessary for the operation.
The division of the second part. The second chapter, on dryness and puncturing, and of blisters, and of pox, and of the extraction of arrows and to those akin, all chapters ordered and arranged in the forms of the instruments.
The third chapter, on restoration and dislocation, and on the cure of twists and akin; a chapter ordered within the feet, and in the forms of the instruments.
I will tell you about the quality of those parts of that cautery and its aftermath, and in what condition is it forbidden to use cautery.
So I say that the discourse on the quality of the cautery and its aftermath is long and prolix, subtle in science, and secret concealed; many wise men have spoken at length about this, and they are in disagreement with each other, so my concern is only a small part of their discourses, fearing prolongation.
And I say that cautery confirms to the whole universal constitution of matter or substance, except for two components, those which are parts of bodily matter.
In the composition of the tail and body there is dry matter which will be dried out; some say that cautery helps with this, while others say the opposite, that cautery is not suitable for maladies characterized by their constitution and dryness, as fire's nature is constitution and dryness, and it would be detrimental for a diseased body to become both heated and dried up.
And that person who says the opposite of this states that with cautery youth is attained in all tail and body maladies which occur in men's bodies, for when you compare a man's body to the composition of fire and his humidity to this comparison, you find that a man's body burns.
And I say according to the discourse of that person, which I have experimented myself on several occasions and discovered.
However, it is not to be doubted that what this person has already expressed in the chapter on cautery and through later exercises, and has come to know about the diversity of human constitution and the disposition of maladies within their bodies, and the causes thereof, as well as the incidents related to them, and the duration of those incidents.
As for the other compositions, there is no fear about this, especially in wet and cold maladies, which all doctors have agreed upon, and are not divided on youth attained through cautery in such conditions.
And know, children, that the secret of healing through fire cautery and the benefit thereof lies in medical cautery with medicine; for fire is simple, its action only affects the member being cauterized and does not spread to other parts without some slight harm.
And the action of burning medicine reaches that within those members which it has reached, and readily brings about difficulty in healing in diseased parts with severe impairment.
And fire, through its simplicity and the goodness of its substance, does not do anything else but spread. And we have come to know this through experience and from long service in studying the art with regard to the truth about causes; and for that reason I excuse the length of my discourse. If it were not for the fact that certain things related to fire are not freely written about here, and its quality with respect to the operation within bodies and its expulsion through which you expel maladies, a philosophical demonstration would be suitable for your consideration, which would sharpen your understanding.
And know, children, that they disagree about the time when it is suitable to do cautery and prefer the best springtime period.
And I say that cautery is suitable at all times, for the harm due to temporary incidents is submerged in the youth that arises from that which comes with cautery, especially if it's done for pain or necessary pains, severe and inflammatory ones, which do not tolerate delay as much as those that might come from malice, which is greater than small harm caused by time.
And it does not concern you in your reflections, or children, those who only value what is considered by the common people and some doctors, for that there isn't always justification to use cautery for healing such a malady, and they consider this consequence accordingly.
And the reason is not just that they are concerned about this, for cautery is only like medicine which alters constitution and dries out humidity which causes pain.
And yet, unnecessary cautery over medicine due to the value and virtue of its operation and the size of its authority.
And it is possible that her malady may return at some point in time, according to the constitution of the body and the location of her malady, as well as its virtue, and what has been prepared within her body from the addition of superfluities, and what has reached her through consumption and connections with those causes; unless the malady to which cautery is administered is a subtle malady in limbs with few superfluities and humidity, as in dental cautery for pain and similar things, it's possible that she won't experience that pain again, rather this happens in infants.
A common medical term is that cautery is the final remedy in medicine, and this term is misleading, not according to what I understand from it, as they believe it is a cure that progresses with medicine or any other cause leading to cautery.
The reason is in opposition to that; and my understanding is that cautery is the final remedy in medicine, not just when administering the methods of treatment for certain illnesses, but those medicines do not resolve themselves, and at the end of the cause, one administers cautery, progressing towards it. And from here, up to the 16th century, cautery was considered the final remedy in medicine. According to my understanding, this is what the common people and many doctors believe.
And the ancients would say that cautery with gold is better than cautery with iron, and they did not say this simply because of the equality of gold and its inferiority in substance.
And they would say that the location for cautery does not cause scarring, as this is not absolutely true; already I have seen this and found out that it only causes this in some parts of the body, with gold cautery being good and better than iron. But however, when you do cautery with fire using gold, this is not explained to you, since it burns according to the quantity you want for the strength of the gold, and what needs to be received for reception; and if you adjust the fire over it, the gold melts due to the heat, and in some parts of the fire, several layers are formed so that the artisan works during its occupation.
And for this reason, gold cautery should be done more lightly and more precisely according to the principles of operation.
And I have already organized this chapter on cautery according to sections, and I have ordered those from the first section into the feet, just as you ask for what you want from them.
The first section.
This cautery allows the humidity and coldness to cause an accident in which there are two causes, being the cause of swelling and inflammation of various traumatic fluids, called rushing, from the head to the limbs and ears, and a lot of sleep, and toothache and the throat, and generally of all illnesses that come through coldness, such as paralytic, swollen and apoplectic, similar in those illnesses.
The method of this cautery is as follows, which I first command the patient to undergo a diuretic medicine in the head, for three or four nights, according to how you need the effectiveness of the patient and their age and usual practice.
And then command him to shave his head with a razor, and then make him lie between his hands on a tilted table and have his hands under his feet.
And then place the tip of your palm against the nose on the bridge between their nostrils. However, whenever you mentioned the correct location, apply that area with temptation, and then heat the olive cautery of which this is the form:
And then place that over the heated area in temptation, like it descends, in which your hand is gradually forced to adjust, and you rotate that.
And then lift your hand slightly and look at the area; if you see already some quantity of the head being exposed like that of sugar syrup, in this case lift your hand. If not turn your hand with that iron, another from that one, when it is cold, so that what I have told you to see is visible inside the mouth.
And then take a small amount of salt and dissolve it over the area, let that sit for three days.
And then place on your burnt palm in bandages and let that sit until the burn is destroyed. And then treat the area with turpentine ointment until it is healed.
And they would say that when the wound is opened, so much better it heals, for this is better and more rejuvenating.
And some of them would say that the cautery is performed inside the mouth, and the cautery is left until a part of the quality of the bone becomes hardened.
And then let this be set like it adheres to the bone, and then allow for its healing.
And others would say that the cautery reaches to the end, where it begins inside the bone becoming stronger, and then the bone falls out, this is how small tooth extraction works: And consider from that area, the vapors of the head escape.
And keep the wound open for a long time, and then allow it to heal until consolidation occurs.
May it not be these two types of cautery that I see everywhere, but in some people according to fear; let that sit, my lord, for health is better than anything else when the head is cleared by the solution of continuity as we have testified elsewhere in their other members, and especially when the patient's head has a naturally cold nature.
The first type of cautery is better and more preserved, my lord; let us proceed from that and do that work for health.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors. And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out. You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
From the head's cautery.
When throughout the entire head there occurs chronic and prolonged pain, and this is extended in the body, using pillows, bedsprings, headrests, plasters, cloths, pillows, and all kinds of cushions, and especially if one has already applied a cautery which no longer aggravates his discomfort from those causes, then consider whether the head of the body is made of strong creation by nature; and if there is not much heat or fume emitted, then that cautery should be replaced with another one; leave this cautery for now but give it a little time. And apply the cautery to his forehead, within which the pain is divided. Incise the pain and expose it from the mouth to the amount we have counted; apply a cautery to that with a single cautery behind the head in the place which is called the vessel - and this is the place where suction takes place. And warm your hand in this way, do not expose the mouth, for the body experiences a different intense pain with this compared to all other head cauterizations.
And I will explain this cautery in its place, which concerns that cautery under which the head and the back of the head are more subtle than the one used for cauterizing the middle part of the head; this is how it works.
Head treatment.
Regarding the new type of migraine cautery.
When pain is localized in the part of the head or confined within it, it should be relieved with medicines that soothe the head, and then another treatment is administered; this one I have mentioned in those concerning illnesses of the body. And if nothing alleviates it, then the cauterization for it is done in two ways: either with a cauterizing medicine that burns acutely or with iron.
A cauterizing medicine that burns is one where you take a dollop of aloes, soak it and divide the ends of both its heads. And apply by cutting into the pain spot on the temple with a needle so that you make a place in it for the pain to be located, inside where it is hidden.
And apply strength to it stopped by gentle compression, then release it through spaces of three hours; and loosen the aloes and extract it, then let the wound heal for two or three days, and place on its head submerge in water so that the spot becomes moist.
And treat it with ointment until it is healed.
And if you see this in some burning medicines which I have written in the treatise on burning medicines.
A cautery with iron can be done this way: heat for the cautery of which this is the form:
And it is called iron key, which the head of it is like a form of a thistle where there is some curvature, and in the middle part of it is a small prominence.
And place your hand on the pain spot, and wet your hand - so that the metal rod does not stick to it - and turn the small iron slowly, at speed.
And if the amount that sticks due to the thickness of the pain is as much as most of it, lift your hand so that the artery does not stick either, so that there does not come a flow of blood.
And soak your head in salt water and place it on the spot, let it heal for three days; then soak your head in cold water, then treat with ointment until it is healed.
And if you see this, cauterize at the tip of the knife according to cautery, and be careful not to cut into the artery in this new type of migraine.
Head fourth treatment.
Regarding the treatment of old migraines with cautery.
When you are treating migraines as we have described in previous treatments and the treatment for illnesses of the head, if this treatment is not effective enough for what we have said about the first cautery with medicine or the cautery with fire, then consider that you should heat the knife cautery until it becomes white-hot, because you apply it on the spot of pain along a line of its length which is the majority of the described action, or if it goes beyond this; and pause your hand for once and strengthen it as you cut into the artery and pierce through to the bone.
However, it is necessary for you to avoid continuous chewing of the mandible, which damages your ability to chew, and that the saliva does not stick and the nerves that control this are not burned, and that there be no muscle cramping.
And if it is about the precaution of blood flow from the artery that is cut, which there is fear during cutting, especially when done by someone who does not know what he is doing and lacks expertise; leave the operation as it started.
And I will remind you of the protocol for blood flow during an artery accident according to his method, in this place of this manual.
And if you see that this type of illness does not tolerate this cautery and the body of the patient is tolerable, apply the cautery in the middle location of the head as we have recounted, and treat the wound until it is healed.
And if you see, apply the cautery which we have said in the tip of the red artery where there is no need for a double-ended knife, and this is a better cautery technique than that.
Capitol refers to the top or highest point, often used in anatomy when referring to locations like the head or specific parts of the body.
Regarding the treatment of earaches with a cautery.
When there is pain in the ear from cold and due to deficiencies, as well as another treatment which I mentioned in the division, if the pain is not relieved, then apply fire to the cautery, this is what has been called "pointed," which looks like this:
And press the point close to the ignition, and it should be placed around the entire ear like a wheel is turned or in any part of each time if the pain is in any place. Extend it with the ear cautery little by little until you have tested the area and ensure it's appropriate.
And if the cautery touches all points in the ear, and it leaves that mark, then you should treat the areas until they are healed.
Capitol refers to the top or highest point, often used when describing parts of the body like the head or specific anatomical locations.
Regarding the treatment of gout (turtura in this context).
Gout which is treated with a cautery is none other than the species that come from phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of illnesses.
Avoid the cautery for the species that cause by drying out or by spasm of the nerves.
When you treat that species of gout with vinegar and mustard baths and restoratives, if your treatment is not effective, then you should apply the cautery to the body three times: the first at the top of the ear, the second slightly on its underside, and the third over the junction of the two lips.
And hold your cautery on the opposite side of the diseased part, where only a soothing effect should be found after it has been cured.
And the method of cautery is to apply it in the middle of the outer end of the ear slightly higher than on the top of the head, and another one in the temple area, whose length should be according to the width of that particular part. Then hold your hand with the cautery until the entire quantity of pus from the diseased chain burns out.
And this is the way to apply the cautery, it's a specialty of surgeons, and its shape is demonstrated on the table. However, that subtle thing should be done like this each time; hold the knife slightly in front of it so that when the blade touches its excess fat just a little.
And then treat the area until what is in front has been processed and healed.
Capitol refers to the seventh section or part of a document, often used when referring to an ordered list or series where numbers indicate specific sections.
Regarding the treatment of old apoplexy (stroke).
When apoplexy is old and you treat it as we have said, but if your treatment doesn't work and the body doesn't have a fever, then apply the cautery in four applications: over all parts of its head; with each application also on the middle of the head, as we have said; and apply it to the stomach. And the method for applying the cautery is done according to what has been described above.
And it's already been treated on the mouth of the stomach; and more at the back; and then treat it as you process it.
Capitol refers to the eighth section or part of a document, often used when referring to an ordered list where numbers indicate specific sections.
Regarding the treatment of forgetfulness caused by phlegm.
Make sure that you provide the patient with large vinegar baths and pills for stomach improvement during meals.
And then scrape the entire head of the patient and place his stomach patch as described in the book on dressings.
And hold that for a few applications, this is the method of applying the cautery. Do it according to that order described previously which I have mentioned.
And therefore if it has been well healed with those; otherwise, then do three applications for the last part of his head, which are descending from the more elevated part of the head towards the part below the neck. And wait between each application for as long as that has been done, and then treat the application of the cautery until it's processed.
And if you gradually increase it and the body is tolerable to this treatment, then apply the cautery in the middle; and if you find more intense heat, then apply the cautery over both sides.
And treat that until it's healed; and make sure to use an olive wood cautery according to the form given in front.
Capitol refers to the ninth section or part of a document, often used when referring to an ordered list where numbers indicate specific sections.
Regarding the treatment with cautery and soothing of all parts of the body.
Make sure that you process the stomach improvement in the head with vinegar baths and as we have said; then scrape the head of the patient, then apply the cautery on the middle of the head, and apply the cautery over all parts of the head, and apply the cautery to the last part of him, and three applications over the spine of the neck.
And if it is necessary in the heart's thickening illness for many and people tolerating it, and the illness is strong, then apply a cautery four times on each of the two vertebrae, and afterwards with a cautery until the disease of him has been relieved, and place your hand. And if it is within that one should be cured, then this is an olive oil cautery.
The sentence "Capit." (or "Cap.") most likely denotes the beginning or introduction of a section in the text, possibly indicating a new chapter, topic, or rule. It serves as a heading to organize the content and may signify that the following paragraphs are related to a specific subject or directive.
Regarding the treatment of epilepsy by cautery.
Epilepsy is not treated with cautery, only that type which is due to phlegm.
And therefore, when you begin to alter the brain at the start of one's years and at another treatment which we have described in the division when the patient is large and can tolerate the side effects of medicines.
And if it's a child who doesn't bear the medicines, then provide remedies and chewers to alter the brain, before that for several days, with improvement of the food.
And if you need to treat the patient's head, then proceed by burning it with a cautery at its midpoint according to the previous method, and apply another cautery on the back of their head, and burn every head horn. And if the patient is strong and can tolerate it, then apply the cautery that I've mentioned, with paralysis and heart softening on the vertebrae of the neck and the vertebrae of the back.
And apply an olive oil cautery as has been described before.
If the patient is a child, then use a gentle cautery according to this method.
The sentence "Capit." (or "Cap.") at the beginning of text sections in medieval documents often serves as an introductory marker or heading for a new topic or section. It might indicate the start of another chapter, a specific treatment procedure, or a rule set related to medical practices and could help organize the content sequentially or by subject matter.
Regarding the treatment of melancholy by cautery.
When the causes of melancholy are dampened and weak in the blood, then apply the cautery with the cauterizations that we have described for paralysis treatment.
And if the cause of melancholy is excess declining to melancholy, and the patient's body is damp, then give them to drink what alters their brain according to what was previously described in this division.
And if you need to treat the head of the patient, then prepare the tortoise shell (or possibly referring to a specific herbal preparation) in a decent manner and apply it over the circle, then place that in the middle of the head.
And if the patient is sixty years old, and is kept throughout all parts.
And then apply liniment; it is worth using an old remedy from sheep. And heat that over the fire until it's warmed to a suitable measure, which the patient tolerates as it grows in him. And place that at the midpoint of the patient's head within the circle, and let the patient rest until it cools.
And do this for the patient once every week, with the other regimen of drinking inside until they recover; or if you prefer, apply the cautery making small punctures according to their best interest, otherwise hold your hand on a properly arranged cautery: this is the type of cautery that moistens the brain equally.
And place that roasted meat in an ointment or in pieces of fat.
The sentence "Capit." (or "Cap.") serves as a heading to indicate the beginning of Chapter XII or twelve in the text, likely denoting a new section or topic within the medical treatise.
Regarding the treatment of descending water with cautery.
When it is determined that the beginning of water has occurred in the lungs based on the symptoms I have described in this division, then begin and give the patient to drink what alters their head, and keep him/her from all dampness.
And make that sugar boil in water for a few days.
And command the patient to bathe their head, and apply a cautery on the middle of the head; and also apply two cauterizations over two temples if it is the beginning of water rising in two lungs, or one temple if it's the beginning of water in one lung.
Apply the cautery to all veins and arteries that cause the disease; and place those cauterizations in that length across the width of the temples.
And keep yourself from blood flows when it's being treated with cautery; and if you see blood flow from him/her, take some medicine which is suitable for you.
And I will come with knowledge of that in the extraction from arteries and about removing those and caution against blood flows.
Some treatments involve applying cautery to the neck between two bones with two consecutive cauterizations.
"Capit." (or "Cap.") typically serves as a heading or marker indicating the beginning of a new chapter, section, or topic within a document, particularly in historical texts like medieval medical treatises. In this context, it suggests that we are at the start of Chapter XIII or thirteen, likely introducing another subject or discussing additional procedures and treatments.
Regarding the treatment of old tears.
When tears from the lungs are slowly occurring and through the veins and arteries located manifestly outside the head, and it's confirmed that this is an excess causing phlegmatic flemmings, then apply the cautery as we've recounted in the chapter for the beginning of water affecting the lungs, and apply a cautery at the middle of the head. Also do two cauterizations on the neck between the temples and do two cauterizations on the neck between the bones. And if you are in need of an addition, then apply the cautery on the entire backside of the eye over the tip of the eyebrow with a small cautery.
Chapter XIIIV.
On the cautery for nasal discharge.
When you treat that which we have discussed in the division and do not deepen your treatment, then you prepare and give to the patient three cups for drinking every night; and move their head, then apply a cautery on half of it with an olive oil-based cautery. And move to apply the cautery on that, using a thorn-shaped cautery with two cauteries over both eyebrows, leaving the hair a little untouched.
And protect yourself from the risk of burning that area.
And this is how it should be with the thorn-shaped cautery.
Chapter XV.
On the treatment for relief of eye lid swellings.
When the eyelid of the eye swells due to illness or dampness, then apply a cautery on that eyelid using this moon-shaped cautery; and here is how it should look for him:
And if you do so, apply the cautery over both eyebrows slightly, using two cauteries all around, and extend them up to the temples. And let each cautery's length correspond to the size of the eyebrow.
And do not press your hand too much on the cautery, but rather according to how hot the thinned part of the eyelid is.
Chapter XVI.
On the treatment for eye lid cautery when skin has transformed into parts inside and at the wrist of the hand.
When the skin of the hand has transformed into parts inside such that it touches the wrist, two ways to perform cautery are as follows: one can use a direct cautery or medicinal burning.
If it is a direct cautery with fire, instruct the patient to expose their skin like those who peel them until they are extended and equal; and if you have to touch the wrist, then strengthen your hands so that no burning occurs while the skin begins to emerge.
Then when they are extended and equal, then have the patient hold their head in your place, and apply to each of their eye lids with a symbol that resembles the leaf of an almond, and make the start of the symbol close to the skin.
And move the small amount swollen up in the egg white of an egg or pus from a boil over the hand.
And heat the cautery, as this is its form:
And move to apply the cautery on the figure you have marked, little by little in waves, until it burns the surface of the skin which is like the almond leaf, all appearing precisely.
And a sign of the health of your work is that you see the eyelid of the hand already tightened, and the skin under it to be elevated due to the puncture in the hand.
And lift your hand and let that rest for three days, then apply to it with butter until the scab has been elevated. And continue to treat that with ointment until it heals.
And if any cause returns from the skin at its origin and causes the eyelid to swell again, then perform another treatment with cautery over that entire area as you did initially.
And if the skin remains on the eyelid, then apply the cautery so that it rises to its natural place and is equal, making sure the skin does not pinch the hand.
And the cautery with burning medicine is that you command the patient to expose their skin until it extends and equals, then have it done in the form of an almond leaf from cloth.
And take known soap and a live animal fat to prepare. 1., Take it, and proceed by mixing those fats well, ensuring not to cool the mixture; then spread this over a piece of fabric as if in the shape of an almond leaf, place that on each hand or both; and have the head of the patient under your own control.
And place the aforementioned on the medicine and press it a little but don't burn the patient as they feel the medicine's bite, which bite is like that of fire to them.
And when the patient becomes accustomed to this biting sensation, then expose them and press it under your own hand; and as soon as the biting stops, then re-expose the medicine and wash each hand as they are washed without a bandage; and then consider whether the eyelid has already lifted as it should be washed with fire or incision, which is now complete; and if it doesn't return to that part of the medicine on the spot where no medicine was applied and does not worsen before your operation is equalized and the hand is tightened.
And continue to apply butter or another type of fat until the rash has been eradicated from its root, then treat that with defined oil or another substance until it heals.
And for this, you must ensure vigilance to prevent the medicine from causing irritation in the hand, and if the eyelid becomes somewhat swollen and any cause of skin pinches it after that point, then apply your medicine on the spot where it is softened by the eyelid, precisely as you did at the beginning, and continue treating until it heals.
And this is the way of the liver's gall duct.
Know that men's veins differ according to size and thickness, so your compression will depend on this.
Do not hide the way of rectitude towards him whom you study in this art.
Chapter XVII.
Regarding the cautery treatment for a fistula that occurs in the lacrimal passage of the vein.
When you treat a fistula as we have instructed in the sections on diseases and do not apply your treatment, then this is how you should cauterize it: instruct the patient to place their head where you are, and have someone support their head between your hands in such a way that neither strain nor agitation be applied to their head.
And place the cautery on fat or on lymph in the throat over the vein of the patient.
And ignite the cautery like this:
Which is rounded at one end, as if it were the shape of a reed or a bird's tail feather, with one end where the cautery is made.
And if you see, it should penetrate to the other end. And if you want it to exit like this, try as if testing it.
However, someone who is rounded is better for your work.
And press the fistula if it has opened, and take away the patient's pain and dry out that area. And if it is not open, then open it and remove the pus from the patient.
And place the heated cautery over the patient's vein, and hold your hand like this: with one part of the cautery at the junction of the neck and nose to prevent your hand or the patient from being disturbed. Then place the cautery in the gray area of the vein and destroy that section.
And indeed, if during the beginning of your cautery it penetrates into the mouth, that is good; otherwise, then repeat the cautery once or twice if necessary; and leave that like this for three days, and place a piece of fat or wax around that spot with some dried salve inside so that it may heal.
And if it has been more than ten days and is not healed, then place the corrosive quick medicine inside where the bone is exposed, and scrape it as seems appropriate according to your chapter.
And this is another way of cauterizing a fistula which some earlier people described: find the place of the fistula and perform it there, then place your hand over that opening with good control so that you don't harm the patient because the melted lead does not reach their vein; ensure that when you apply pressure to the patient's vein like fat in milk or water, where lead adheres to the site of the fistula and heals it through miraculous healing.
And if the fistula is healed as we have described through cauterization and treatment, that's good; otherwise, it may be necessary to administer something up the nose and reduce the fistula into the nasal cavity according to where it naturally occurs.
Chapter XVIII.
Regarding the cautery treatment for a cut in the foot.
Reddened spots may cause cuts to occur on the lips, particularly on children's lips.
So when you treat those cuts as we have instructed in the sections and do not improve your treatment, then ignite the small cautery tool according to this manner that follows:
And return the affected area as per the subtlety of the tool.
Place that initial part of the cautery inside those cuts so that it reaches the edge of the cuts.
And then treat that area with bandages until it heals.
Chapter XIX.
Regarding the cautery treatment for a fistula in the mouth.
When in the throat or on the palate or at the base of the tongue there is pus, and it has burst, hardened, and become infected, causing a fistula, if you fail to treat this properly then follow this method for applying the cautery: ignite the cautery according to its size as required by the fistula; place the ignited part inside the fistula opening, hold your hand so that the heated tip reaches the edge of the fistula and do this once or twice more. Then proceed with treatment according to what we have described about healing until it is healed.
And if the healing has been removed and it is healed, that's good; but if not, then it may be necessary to discover the location and cleanse the bone according to what follows in your chapter.
Chapter XX.
Regarding tooth cautery and soothing of the gums.
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth are sensitive, if you fail to treat them with medicines, then place the patient's head where it is, and ignite the cautery in such a way that you place your thumb on each tooth while applying the heated tip rapidly so that the heat from the fire reaches the base of the tooth. Keep your hand close enough for the warmth of the flame to reach the root of each tooth when igniting it.
And then lift your hand, and repeatedly apply the cautery for several times according to your wish.
And then have the patient drink water with salt in their mouth for an hour and afterwards rinse it out, so that the decayed teeth are hardened, the gum is made soft, and the corrupted moisture is dried.
Chapter XXI.
On the treatment of tooth pain through cautery.
When tooth pain is due to coldness or worms, or if you do not respond to medicine, then apply cautery on that according to two methods: either apply cautery near the gums, or apply it in the mouth.
Cautery near the gums is that you take cow horns and heat them in the flame of a lamp. Then prepare a strip and wrap it around the tip of the tool, then immerse that in the heated horn, and place it over the painful tooth until it gets hot.
And repeatedly apply this several times so that the heat of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
And if you see this, soak wool or cloth in the heated horn above mentioned, and place that on the painful tooth, and over it place an ignited iron until the heat of the iron reaches inside the cavity of the tooth.
However, the cautery with fire should be applied when there's an inflammation or a lump in the body, and the heat of the fire does not reach into the mouth of the patient.
And then light the cautery in the shape that will come, place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery gets hot; do this several times so that the pain subsides or within one day or another.
And when the patient swallows that heat from the cautery which fills their mouth with good water and lets it stay for an hour; and this is the way of the cautery.
And apply cautery wherever you see an extremity according to what's possible to you.
And this is how the cannula (instrument) should be used:
Chapter XXII.
On the treatment of hernias through cautery.
When hernias are due to phlegm and humors that do not respond to digestion by medicines, then you see the digestion of those a little bit. Then light the cautery in this way: having two straight ends, when you make the smoke exit from one end, apply the heated cautery at the other end, place its flame on the hernia spot once, and if necessary do it again until it reaches inside the cavity of the hernia.
And if the hernia is small, then place the cautery according to the size of the hernia, and let it rest for three days, then wrap it with a heated cloth on cow horns until what has been burned by the fire becomes renewed.
And afterwards treat that with ointments, bandages and cloths until it heals.
Chapter XXIII.
On the treatment of throat swelling and constriction of the airway through cautery.
When moisture invades the channel of the lung, especially when this is due to cold constitution, then it's necessary that the patient be relieved at the beginning with laxative medicines, and you should apply cautery on the throat bone in the area below.
And be careful not to allow the cautery to touch the throat bone, or do not burn too much of the patient's neck but only a little.
And apply cautery on another one in this way, cauterizing at the junction of the neck with the lower part of the spine. And treat his chest and arm joints according to the previous method.
And afterwards treat that with what has been described until it heals.
Chapter XXIV.
On the treatment of lung disease and cough through cautery.
When cough and lung disease are due to moisture, the patient does not have fever or rash, and it's old lung disease, then apply cautery on two areas on the sternum at the lowest points of the collarbones and ribs; and on another area in the middle of the chest between the breasts; and treat arm joints according to the previous method.
And if you want, your treatment with cautery is puncturing in the way that is called puncture, which was described earlier for the treatment of ear pain.
And make points within cuts there; and afterwards treat that with the remedies prescribed until it heals.
And already, have three ramps for this cautery treatment on that: you can make three cauteries in this way in one go.
Chapter XXV.
On the treatment of boils that are at the tip of the penis.
When the tip of the penis is dislocated due to moist lubrication and does not return immediately, then you should correct its dislocation before it returns to the usual practice, and by a small movement it gets back in place as we have described. Then make sure that the first thing you do is reduce the dislocation, and have the patient lie on their back or on their side; and lift up the neck which is at the inner part of the boil above the places indicated with your left hand's fingers if the junction is dislocated inside.
And you should use two heads for the cautery flame; this is how it works:
And you should apply the cautery inside where it goes through to the other side; and here will come the figure of the cautery process, using two heads of the cautery.
And some applications are adjusted according to this rule, because of these cauteries.
And you should place salt on the area of the cautery burn, and then fix the patient to be in comfort, making sure the member is not in pain for some time until it feels better.
And if the dislocation is above or below and it happens like this, you should apply the cautery on the muscle near the bone or on the surface of the skin, where the joint is confirmed and moisture is reduced, making the patient well.
Chapter XXVI.
On the cautery treatment for the stomach.
When cold and moisture accumulate inside the stomach causing its contents to increase and multiply, and if you continue with the treatment methods without it working, then the patient should be lying on their back, spreading out their limbs and things. Then apply cautery three times: first leave the foot in a position equivalent to one finger's width from the bone, and then apply the second layer of cautery across both sides of the stomach area, forming a triangular pattern; extend those that are not properly applied which will cause blisters.
And if the depth of the cautery matches the two thirds of the thickness of the intestinal wall.
And if you wish to follow the shape of this process, or if you prefer, apply large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this method; here is a circular cautery according to this form:
And if the stomach is burned by points that are frightened by this cautery: then you should place the point on the stomach according to your wish with heat, and then apply the cautery at the points; and treat it with subsequent treatment until it heals.
Chapter XXVII.
On the cautery treatment for fever.
When fever is caused by coldness or moisture or excessive wind that disturbs its normal state due to excess expulsion, and if the patient heals with what we have said and it doesn't work, then you should have the patient lie on their back, apply three layers of cautery according to this form; half of this quantity over the fever in front of the hipbones, the other half down the length when lying horizontally.
And let there be the space between each cautery according to the thickness of a finger, and make the cauteries according to the length of the body diagonally.
And don't hesitate on your part with respect to the cautery burn.
And if the amount of heat that sticks is equal to the thickness of three parts of the intestinal wall, and it's not properly adjusted; and if the patient stands on their feet; and if they're not standing, then have them lie down, which already has extended their limbs, and raise their arms.
And if it's within your capability to apply these cauteries with a surgical knife, when you have subtlety and caution in the art.
And beware that you don't overdo the cautery procedure, so that heat sticks to all of the intestinal wall and spreads throughout the body, as the wall here is delicate; know this.
Chapter XXVIII.
On perforating an abscess of fever with a cautery.
When there is an inflammation or abscess in fever and you want to know if that abscess is within the fever flesh or the tissue around it, then if it's within the fever flesh, the patient becomes worse and the pain intensifies.
And if it's within the tissue of the fever, then the pain is very intense and often exhausts doctors trying to cure him.
Therefore have the patient lying horizontally on their back; and place them where the abscess is; then take the cautery flame that resembles a needle, which was described in another page. And apply the cautery until all of the intestinal wall is heated through, till it reaches to the appendix, till health returns.
And treat that by curing the other abscesses until he/she gets better.
And don't use this method of cautery treatment other than the one studied in the art of medicine which goes through to completion, and with respect to many cases where they may feel discomfort from it; but some applications have burned during these operations, but you should follow that one, and it's better.
Chapter XXIX.
On the cautery treatment of pleurisy.
The ancient cautery practices for pleurisy were done by rubbing according to this method, and here's what you should do from the principles of Aristotelian physics: take a long, dry plant root that is found, which has the thickness of a finger.
And then immerse that in oil and heat that by the fire, and apply a cautery to that place which is between the continuation of the scapula and the rib; and with two cauteries, leave one pointing towards the side where the beard hangs down, and apply two cauterizations there that are declining between the fifth rib and the hip bone, declining another towards behind; and apply another cautery in the middle place of the feet; and apply another on the stomach, and apply three cauterizations from behind; and apply one cautery at that place which is between the two shoulders, and apply two cauterizations on each side of the feet, leaving a cautery that is between the two shoulders.
And don't hesitate to place your hand near the cautery, but rather in the field of action for healing work.
And already some old sayings have told that certain men who use a kind of iron cautery resembling a flame and fire, insert that in the place which is between the ribs, where it reaches to that place from that one, until it heals there as we said about the boil.
In this puncture with cautery, there is no cause for fear; you have often happened to me in the place of fistula where healing does not occur.
Chapter XXX.
On the cautery of the womb.
When you treat the disease of the womb with what we've said about treatment in division and do not apply your own treatment, then cauterize it as follows: three or four lines according to the length of the womb along the figure of the boil, which I have already explained.
And between every cautery is the thickness of a finger or a few inches, and the way of the cautery is the method we've described in the treatment of boils equally.
And don't place your hand near the cautery; and the patient lies on their back.
And there is another way to cauterize: you ignite the cautery with two streams; a method we've discussed in the chapter on muscle dislocation, and lift the patient's body in the direction of the womb so that it may pass from the left side of the patient.
And for your elevation, do as when you raise the body according to the length of the body, so that you make cauterizations according to the width of the body.
And then immerse both streams, ignite motion, in that place where it penetrates the body from the other side.
And then remove the cautery; and thus four cauterizations are made.
And if you see, apply a cautery with three streams.
And then you treat the cautery because it has stopped bleeding for too many days; more so than other previous causes in treatment.
Chapter XXXI.
On the cautery of hydrocele (a swelling due to accumulation of fluid).
Cauterize only in the actual area and not elsewhere for hydrocele.
When you treat hydrocele with the treatment methods we've described in division and do not apply your own treatment, then immerse that with four cauterizations around the umbilicus, and one on the stomach, and another on the boil, and two cauterizations between the kidneys, and one on the right side of the foot, and another on the stomach. And the depth of the cautery should be similar to the thickness of the body.
And then smooth out the cautery until it allows bleeding for a long time.
And do not remove the patient from the area of treatment close to the cautery as we advise so that they can benefit from two treatments, and it should be given assistance for healing.
The shape of the cautery where it is cauterized to the belly should be oval according to that which was previously, and that which is cauterized on the side should be olive-shaped according to its previous form.
Chapter XXXII.
On the cautery of feet and thighs.
When the feet are filled with yellowish water and swollen, you should cauterize the feet on the back of the hand until it's between the thumb and little finger, lift your hand near the cautery and do not twist that; and then lift your hand, and do not return that completely, as the yellowish water will drain.
This is the way for the cautery: And then make on each thigh two cauterizations, and in any case place a cauterization at the end of the blade-shaped area. And let the cauterizations be according to the length of the thigh: make one near the knee and the other in the middle of the thigh; and on each thigh, two cauterizations.
And leave the opened wound for a long time to allow some water to drain from it.
And then treat those causes which we've described.
Chapter XXXIII.
On the cautery of belly wounds.
When belly wounds are due to friction and dampness causing disturbance of digestion and retention, which are found in the stomach and in the intestines, these are treated with treatment methods and not with your own, and sometimes the patient suffers from the cautery of disturbed function, then cauterize that with a large cautery over their stomach as described for the stomach in the cautery of the stomach, on the circle of the stomach and four small cauterizations around the subtle umbilical area, on small subtlety. And make another cautery near the anus on a large area or two cauterizations.
And if you notice excessive wetness and the patient tolerates it, then apply a cautery to that area on the knee and on the hernias, strengthen by adjusting two cauterizations on the stomach and near the groin region, which is a perfect cure for young ailments from which you will not err.
Chapter xxxiv.
On the treatment of old hemorrhoids.
When dealing with old hemorrhoids or those filled with thick humors or corrupted moisture, and they are treated as we have said in the division and do not provide your cure, then apply three cauterizations to the pus left on both small and triangular spines, and perform a second cauterization above the navel for two times.
And if you prefer that the stomach of the patient be cooled and the food not spoil, and their face becomes reddened, then apply a large cauterization as instructed beforehand; and perform one on the thigh bone, and another on the seat area. Apply a cauterization to the knee joint, and let the cauterizations rest for some time after application, and soon after, treat the interior until it is healed.
Chapter xxxv.
On the treatment of abscesses near the anus.
When you remove the anal sac (atherial), then you should apply the cautery that is analogous to lightening. Place the burning tip in that anal sac (atherial) abscess and continue with your hand until the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which the infection comes.
And do this once or twice, if the abscesses are too many, then cauterize each one according to what we have recounted, and soon after treat those with the remedies you provide until they are healed.
And if you apply a large cautery to an open wound, it is more effective in youth.
Chapter xxxvi.
On the treatment of fistulas that occur naturally in various parts of the body.
If nature does not comply with the work we have recommended in its place, and the patient is frightened by this, they will be healed by a cautery.
So when at some point you find a fistula in nature posteriorly, and it is old, infected with disease and corrupted moisture, then this pus that deserves to be covered should be covered by that which matches the subtle nature of it, and then you can know the depth quantity of its location from the previously mentioned test.
Place the cautery that resembles lightning. And place the ignited cautery in this fistula, and according to the depth of where the test penetrates.
And apply the cautery repeatedly inside until those corrupted bodies are burned out once, or twice, or three times, according to the quantity of your need.
And protect yourself from burning nerves and veins; or if the fistula goes to the bladder's body or to the intestine, then protect all those places; and do this only when the fistula is in a meaty area and you think it is not penetrating.
And treat that area until it is healed.
And if the place is sealed, and all materials have been removed from it, yet it still remains for a long time, then know that it has already been fully cured.
And if the materials are not of your origin, then know that it is penetrating or in the beginning of your body's corruption, or comes from those causes whose memory will arise at its location.
Chapter xxxvii.
On the treatment of boils.
When in boils there is pain due to squeezing or due to a swollen face, and the cheek of the patient becomes reddened, then cover that with a cautery on each boil with a cautery on every boil, applying a knee joint (clavilh) from which you remember the origin of the remedy.
And firmly apply the cautery on a small spot first, so that three linewhisked cauterizations will come about, and thus they are more effective in youth.
Chapter xxxviii.
On the treatment of the bladder.
When it happens in the bladder due to squeezing and moisture such that the patient cannot retain urine, then apply a cautery on the part with pus left above the bladder, like where the skin begins at the knee joint, and apply a cautery on the right part, and another on the left of it.
And make the length of each cautery according to the amount of pus; and apply a cautery where the lower part of both is filled with pus, or two cauterizations if it's necessary.
And do it as with knee joint cauterizations, according to what has been instructed.
Chapter xxxix.
On the treatment of childbirth (mayra in medieval Latin likely refers to pregnancy or childbirth).
When there is friction and moisture during pregnancy, and because of this intercourse is prohibited, and her menstrual flows become corrupted, and their onset is delayed, and pain occurs in the belly, then know that the area should be treated with three cauterizations in the loop around the navel, as we have mentioned for bladder cautery; and apply a cauterization on each part filled with pus left by both halves, or two cauterizations, and do it as with knee joint cauterizations.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
Regarding the treatment of the dislocation of the ankle through cautery.
When moisture accumulates within the ankle joint and it causes pain due to the stiffness of its position, a sign is that the foot extends beyond the other when compared between them. And the site of the dislocation is felt in the ankle joint.
Then when you cauterize the patient's ankle on the foot joint, with a similar pointed cautery, because you will feel it in the circuit of the joint site as it revolves, and thus to make sure that the part falls into the center of the circle.
And like the cautery described previously, its shape in the cautery of the stomach.
And if this cautery is not available to you, then use three other large olive wood cauteries.
And perform the cautery according to the amount of irritation throughout the chain; and treat that inside which has been healed.
Chapter forty-one.
Regarding the treatment of the sciatic vein through cautery.
When pain occurs in the ankle area, and it is caused by friction and moisture, healing of the patient occurs with what we have said earlier and does not involve waiting. In this situation, you should release the patient from large humors through pillowed cushions or artificial pillowed cushions or something similar; then treat that area by cauterization.
And the method of cautery in this case follows two methods: either with burning medicines or by applying fire.
There are two known methods according to which you should perform the cautery, of which one involves performing three triangular cauteries on that area over the width of the ankle; and make those have good depth. And between each cautery space is the size of the irritation described, and use large or big olive wood cauteries.
Perform several cauterizations on the center of the ankle joint by the head of the ankle bone, as there should be four cauteries.
And if you wish, perform the treatment in the circle that was described in the procedure for treating ankle dislocation, which includes burning irritation throughout the chain.
And this is the method of cautery when pain is attached to the ankle and does not spread within the foot.
And if it does spread within the foot, then perform two cauterizations on the foot over the area where you find the ankle which causes pain; and for one cauterization on the cavity, four or five should cover the calf part.
And if it's a surgical cautery, then the depth of the cautery should be according to the irritation size in the body chain.
And if the ankle is where the pain spreads to within the foot region near your toes, then perform cautery here in that area by making three points or four or more as needed.
And if the ankle is where pain has left to beyond your toes in the foot, then perform a surgical cautery here.
And when performing any cautery procedure, do not allow the heat to reach nerves or major blood vessels until it burns them, as this could cause injury or constriction on the ankle.
And I have seen several of those who perform cautery on the cavity first and then complete the treatment, and when the fire bed is inflated within which the swelling results in the foot, and burns through and destroys all of the foot. And it also leads to severe stomach acid production, leading to death as well.
And if the pain is in two parts at once, cauterize each according to this method.
And some wise ones would instruct in the treatment of ankle cautery as follows: imagine a circular iron object with its circumference similar to that of a palm's width; and adjust his hole according to the size of one knuckle bone or slightly less.
And within that circle put another triangle; and the space between them is the size of one ankle bone; and those circles should be opened in two parts; and the length of those lines is one or two ankle bones, make each groove for iron properly fitted into the circles; and this is the shape:
And it should be ignited in the fire until it reddens and sparks fall off, and then placed over the ankle area, having the ankle against the back of your hand. And thus perform three circular cauteries in one go on that area.
And then rest that for three days; and cover that area with bandages, allowing the opened wound to heal over too many days; and treat that with ointments until it heals.
Albucasis: oh sons, for this type of cautery we have used it due to the fear in observing him, and thus we found those who watch over him.
And for the many harsh cautery treatments he endures, find that place on him.
And perform cautery with burning medicines, make two circles carved through which the iron dust comes out; and let their length in the flexibility of skin be two or three ankle bones.
And if it is the space that exists between each part of the quantity of the fat of the mentioned; place them open and above, and let them contain themselves among each other according to this form:
Then place your hand on the water part of the patient's belly and keep it there, covering that area with your hand; then take out some hot water and heat the two circles together until their quality matches that of small fire gradually, hold this for the amount of one hour, let the patient chew and adjust - as if they were biting burning fire - until the chewing stops.
Then lift your hand to the instrument and clean all the hot water off of the water completely with cool water.
And let that heal for three days and place your hand on the area until the color of adjustment is renewed, then let this heal for some more days, and wash it from its reddening; this is later in youth.
And treat that with ointment until it is healed.
And if the pain extends into the thigh or chest, place them in such a position that they contain water like in the bath.
And this is the method of hot water treatment, and I have already written about that in my treatise on correcting medicines. The recipe for alkali and a new heat from both is to use an equal part of each, mix them together, and place it in a fresh wave where the part for you should be pierced with a small rod according to how much fits into your hand.
And place your hand under the bottom of the wave again, pour on it live alkali and earth from fresh water that takes them up by a finger, then once you take those out with your hand for good compression, let the hot water flow from the sharp edge of the part placed under the fresh wave.
And adjust all that water, pour it on fresh live earth and another renewed alkali, whereupon that will have a strong acuity, which is administered in doses for medical operations and in cautery of other limbs, this operation is performed with fire.
And there are some medicines among which broad cautery occurs, such as blistering and wax on the skin, and earth with oil that should be mixed.
And Gualia recounts an operation and treatment of ancient times for which water pain and sciatica vein pain is cured, and it praises this method very much, saying that there is no need for other treatments, and once it heals in one go as recommended, and the patient bathes and washes with water from that.
And if there is doubt about the cause of vertigo, and if it is not due to vert, take fresh fig; then mix it with a little oil and place it in water where there is pain or on the thigh, or on the chest, and fasten it.
And let it be left for the amount of three hours or until the patient feels relief from adjustment.
And place it in water and then when the body has turned red, immerse it in the sun, where the pain stops and is healed.
Know that not everyone should use cautery with these medicines but rather the evacuation of the body.
May Escorides says that when there is an opening in the goat and the vein narrows, it should be treated with cautery; and do this for the cautery: take wool and soak it in old oil, then place it between the chest and under the armpit.
And take an opening in a dried goat and flame it over fire until charcoal is made; then place the goat on the wool and let it extend. And repeat this process, without stopping until the sensation of chewing reaches into the water and stops the pain.
And this method of cautery is called cattle's cautery.
Chapter XLII.
On Cauterization for Two Pain Points.
Some pains occur in two places due to various causes, such as through impact or striking or over-extraction, and through causes similar to those, by infusion of wet and rough material.
And cautery is not for cats but only in this single species which is performed through the infusion of rubbing material.
So, use, for evacuation in the patient with pills that resemble them, which are made over the two areas where there is pain three lines according to the width of the body, because signs when tested on each line one by one, either a cautery or more, depending on the amount tolerated by the patient and its effectiveness.
And do the cautery treatment with point cautery.
And if you want, do it with three or four points of point cautery as follows:
Chapter XLIII.
On Cauterization for the Beginning of Biliousness.
Symptoms of this disease in young children often occur; and the sign of its onset in children is that it affects their structure, increasing their height and causing movement.
And you find in the last section of the spine and the nape where they already begin to rise above the other vertebrae.
And so when you do this and want to prohibit it, then apply a point of the cautery around in accordance with this form: let the cautery touch all parts of the spine equally.
And if you want, apply a line or two lines of points of the cautery around the circuit of the spine with the pointed cautery. Let the points be evenly spaced among them.
And after that, treat the area so that it is healed with what we have said.
May be that a cautery not be administered in gout caused by nerve spasm.
Chapter XLIV.
On the treatment of gout with a cautery and joint pain.
When joint pain is caused by cold fluids that penetrate every part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customary for doctors to call this gout precisely.
And thus how gout due to friction is treated with the method of treatment and without making the pains worse, then uses a cautery.
And you apply the cautery near the point of evacuation in the joint circuit on the foot with a hot cautery.
And this is how an olive-shaped cautery looks, as follows:
And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. And if the pains ascend to the joints or to other joints, and these points are difficult to find, then apply the cautery around each joint with three or four cauteries in total on this olive-shaped cautery.
And if you need these cautery points to be done by you, then apply the cautery and do not press too hard with your hand before, just around the thickness of the tendon.
And if the pains penetrate through both joints, then apply the cautery that we have said in its chapter.
And if the pains are only in the heels and it is called gravel, then prick along the path of the veins as they move, prick on those two lines.
And if the pains remain in the fingers, then prick on the path of the veins over each notch and over the back of the hand.
And if the pains ascend for several days to the elbows or to the muscles, then apply all points of the assistants around.
And do not evacuate the patient from good care and receipt of medicines, for if good care is maintained and inflammation is evacuated by this cautery, it will be healed, God help.
Chapter XLV.
On the treatment of ruptures with a cautery.
When it comes to rupture in the arteries and discussing the intestines facing the hernia at the groin, and this is how they begin from there, then you instruct the patient to leave his food for that day and use gentle causes so that the opening in his abdomen decreases.
And then guide the patient between your hands on his back, and command him to hold his breath until the cut is healed or the hernia appears or the intestines come out.
And then return that to your fingers and test the rupture on the bones of the foot, marking the extremity of which is similar to half the circumference of the lower parts of the body.
And then apply the cautery in this form:
until it emits sparks and produces a glowing effect. And then return the hernia or the intestines to their cavity, and place your hand over the area in such a way that the hernia does not protrude.
You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs and placed them under cushions, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
And then place the cautery on that mark with your hand holding the hot point, and insert that into where you can reach the bones of the foot in the middle of the knee; repeat with that another time if what you have not achieved at first is within the bones.
And observe wisely the condition of the hernia during your treatment with a cautery, that you do not burn the hernia to the point where it may cause death or any other serious harm to the patient.
And know that when you have the cautery but do not touch the bones, your operation will not be effective.
And understand that the cautery for children should be fine according to their size and age.
And then care for the area of the cautery for three days with oil until the scab from the heat has healed.
And afterwards, treat that with other ointments until it heals.
And the patient should be resting on their back for 40 days until the wound and the injury are sealed.
And understand that you should pause giving the patient nourishment according to the length of their healing time, which stretches out their stomach, and ensure that the hernia does not protrude during their efforts to recover.
And then when you want to remove it after about 40 days, administer food in moderation, and keep that for another 40 days.
And if he is weakened by work and full of food and drink, and uses this whole regimen for healing, then he will be healed.
And I will discuss the treatment of ruptures in other parts of the abdomen, and so at the beginning, if they do not heal, then cauterize the rupture with a pointed cautery according to the amount, such that it is excreted by the body as quickly as possible like another part; and further treat that which we have said, and ensure it is properly healed.
And they should be treated with such first aid measures that the rupture is cauterized using a triangular cautery according to this form, for it is handled in the way of trials:
And draw a line that extends beyond the width at the side of the rupture, and another line above it; and place your hand on a triangular cautery, where the first cautery is lighter and better.
Chapter XLVI.
On Cauterization of Torsion.
When persistent pain persists in certain limbs due to impact or percussion and does not respond to healing with medicines for a long time, then you should decide to cauterize with a pointed cautery.
And make the cauteries for each member according to its size and thickness, and the strength and development of the individual, and the location of the torsion and pain.
Then if the first cautery is effective, that's good; otherwise, continue with additional cauteries; for customary practice regarding these pains is to puncture members at those parts closest to the body, so that you can successfully use those cauterizations within which the patient becomes healed.
Chapter LVII.
On Cauterization of Lepra.
Some lesions require cautery treatment for a long time, especially if the type of leprosy is caused by the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
And when you want to cauterize that, consider whether the leprosy is contagious and if it has been cured according to what we have said in the division, without this one or that one, fearing for the patient's body that corruption might encompass his whole body and all its organs. Then cauterize on top of the head with these: at the middle of the head, and a second near you, place the forehead at the end of the hair; and both over two horns; and one behind, on the back or neck or seat.
And with your hand and the cautery, move it a little inside where you take a small pinch in the mouth, and if her movements have been delayed, for that reason her expiration of thick vapors shall be relieved; and cauterize on the tongue according to what is necessary.
And if leprosy has already spread across the body and is manifestly visible, then you should cauterize that with those cauteries which we have said for the head; and apply a cautery on the tip of the nose, and two cauteries on both major ears, and two cauteries on each cervical vertebrae, and three or four cauteries on each rib, and one large one near the navel, and one on her chest, and two on her ankles, and one on each ankle, and two on her knees and one on each knee cap; and cauterize that across all joints of those mentioned limbs and feet, and over every single heel of her feet, and over the bones in her limbs.
And guard yourself from the nerves that are on the heel so as not to touch those.
Some lesions are cauterized with a cautery on the bone of the elbow and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the throat.
And know that the more precisely you apply cautery treatments, the quicker and better they are effective; and know that the patient does not feel pain in the cautery like her sores do, for their body is already numb.
And you should know that the size of the cautery treatmentswhether large or smalldepends on the parts and joints as determined by the types of tools used.
And then treat the cautery with flour mixed with honey, and the other treatments until it heals.
Chapter LVIII.
On Cauterization of Stupor.
When a limb is stiff or paralyzed and has not been cured with medicines or bandages, then you should cauterize that paralyzed limb using cautery according to its size or the smallness of the individual.
And make your cautery enter slightly into the opening of the body, a little bit. And then treat that with ointment until it heals.
And some lesions are treated by cauterizing certain paralyses that affect the limbs and feet, as well as the vertebrae of the back, and you observe the nerves that govern that limb, and then alleviate the paralysis.
Don't assume about this matter without consulting those who are knowledgeable in the anatomy of limbs and the exit of the moving nerves throughout the body.
Chapter LIX.
On Cauterization for those that are moles.
When moles are old and do not respond to any of the ointments used for medicine, then you should cauterize that area with a pointed cautery a little according to the size of the opening in the body until the whiteness and color of the mole is relieved, and the color changes.
And then treat that with flour of rue and lentils mixed with fried oil and leaves of sage, and from each take one part, all mixed together, and apply a cloth over the area to be treated until it is healed.
"Capitol .l." seems like a term that might come from a legal or formal context in medieval times. The word "capitol" often relates to a place where decisions are made, like a legislative building, and ".l." could refer to Latin abbreviations commonly used for "et" (and) or other words. Without more context, it's hard to give an exact translation or explanation. However, if taken literally in its historical context, it might be referring to a decision or ruling made at the Capitoline Hill in Rome by Roman officials, as that was one of several ancient Roman capitol buildings where judicial and legislative processes took place.
"De cauterization of an infant."
"When cancer begins and you want it to stop, then apply cautery around it in a circular manner along its pathway as if it were being rotated."
"And it is said that the wise ones recommend applying the second layer of cautery in the middle place; but I do not see this happening, for I fear there might be an ulceration. I have already seen some occurrences like this."
"And it is a rule that the area should be treated with cautery along the pathway of the spot as we have said, or in multiple spots."
"Capitol.ii."
"About the treatment of boils with cautery."
"When some boils take longer to mature, and this is due to the excess causing that, or because of the patient's condition, which is old with weakness, having few symptoms, or due to time, and you want to hasten the maturation of the boil; then apply cautery along the spot in multiple small punctual areas; and place something under it that would hasten its maturation."
"And if you want the perforation of it with cautery, then you heat the type of cautery which is this form: and place that in the middle of the boil so that the tip penetrates."
"And if the cautery in that place you have put it relieves, then the arm's circulation is improved; and then treat that area until it heals."
"Capitol.ii."
"About the treatment of corrosion."
"Corrosion is a spreading corruption in the member, which destroys it as a burning fire consumes dry wood."
"So when you see that corrosion in the area that needs cautery with fire, then heat up several small and large prongs of the cautery according to what is suitable for that area where it is corroding."
"And then apply cautery to all parts until you eliminate the entire corrosion without causing any harm to it."
"And then place something over it for three days, and rest on the areas that have been treated with cautery until all the scabs are completely eliminated and all the corruption is gone."
"And then treat it with meat-generating ointment."
"And if within three days the healthy flesh grows in the area where there is no corruption, that's good. But if not, then apply more cautery to the areas that are affected by corruption."
"And corrosion is treated with some doses of acute medicine, which is in between areas where cautery has been applied." "But anyway, applying cautery with fire is for more liquid pus to become less abundant quickly."
"And I have already mentioned the treatment of it with acute medicine in the division, and therefore take that when you have preparedness for it from it.
"Capitol.iii."
"About the treatment of warts and similar conditions."
"Red spots on the parts of the body afflicted with malaise are called warts, and it's a large cause, an intrusion, which affects the body; applying cautery to those is done in two ways: one is applying fire-cautery, and the other is applying boiled water-cautery."
"And apply fire-cautery by heating the cautery like a small coal, which is made of iron according to the quantity that contains the wart in all parts, and it has thin edges."
"And then rest the ignition on the wart, and then rotate your hand with the cautery around the wart so that the cautery reaches to the depth of the wart." "And place something over it for three days until you begin to see an improvement in the arm." "And then cover it with an ointment made of dried malva leaves mixed with salt, and leave the bandage on that for one night, as that will help to eliminate its roots."
"And then treat the area with meat-producing ointment until it heals."
"And if it does not heal, and red spots occur on the surface of the body, especially in the legs and feet, then consider that you should apply cautery with water to those. And take one piece of charcoal or iron or a small coal and place it over the wart; and pour a little amount of boiled water into the container, and wet your hand, and move your hand around inside while pressing the edge of the container against the root of the wart, and allow the hot water to flow through the canal of the root; and let the patient chew on the hot water for an hour, then remove it, as that will help eliminate its roots in the wart."
"And do this for each one and then move on to all that is present throughout their body in the body."
"And then treat those pus that are caused by the roots of warts, using ointments which allow flesh to regenerate."
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
Regarding the treatment of trembling with a cautery.
When the trembling is due to pressure on nerves or by fever caused by friction, or by other similar causes, then you should apply four or five points of cautery around the vertebral column between each vertebra; and one point of cautery in the feet and over the stomach; olive points are applied.
And the trembling of the patient subsides, and their health improves from rubbing the illness.
End of the treatise on medical procedures.
Regarding the treatment of injuries by cautery to the body.
When in the body there are swellings and pus-filled sores made of corrupted materials; therefore, at the beginning when they appear, have them cauterized over all heads of the fistula with a subtle cauterizer with a stick; its tip is extended towards fire. Or with long rods of erysipelas; or with lenticonal cauterizers.
And some ulcers are cauterized at the beginning of their expulsion according to this manner; they do not swell up, and the excess is released by these, and they heal from them.
Moreover, it must be that this be done near evacuation through phlebotomy.
End of the section on medical treatments and procedures.
Regarding the treatment by cautery of a disease's flow that occurs due to injury from an artery cut.
When dealing with a flow from an artery that gets injured and is cut, you should treat the wound where it is supposed to heal naturally, or by making incisions for pus or cautery on the member, then proceed as required, making it difficult to stop the flow.
And when such happens with another one, you press your hand on the openings of the artery, and place your finger over that spot. Hold there until you stop the flow of the blood from that point, and prevent it from flowing out.
And then place olive-shaped small and large points in the fire for several times, and blow over them while they are still hot.
And then take one small or large as needed for the place and injury where the artery has ruptured, over that vein quickly after you have stopped your hand there, and apply cautery within so that it is cut off and restrained that disease.
And if the blood is expelled from the opening of the artery while you are keeping your hand there and withdrawing the cautery, then take another small cautery from among those that are prepared in the fire. Therefore, do not stop doing this one after another until the bleeding has been restrained.
And watch that you do not burn the nerves here, and bring about other harm to the patient's body.
And know that when blood flows from the artery, it is not possible to restrain the flow in those cases, especially when the artery is large, unless by one of these four methods: or with this cautery that we have mentioned, or extraction which if not extracted results, wherein upon extraction its extremities are burned and the bleeding is restrained; or they may be tied with string or bound firmly with a bandage, or they may be placed over the patient using medicines whose virtue is to restrain the flow; and they are strengthened with powder in the case of constriction.
Let him who administers proper constriction to the patient use string and binding or through positioning of burning causes and similar situations, do not apply it except with caution.
If such happens with another one and the doctor is not present nor medicine, then open up in accordance to our indicated position over the opening of that vein as we have said, understand that there should be a great constriction within so that the flow from most parts of the wound is stopped, and over the artery do not let it stop; and over the artery sprinkle with boiling water mixed with granules of very cold friction while the bleeding is cooled down and thickened; then consider what needs to be cauterized or which medicine should be applied.
Regarding incisions, punctures, wounds, and phlebotomy as well as their various aspects.
We have already discussed in the first chapter all illnesses where fire-cautery is appropriate and along with it medicine that causes burning, their occasions and reasons, and the tools necessary for those cases; I have arranged the chapters on the higher state of the head within the body.
And I will proceed in this chapter for that purpose, so that the one who requests it may be comforted here, then about what he has requested.
And before I start this, son, learn that in this chapter it deals with the fear that was in the first chapter of cautery.
And so that you understand his great caution, for in the operation which is in this chapter there are ulcers that cause evacuation which is from blood containing life, it should be sprinkled with blood or incised over pus or opening of removal or cleansing of the wound or extraction of bullet or incision of scarring and their various aspects. And all of those are accompanied by fear and trembling, and in most cases death.
And I warn you that you should not get into the situation in which you are subjected to these things, some operations requiring your methods for dealing with patients' ailments. And among them is one that you should tend to their illness and it may lead to their death, and also due to the intensity of what they suffer from their illness, and because of the duration of their illness, and for this illness means death.
And among those is the one who provides you with their account and speaks of this illness, hoping for that health, and their illness is harmful.
And so do not agree with the one who comes to you about this manner; and your caution should be greater than greediness and your desire. And do not presume any reason about this but only a certain knowledge that verifies what is done, and towards which there is a possible success.
And use in the treatment of all your ailments from prediction and indication to which health is converted, where in that there is help for you concerning acquisition of fame and memory, praise and glory.
Oh, children, God prays for your understanding and does not withhold direction and protection from you, as that is within his hand.
And I have ordered this chapter to be distinguished by chapters according to what was stated in the chapter on cautery, regarding the treatment of the head within the feet, so that you may find what you ask for and what you need from it.
Chapter first.
Regarding the treatment of water which is contained in the head of children.
Know that this illness, which is observed in children, requires delivery and when the baby is stronger, its head becomes soft.
And some operations occur due to hidden causes which are not known.
I have not seen this illness except in children; and for all those I have seen die by it, which is why I see these remnants of work in them.
And I have seen that a child had a head filled with water, and his head was always so magnificently expanded that it could not contain him due to the size of his head, and more than the wetness increased within that caused death.
And this moisture either gets added between the skin and the bone, or is added to it from outside over the skull.
For when the moisture is between the skin and the bone and the pus is little, then you should cut in the middle of the head with a crack across the width, and make the length of this crack contain two fingers so that the moisture flows out; this is the form of the spate:
And if the moisture is much increased and the pus is greater, then these are two cracks according to this manner:
And if the moisture is on the outside of the bone, as an indication from it you should open the corners of the head from every side and water is squeezed when you press that with your hand towards the inner parts, and it is not this hidden to you. And if you should cut in the middle of the head with three cracks according to this manner:
And at the beginning extract all the moisture; and strengthen these cracks with cloths and cottons; and around the fifth day smear oil over them from above and inside, then remove the membrane and treat the wound with vines and ointments, and strengthen the head evenly; and feed the patient with dry food of little moisture until the member is comforted and healed.
And it is another method of incision that considers the size of the pus collection and the accumulation of water, where sometimes the pus is more in the back of the head, or on the front side, or on the right, or on the left; and then pay attention to the location where you see the pus and its accumulation, and do this according to what suits you best.
And observe that do not cut the artery and let blood flow from it, instead allow the patient to heal through this blood flow in the elimination of moisture.
Chapter II.
When there's occurrence of certain catarrhs or pains in the nose or on the feet, and it is long-lasting, and you do not apply medicine therapy to this, then the best course of action here would be an incision for these two arteries.
And when you want to make an incision for the patient who raises their head with pain, then smooth over the spot with a rough cloth so that you can see the arteries, and make sure to strengthen the neck of the patient with some cloth; and consider where is the pulse; and the places above those which are close to the ears being depressed, they do not always remain hidden in some people.
And if it is necessary to touch the artery at attempt, and if you must enter any part of the diseased area into the opening, do so with a narrow instrument, for this is according to the width of the head.
And if you wish, insert a needle into the place and twist it at the points that touch the parts of it.
And the length of the incision should be about two inches adjusted, so that when any vein is cut, the heartbeat's exit is stopped, which jumps from time to time.
If the artery does not show in the palpation, then take the measurement of your hand for the size of the space of three inches, and if you must touch it, then make an incision into the opening.
And whatever that gets from the blood is a quantity of urine. And let him urinate either more or less, and all of this depends on the quantity that appears from the condition of the patient and the size of the artery of him.
And then consider the wound, therefore if there remains something in the opening that causes infection, then cut it out yourself so as not to develop a suppurating sore.
And then strengthen the wound with feathers and with lint from the cloth, and treat that with grease until it heals.
Chapter III.
On removing the arteries which are in the temples.
When something causes old headaches or sudden intense pains in the temples, due to humidity from agriculture and their quality in those pains, or old headache that seems like those, and are treated according to the methods of healing in medicine and this does not help, then we have focused on these illnesses: removal of the arteries in the temples, or cauterization of those as well as we have shown.
The method of the operation and removal of those is that the patient raises their skin which is in the temples; and understand the artery visible in the temple where it is shown by its pulse, and this is hidden even in a few people due to forceful rubbing.
And if it is hidden, then the head of the patient should be strengthened with some cloth; and then rub the area with a hard cloth or evaporate the place with hot water until you see the artery clearly manifestly. And then take the needle of which this is the form: And then you cut the thread with it at that place for ease of passing into the artery; and let him urinate in a pot and remove from the surface areas into which you remove that part of the thread, uncovering those layers of tunics that are underneath, from all parts.
If the artery is delicate, then wrap it at the tip of the needle, and if you must cut from that part according to the length by which its ends extend and are constricted, and do not allow any blood flow; for if they are not cut, the blood will rise up entirely.
And then evacuate of urine. In three parts.
And if the artery is large, then take care that you place it in two places with double strength at each or with cords long, and do not allow him to become rotten before healing the wound and prevent blood flow.
And then cut off the surplus that is between two pieces of lint; and do this either at that time or some other time.
And if you wish, cauterize that with a cautery into the opening with a surgical knife until its ends are cut off, and remain at the place of that operation.
And it is better work if the patient has fever or is of thin complexion; for cautery comes from those causes that help in finishing humidity, and so it is better in youth.
And it is proper to perform the removal of arteries that you place near the old cut, and have them placed over your finely ground powder, and then let them be treated with dry medicines until the flesh comes out and within which they heal.
And if while you are working on another wound blood from the artery starts to flow out, then you restrain that blood, or with a cautery, or you fill the old cut area, and strengthen your hand until the blood is restrained. And if none of those causes are present to you at that time, then hold your finger on the area until the blood coagulates, and smear the area with water from intense coldness until the heat subsides, and strengthen it according to how you do.
And that which is pus in the removal of arteries is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery having two needles, because you have touched both areas at the point, and then remove each by fire, until they pass into the opening and cut off the vein in two places, so that it becomes extended where its ends are not fully consolidated from this cautery.
And this is how you perform the cautery:
And let the heat of both needles be the same. However, if they are more sensitive fires than two needles are better, for if they are sharp like two needles near any skin, and do not cut the flesh at speed.
Therefore, when there is some thickness in those cases, the heat of the fire is contained in those and the flesh is cut slightly.
This operation is better in all operations and even lighter.
And those spaces which are between the two hips, the amount of pregnancy of the said person.
Head quarter.
Regarding the treatment of illnesses involving sharp and acidic tears in the stomach.
When it's about acidic tears, and this is the body of those veins which are on the forehead in front, and no medical cause should be applied to any cure, and sometimes the face of the patient reddens and walks around as if it was a walk of ants, and their breaths are exhausted, moistened in such a way that their skin has already been exposed, and their eyelids are scratched by the sharpness of tears. The old ones often struggle with treating those from this operation, and most prefer this treatment to any other cure.
And you command the patient to scrape off the skin which is on their forehead, and then you make three equal distance slashes across the forehead according to its length. And if the length of the slash is two digits: the first slash should be at an equal distance from the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second according to the length of a little bit less than the movement of tears which are in the lacrimal area, and the third on the opposite side.
And watch out for the beginning of the arteries which are in two places, and extend your hand from the continuation of both jaws. And if the space from each beginning is three digits adjusted in quantity.
And if you have a sponge or a damp cloth, wring it out so that the moisture disappears.
And then introduce the tip of two sharp points, this is the shape of the incision for him/her: which enters from the division of the temples into the second incision. Scrape off all the string that is between two incisions on the skull which is above the bone, and then make this from the incision move into the second one. And then cut this point and enter into the first incision another tool which is called a surgical knife, sharp on one side and not sharp on the other.
And hold the sharp end of it you must cut off the connected flesh and the string, and the end of him inside the bone, and insert this into where it reaches the central slash, and remove all veins that descend from the head to the stomach.
May that the incision continues at this opening of the string, and then do this inside the central slash between the other slash.
And once there is an equal amount of blood flow, squeeze the places of the coagulated blood blisters.
And then pause at each central part of age, and pause over those powders that are in oil and vinegar and wine mixed, and check that no pus forms.
And on the third day, dissolve the bandage and apply large quantities of boiled water or tea, then treat this with balm oil and others among which the wounds are healed.
Head .v.
Regarding the treatment of tears by cathartic and for those stomachs descending from the divisions inside the head.
When you apply a cathartic to one of the veins and continue it, and sometimes exhaust the patient's stomachs with it, and their examination becomes confused. Their eyelids are ulcerated and their skin is affected around the head, and in the front of the head there is intense toothache followed by consequent extreme pain, then you know from these accidents that the substances and cathartics do not come from veins inside the divisions that originate.
And the best cure in these cases is this: you command the patient to raise their forehead, then make a slash at the middle of the forehead that is small for width (and start from the slit on the left temple towards the right temple; and the incision goes through the bone; and extend your hand along the tendons where they are tight due to chewing), inside which the bone should be revealed.
Dry all the blood with a sponge or with a dry cloth, and then fill in between the two lips of the slit with some old cloth or linen. And then sprinkle over it finely powdered and well mixed in oil, in such a way that no pus forms.
And when you remove that and see that the pus has decreased, then command to clean inside the bone which starts in his mouth, and then treat it with a drying regimen which makes flesh resemble flour from wheat, as if you take two parts of flour and four parts of honeycomb sugar syrup and mix them, and make plaster from these and apply it to these wounds as if they were native flesh.
Head .vi.
Regarding the treatment of what cures in the earlobes.
All causes that cure in the earlobes are of four types, some or it is mineral gravel causing something similar to gravel, such as iron and lead, or it could be caused by plants like dandelion or fava beans, or it's a flowing cause like water and vinegar mixed together and resembles them, or perhaps some kind of animal.
And when gravel is in the earlobe or another similar cause of those causes that do not settle into the earlobe, and expose the earlobe to sunlight, and if you find the gravel, then distill some oil extracted from saffron or turmeric on it, then administer its extraction, make him sneeze with a condition, and hold his nose until the sneezing begins. And then place on the lymphatic circuit some pieces of cloth or wool, and extend the lymphatic system to these parts, where swollen veins are affected by these causes.
And if you do not find it affected, then administer the removal of him using the tool called the gentle epiploagia instrument under which this is its form:
And if it is affected by the node, that's good; and otherwise, then administer the removal of him using the small slender instrument of lesser duplication.
And if it is not affected by this, then make a thread and introduce the tip of the thread into the duct of the lymph node and encase around the vicinity of the thread with wax and with soft soothing oil so that it does not open except for the thread. And then extract from your womb with strong suction, where swollen areas like this that we have discussed are found.
And if it is not affected in this manner, then take some alum or vinegar and on which are fastened wicks with one small quantity of wax each, and place that under the tip of the tongue, and then wrap that somewhat decently around it. And then introduce that into the duct of the lymph node with ease, and then remove the lymph node from the moisture.
And if it is not affected by all the causes that we have recounted, then take care to cut out that before it develops into abscess or spasm.
And the method of cutting out that is as follows: at the beginning, sense the site where the phlegmatic vein is and extract from there according to the virtue of it, then make a small incision between your hands and convert the lymphatic system to these parts. Then make a tiny fissure in the root of the lymph node and apply its grease in the spot that was pressed by you. And if the fissure is of lunar figure until it reaches the skin, and when the skin has healed, leave that alone if you can with suitable instruments; and quickly with this in the same position, cure that inside so that it heals.
And if the cause affecting the lymph node is one of the fats that grows and inflates, then administer the cure and removal of it; but if it does not respond to your efforts, then take a thin needle according to this form: And administer the removal of that lump which is found inside the lymph node.
And do not remove it when you think that it is already moistened by the steam of the lymph node, place it in several pieces and then extract from those towards the kidneys or at gentle epiploagia, or use a similar method as we have described, which facilitates the removal of it.
And in the water that enters the lymph node channel, let the patient use sneezing with a cold at the beginning, and fill his lymphatic sac with a piece of old cloth, and lay this water on the lymph node area where there is water. If it does not respond to this treatment, that's good; and otherwise, take several small pieces and lemons according to their length as described, then heat these slightly in fire for a while, and have the patient insert one of these into his lymphatic duct and heat over this part by placing another cloth piece on top of it, and knock it with another piece of cloth that is inside the lymph node. Then continue this with the cloth until all the water has swollen.
Then continue this with the cloth until all the water has swollen. And when the water has swollen as described, take paper or gauze instead,. And place one end of it inside the lymph node, and extend the other end into fire until its tip is burned.
And then place another gauze and do this several times until all the water has swollen, and cut it with a thread as described of the draining cloth.
And for the removal of beasts entering that lymph node, if they are small creatures, in larger quantities and resembling them, treat it as we have said in the division; but if they are large creatures causing pain inside the body, then administer their removal through gentle epiploagia and the kidneys, and the cause is much lighter than all other causes that occur within the lymph node.
And for the removal of worms that are born within the lymph node, when you treat it with what we have said in the division and in the distillation treatment, do not let your treatment fail; instead, watch the lymph node as if you were looking at the sun.
And if here appears any cause of the worms, then remove it through gentle epiploagia or using slender instruments; but if no cause is found, then take a tube that is bent and widened above, this being the form of it: And introduce the small tip into the lymph node according to the amount that the patient can tolerate; and then suck through strong suction, making this several times until all the worms have swollen.
And if it does not respond to your efforts, then fill and seal around the tube's circuit with wax as we have described; then administer distillations that have already swollen during the treatment of worms, and consult this section on distillations.
And make your application at the place where you pour the medicinal oils into the lymph node with this instrument, as described here: And make that one out of silver or ivory, leave it straight, in which there is a small hole, and place something hard on top.
And so let them come to what is within the cavity of the large intestine here where it is necessary. And if you wish, take the rod and wrap it around the extremity of their descent with a cloth, and then pour oil into the cavity of the lung, or juice from any herb, or whatever you choose from these medicines in the tube - that one is in the ear - , and then place the rod with the cloth on top, pressing gently inside them until the oil is expelled into the cavity of the lung, and the patient feels the oil internally.
And what is enclosed in the ear should already be cut with fire a little bit. And remember that if you are distilling in the ear, it should not be too hot; for the medicines of the ear do not tolerate this.
Chapter VII.
On the treatment of removing wax from the ears.
Some children have small perforations in their mothers' abdomens that do not penetrate to the ear; and this happens sometimes in some adults as well, when an obstruction or a mass of flesh gets stuck inside the ear. This type of wax removal is done either at the opening of the ear canal where it does not touch the membrane, or outside parts of it.
And this one that occurs at its opening doesn't touch the membrane and is in more difficult situations for treatment.
And when you can reach the membrane, take the ear of the patient to the sun and look into it. And if you see an obvious obstruction, open that with a subtle spoon which is this shape:
If the tip of it where the width is small has one sharp part and the other not; and the spoon be of two long sides such that it doesn't harm the ear.
And if the obstruction is inside the ear or in its flesh, take this thin needle and pierce it strongly inside so that all the flesh is pierced.
And if the obstruction is in the opening of the ear, take this thin metal rod and heat it slightly over fire, then place it into the ear canal.
And if you have felt the obstruction with this, so that the patient feels ease when they hear, relieve the pressure on them with ease; and remember not to injure the nerves of the ear.
And place on the ear a bandage according to the size of the opening of the hole that you have covered with the wax from the Egyptian ointment; do this for several days until you are sure of the healing process; or take any herb and immerse it in water, crush it finely and use it. And if you see that the ear is already swollen, then soak the same thing in water and apply its juice over the dry wound, using it. If you notice pus formation, then take out that substance and replace it with another piece of something you have coated in rubbed oil, until the pustule discharges; and continue to care for this until it heals.
If pus should occur, then soak the sponge or bandage in water and apply it over the ear, and use another treatment that thins out the pus from the infection, which is mentioned in the chapter on distillation.
Chapter VIII.
On the treatment of atresia affecting the eyelids.
Atresia (obstructions) that occur in the eyelids of newborns; sometimes they are moist, and other times they are dry.
Then take them with tweezers or forceps, and sever the parts of these sticks that are in their hair, and place them on the spots finely ground.
If pain occurs with pus flow, then you use a small pointed cautery to cauterize those on the tubercle.
And the best cautery is when the incisions are close and if there are pus discharges they return only as long as a cause of the said hair remains; and when they are burned with fire, those hairs are burned and do not recur.
Chapter IX.
Treatment for swelling that occurs in the eyelids of newborns.
Swelling that occurs in the eyelids of newborns is caused by something resembling swelling in its strength and hardness; therefore, it is called swelling.
It's an addition of large moisture on the eyelid(s), below.
So, in this case, you consider if the swelling is coming out from under the eyelid and is larger than any other part; and the cause of it is minor.
Then make an incision across its width, and then carefully squeeze it from all sides until it drains completely, and finally hang it up with forceps and cut off that which is left.
And if the shape is large, then you adjust it with stitches; and care for this until it heals.
And if it's small, there will be no harm from that because the inflammation of it restores and renews.
And if the largest one is declining inside the parts of the eyelid you need to flatten the surface inside, then lift up the large one with an onion, another that you choose at the beginning, and press it all around. If the eyelid is stretched from the beginning, do not worry about any cause.
And at the beginning, wash the wound with salt water; and treat the area with water where it swells until it is healed.
I apologize for any confusion earlier. It seems that your message might have contained a typo or was cut off before completion. If you need assistance with another piece of text, translation request, or any other inquiries, feel free to provide the full details so I can help appropriately.
For the cure is performed on the eyelid above the wound.
Axcirnath is caused by grey matter that is produced in the tunics of the eyelid above, and it is more common in children, aggravating their wounds; and they lose their ability to look at the brightness of the sun because as a result, their tears tend to run into those areas.
And you should make them say about those times on their faces all the time, and on their face while they sleep; and they leave wet eyelashes on their eyebrows for them, which are already covered with swelling and anticipation of the beginning in the eye; and that when you press the area with your fingers, you feel a spongy inside those.
And for some surgical method is in that when the patient puts their head on your hand, then you place a cloth over them and make an incision, and make a circle according to the quantity which contains pus from all parts. Then place that one over the other and press with your fingers around so that spongy tissue is added inside the middle of the circle, and in the middle of that wetness, you make a cut across the width, and the cut should not be wider than the cut made in lumbotomia.
Make sure in the preparation that you cut through completely until you reach pus, which after the worst positions, process pus through a cut according to the shape of white fat.
Then extract those with the cloths that you have enveloped between your fingers in the back parts, and stir between your right and left hand until it is dispersed.
And be careful not to squeeze through the cut on your own, making sure that the fluid doesn't reach the wound and avoid that.
If you don't find pus at the beginning of the cut, then adjust inside the cut with something that facilitates, as you process pus; and do so similarly to what we have said; and apply wet cloths in water and vinegar over the area, strengthen those with powder.
And thus they sprinkle salt and leave it in the cavity of the cut, so that what is left from that wetness.
And then treat it until it is healed.
If an abscess forms in the area, then treat it with plaster bandages until it is healed.
I apologize for any confusion earlier due to misinterpretations or errors. If you need further assistance or translations, please provide the full text or context so I can help more accurately. Your request here seems to be asking for "Capitol xi", which might refer to a title or section in a larger document. Please clarify if there are specific lines or sections you wish translated or explained.
About the methods of examining the eye.
When in the eyelids of the eyes, they have thickened the hairs instead of their natural skin and are old, then those are in the eye and cause various issues like constant tears, puffiness of the eyelids and inner tissue, which is due to this cause leading to damage of the eye called inflammation of the eye. The treatment can be done through four methods: or with a cauterizer by fire; or with acute medicine as mentioned earlier in the section on cauterization; or by performing inflammation surgery via incision and suturing; or using canes, which I will explain further.
And thus when you place the head of the patient on your hand; then convert the eyelid of the eye to your left hand; if it is converted, it's good; and if not, insert a needle in that part where pus is present under the eyelid, and make the needle penetrate through below, and this - near the edge of the eyelid from where hair grows - near the hairs, pull out the string above on the eyelid, then convert it back to the original position.
And then make a cut inside the eyelid at places where hairs have thickened onto the horizontal line of the major lacrimal duct within the minor lacrimal gland; and then extract out that string and cover your eye with powder or cloth, and apply it to your eyelid like the shape of a mint leaf.
But when you do it, make sure the shape follows the amount of eye lid relaxation, which has already varied in humans, and among those are those who have had a considerable incision in the eyelid according to the extent that the eyelid becomes puffy.
And then apply on the two lines you have marked, starting from the major lacrimal duct towards the minor lacrimal duct. And if your cut is near the natural hairs like the thickness of a king's beard.
And then place the onion in one of the two corners of the string, and then scrape it completely off. Then adjust it towards the cut on both lips by the mouth or a thread of fine wool. Clean off any pus, and if you want to stick what remains from the threads over two eyebrows for certain causes, do so; otherwise, don't treat it.
And after three or four days, suture the wounds inside and attend to them.
And if you want, let the wound dry and suture it, attend to that as it dries and tightens. When the eyelid is swollen, you should seal the wound and add to it; more stitches are better. So do this for days until they understand the doctors' teachings.
However, in dealing with the sick person, it is a good operation, and not from fear.
And there is another way to check it, and that is that the figure on the eyelid resembles a leaf of myrtle, then lift the eyelid by three threads separately and gather them according to this form:
If this cannot be done, hold the threads, and if this is not equal, then take one needle with thread and put that in the middle of the figure, and insert the other thread close to the larger lacrimal duct, and the other thread according to the smaller lacrimal duct, and adjust between your fingers the threads equally, and when those are raised by your hand as high as equal elevation, raise the entire chain over which it is sutured thus as we have recounted.
And adjust the two flaps of the wound with stitches, and cure that inside which is healing.
And if you encounter an abscess, you should start or make your incision, but drain that abscess with wet compresses and match it to them, and apply ointment.
And sometimes there are inflammations under the eyelid that cause their hairs to fall out, so do as we instructed with incisions for that; more stitches in some cases are more artificial.
Doctoring on legs is according to this form: And this is that you transform the eyelid and divide the figure inside as I have recounted; then through art make two canals or two subtle lines whose length follows the length of the eyelid, and their width resembles the width of the nose. And you have already made incisions at the extremities of each part, where you have the threads.
And add each under what is superfluous of the eyelid of the sick person, and tighten the threads on each part's canals, and let that stand for a few days, when the canal by tightening will die off and be rejected and will pass so as to eventually fall out.
And if it has taken too long, then cut off the threads at the ends, and cure that wound which is healing.
So when it's solidified, the eyelid rises and the hairs do not poke.
And this is how you make two canals as follows: And have the quantity of length and width neither too much nor too little.
Chapter XII.
On raising hairs that poke in the nose with a forceps when the hair is hard.
When there are unnatural hairs that are hard and prickly and poke in the nose, then for this operation with you take a subtle forceps and hold it at the subtle point of each one, and adjust its ends in such a delicate manner that they are not noticed. And let the length of the threads be as long as a palm.
And then you can make another subtle thread from it quickly, and if you want use its ends.
And then place the sick person's head where you are, and be near the sun so that your work may be seen, for it is a delicate and small operation.
And then insert the needle into the hair root adjusted which requires a needle, and make it penetrate through the eyelid gently until you remove that above the natural hair.
And then pull the hair in and insert it into the groove, and let there be one or two or three hairs and no more.
And then pull your hand towards that where the hair has been pulled out into the groove in the eyelid with respect to the natural hair.
And if it is pulled into the groove and the hair is not out, pull it into each part towards the thread that you have made at that point, so that what would be pulled in by the root remains pulled.
And remove that from the nose's view, then you will pull it out gently and the thread too, and clean every part of the nose, and let the cleaning stand for two or three days, so that the hair sticks to its place and grows over that good flesh.
And if the hair is too short, then adjust a longer hair from the natural ones, and raise it up to that, or let it stand until it grows approximately in some space, and then you will lift that.
Chapter XIII.
On the treatment of excretions which occur on the eyelid above.
When excretions occur in the nose, which is when the eyelid contracts when it is tightened around its edges, or to the right or left side, due to poor consolidation of an inflammation, lesion or cautery, and this is called leporine. This contraction can be natural or accidental, caused by consolidation of inflammation, lesions, or cauterization, or due to their malfunctions.
The method of the operation is that you cut through this consolidation and separate its flaps. You should do it in such a way that there's a piece of linen cloth inside where there was inflammation, and tie these together until they heal.
And do not confuse the curing of his diseases which dry out, with constriction; for if you do this, it returns a worse illness than had previously existed without any time to heal.
Use in those remedies that soothe such as fenugreek, and soak it in water where the herbs are high up and simmered for a while, or apply almond oil, which when mixed with one of the oils becomes liquid, immerse the body in this, and cure with it.
And the treasure of your remedy is that you puncture through all the abdomen that is not consolidated according to the form that I will show at the beginning.
And this operation which we describe is nothing more than a correction of the hernia that does not return the shape of the area according to what is in front.
Chapter XIIIV.
Regarding the cure of hernias that occur in the eyelid, do this.
This hernia that occurs in the eyelid, which is called vertically herniated; and it is either of your body's own nature, or one that happens accidentally.
An accidental one is caused by a wound, or a cut, or a cautery, or other similar things.
And the way of performing this operation on it is that you take a needle in which you make a double thread, and place that in the flesh, and have it pass through the left lacrimal into the right lacrimal, so that the thread reaches both ends of the flesh.
And then extend the flesh to the upper parts on the needle and make it stick to the needle, and cut open that ample space. And if the figure of the eyelid returns as you see fit, it's good; and if not, take the thread and pause that at the cut figure, and with that reshape the eyelid, and make both cuts in the back of the eyelid.
And let the ends of the two cuts be at two corners of the incision you've made inside where they converge, and make that corner between them to form their figure when they come together.
And this figure is Greek letter: the Lambda.
And then remove that flesh piece up to that amount which is at the tip of your needle's point, so as to preserve the eyelid.
And then adjust the separated parts and sew those with the thread of wool; and then cure those with what we've said about soothing medicines and baths so that they heal.
And if a hernia is due to a cut or suture or cautery, then you should open it with a flat cut over the skin of the eyelid according to what has been described. And then separate with the hot bath between two lips as we have said.
In the summary of the discourse on hernia cure whether above or below, that flows in your operation according to how it is prepared from the shape of a hernia, and that one is in the form of various spots.
And all artisans prepare the abdomen in every manner possible that fits within it to make it return to its natural shape or close to it, and for this patient according to what suits them from the operation and tools in the best positions.
Chapter XV.
Regarding the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
When this solidification happens in multiple individuals, it means that the eyelid is too high above the white of the eye, and is restricted from the ease of movement and its natural actions. Therefore, you should insert the tip of your needle under the eyelid, elevate it with that, or extend it to your finger.
And then you cut the adhesion with a fine incision, not at the sharpness of the cuts, but more obtuse slightly so that the patient is not disturbed by the operation and you leave the incision undamaged that does not degrade the eye's sharpness.
And let your cut remove that adhesion with ease so that the eyelid returns to its natural shape and all the adhesion is healed.
And then, you put salt water into the eye, or distill it from junia dissolved in water.
And then separate between the eyelid and the eye with a hot bath, place wool soaked in egg white on the eye, and use strengthening remedies for several days so that it heals.
Chapter XVI.
Regarding incisions of the eyelashes and protrusion of flesh in the tear ducts.
You should know that an eyelash is in two ways, one being nervous and resembling a hard thin ciphac; or it's not-nervous, resembling white damp congealed, which when touched, or forces that take to your finger, is cut off and the finger does not stick to you.
And both types only start from the major tear duct, gradually spreading that covers the view and prevents light and eye movement.
As for the way to work in an incision is that the patient holds their head in its usual place, then open their eyes, and lift the eyelid with your hand, then collect the eyelash on a small duplicate finger and extend it upwards. And then take a needle and insert a horse hair or a cow's hair or a calf hair, or of another similar strong material, or double the end of the needle gradually and place that in the middle of the eyelash, penetrate that with the needle, and tie it to your finger; then extend that upwards, cut out its back part which hardens the pupil. And thus follow that in front of the patient's abdomen.
And then you incise the remaining in the root of the tear duct through a small cut or with tiny scissors, and removes the natural flesh of the tear duct so that there will be no continuous flow of tears due to this procedure.
And some times the thumb is extended or at the elbow, as we have said, and then it's excised through a small cut of which this is the shape:
And remember that when making the cut do not touch the corneal membrane and ensure there's no break in it, also make sure not to pierce the pupil.
And the incision should be made close to the nostril with a little salt or a needle made of iron, and leave that inside until the next day; then take care of it in water so that it heals.
And if the thumb is not sensitive and you can't put the needle there, or it's located at that part of the elbow, then treating this type of thumb with medicines works, and it heals in this way as I've recommended in the division.
And if you want to incise that, then open the space between the patient's thighs and make a small incision with an acute iron needle according to this form: with subtlety. And if you notice that this is weakened and mixed with the root, then pour from your mouth into the nostril made of iron or with an iron knife, or with ground salt, and fill the nostril until the next day.
And then proceed with the operation until all that is from you has been removed, otherwise if it's not this way an abscess will remain in the nostril. Then leave that and start treating the abscess until it heals.
And then proceed with your operation on that at pace until it is healed.
The urgency of the tear flesh, if noticed in the nostril due to great damage, should be suspended at the nostril; and incise that part from there, and do not finish the incision so as not to cause a continuous flow of tears.
And then pour into the tear duct with iron and steel, until it heals.
Chapter XVII.
Regarding the incision of the nasal bone and what is born from adjusted flesh in the nostril.
Some tears in the nostrils of some people result from swollen flesh, and it's placed above covering the pupil, or presses close to or strengthens near the eyelids, forcing the eyelids to press against parts further away and is assembled touching the cheekbone.
The operation when it comes to the patient is that their head stops at its place; and then open the nostrils of this one and collect all that flesh with suitable incisions for this, and hold this with forceps or a pair of tongs; and then cut the flesh starting point until everything is finished with the scissor, remember when working on the nostril you mustn't let it descend, you should perform your operation.
And your incision should be with the needle through which you cut those or with an iron rod which we have recommended in the incision of the thumb, or with tiny scissors where you can collect the snail according to how this head resembles this chapter.
And when your incision is completed and all that flesh has been removed, then fill the nostril with salt water, or pour it with iron dust, or resembles it from the corrosive medicines as a powder, and place over the nostril somewhat away with the white of egg until an abscess lump is assured.
And if there's any cause for nasal bone and it's swollen due to coldness, and you fear an abscess lump, then leave the nostril and treat that abscess with water that reduces that abscess, and then proceed with your operation until it heals, similarly do this on the flesh which occurs in the nostril of this type.
However, remember to let the healing of the nostril happen naturally or through an accident, do this with iron and don't put your hand in any of these operations until you see that that member is enduring this operation.
Chapter XVIII.
Regarding the collection of wax in the nostril.
Wax are veins made of iron that are hard in the nostril and prevent their operation, so empty the nostril along its length over days.
So it's necessary at the beginning that you consider whether the nostril in which there is wax is strong and there is no other malady besides wax, then you collect that wax.
And it's that you command the patient to place their head at its own location, and then suspend those veins with an iron or two according to your judgement; and make that iron of slight duplication as follows:
or make it two irons gradually in one body as follows:
And then collect those veins with subtle forces, with subtlety, and remove the cold as soon as you can, until you see that these veins have been removed from the nostril and are reversed.
And remember not to lead the nostril towards the ends of the needle. If your operation is in midday facing the sun and you are firmly focused on your operation, make sure you only cut these veins and nothing else.
And when you have completed it, then you should let the heat of a green herb or rosemary work to intensify what is already inside from the knife.
If it's not possible for you to collect all of this in that hour, then later you should plaster over everything that causes the pain in him/her, and leave him/her for a few days until the pain is relieved and the abscess has healed.
And then apply it over him/her according to the mother's method until he/she is healed.
And this is the form of a scythe:
Chapter XV
On reducing hernias to the nose.
When you treat hernias with a cautery or with hot penetrating medicine after the description of it has been given and it is not cured, then there's no use for you in him/her but you need to make an incision over the abscess, and remove all moisture that is in him/her until the bone is revealed.
And therefore when the bone is discovered and there's corruption or blackness in his/her body, then you need to dress him/her with an herb like this:
And it's called hard grass, and it's made of iron indigo, and the head of it is red like that of an asir which is pierced by a puncture from a saw or finely ground (like in the following form).
And place that over the corrupted part of the bone, and then move it around with your fingers, and gently press your hand little by little until you know that this corruption is smooth.
And do this a few times, and then restore the area with causes of drying out and tightening.
So if the area is consolidated and there's good flesh in his/her abdomen and it's removed from the inflammation and rests for 40 days, and it's not renewed and doesn't heal and nothing happens to him/her by chance, then you will know that he/she has healed.
But if not, then it's not in his/her stomach but to reduce the fissure to the form of the nose, and according to this method: you need to uncover from second bone or with acute medicine, when the bone is discovered, then you take a tool according to this form:
Let the end of the iron be triangular, and the main part of the tool is first extended into the end like this.
And then place that on the bone, and let it be close to the lacrimal; extend your hand a little from the herb, and move your hand towards the tool until it penetrates all the bone, and feel the patient through his/her hand when you find an opening in which air can escape him/her.
And then restore the area with tightening medicines, drying them out like this.
And when the flesh and the area are hardened, then that matter which flowed to the remote parts returns to the nose, so that this pus is lighter on the patient.
Chapter XX
On reducing the swelling of the herb (or perhaps 'reduction of the prominence of the nose').
When the nose swells up to its entirety and nothing happens by inflammation or diminishment, then you should let the patient breathe, and continue, and place breaths in the neck region of your incision with good bleeding; and then place a liniment over the nose which is made from garlic and aloe vera and onions and wheat bran, and strengthen the plaster on the nose with powdered paste.
The method of the powders is that you take cloths of lion's hair wool, and each cloth is divided into four pieces; and make from those pieces.
And then place those one on top of the other according to the quantity which the nose needs. And then strengthen over those with hard cloth and strong stricture; apply the suckers on the bleeding incision area; and remove the suckers and straighten the nose throughout the day and night.
If during this time the ligament is softened, then you should ensure that it's straightened out.
And keep the ligament stretched throughout the day and night as we have said.
And if the nose has already been reduced, that's good, and if not, then continue applying the plaster with powders and stricture and suckers until healed.
Chapter XXI
On removing the swelling of the uveal layer (perhaps referring to the eye).
When disruption occurs in the uveal layer, and it swells out like a small bump, and shapes itself like a person through this, and you want to remove this lump, then according to what we have advised, you need to insert the needle into the opening of the uvea in the part left from the part above, and then place another needle with twice the length of the lacrimal side into it, and make that penetrate and move the first needle according to its position; and then cut the double thread area, lift up the uvea part along the line of the needle, and strengthen that paste.
And then extract the needle, place wool infused in egg white on the nose and wait until the thread falls into the eye.
And then treat the nose with what makes it comfortable while the wound heals.
And add some times around the entire area with a layer of cloth around the nose to adjust for large swelling, and then pierce through the fine needle that goes into the tip of the nose, allowing the aqueous moisture to flow out, causing the nose to descend and settle in place.
And then strengthen inside so that it may be healed.
Chapter XXII.
On the treatment of hernias.
This disease, which is called hernia, is simply an ailment that adheres to the belly like descending water and is not that one.
The method of working on it is to have the patient lie down on the padded seat and straight, and then take hold of his limbs from both sides and push inward where you see the disease approaching your parts, and then dry it out so that it does not descend, and remain until the end, and the patient saw the reasons thus as they appeared.
And if it doesn't descend below, know that it's water.
And if it hasn't been prepared for the descent of the disease as we have said, then have the patient lie between your hands and take a subtle knife and place it under the belly on the membrane, cutting just a little in the continuation of the conjunctiva at the tunica cornea in the corona (into the location wanted), where the disease has been removed.
So when it's been removed, then you distil into the belly a water cauldron in which you have mixed honey or water in which you already have boiled fenugreek and honey.
And then it's cured of the other causes while it is being healed.
Chapter XXII.
On the treatment of descending water in the belly.
We have already mentioned the properties of water in the division and which is suitable for piercing when declared, then that according to health.
Then cover so that you make the patient lie down between your hands on a hard surface and place his belly flat, with strong pressure.
And place your right hand close to the belly's eye socket, if the eye is where there's water, it's the left eye; or with your right hand, if the eye is on the right side.
And place your right hand with an almond, if the eye is on the left side; or with your left hand, if the eye is on the right.
And place the end of the almond near the crown due to pregnancy in the sacculus of the eye on the aqueous humor's side from the tear duct, and then peel the almond with its virtue and turn your hand there.
And penetrate into the aqueous humor and feel that the almond has already been spread due to viewing.
And cover so that it matches the size of the almond's path to the pupil is equal to the space, which is from the pupil to the end of the darkness, this is the crown of the eye; you will see the pupil through your vision with the clarity of the cornea.
And place the almond in the location where there's water, and then draw it down once or twice, so when the water descends immediately, you observe the patient looking with their vision right away, and the almond on their eye.
And rest for a little while; so when the water has descended, then you remove that almond again before the almond is heated.
And therefore when it's finished and doesn't descend, then you extract the almond easily, and turn your hand little by little towards that place, and dissolve a small piece of clear salt from gemma in water; then wash the inside of your eye with that water; and then cover your eye again with a stopper or cotton dipped in rubbing oil and albumen mixed with water.
And may those who are of our time cover it up like this with the albumin of egg.
And if the almond doesn't fit inside your eye due to its hardness - which is something in some people where their eye is hard moving - then cover so that you take the knife known as "alberid" whose form is this:
And then pierce that conjunctiva with it, and don't let your hand end in the tear duct, but do make a path to the almond located inward.
And place the almond as we have said.
And you must complete your work, ensure that the patient sleeps in a descending manner after letting them rest on their back in a dark room, and forbid all movements.
And rest in the nature of him with water so that it can refine his nature, and don't let his head go to the right or left part at all.
And have the bedding according to their disposition inside the bed frame.
And then prepare them in that dark room and let the eyes see some causes, and return them to the regular bed on the seventh day.
And cover so that you do this during the hours of treatments or shortly after the infusion. Have covered so that you remove this for yourself where water can barely pass by great and strong observation.
And if it happens that there's a boil, then cover so that you remove the eye before the seventh day, and correct that with water that allows the boil to come out.
And then you take back your vision of them and rest on their face near their mouth which governs the smell of their breath for some days, existing in that dark room.
And then gradually get rid of that darkness and discuss about his causes.
And know that in an operating room, the student should not see any injuries, and then you should be attentive during the operation.
And now it has reached us from some of those which are in the Artach, and others say that in the Ayrac, with a heated needle that pierces through to drain water.
Nevertheless, I have not seen such perfect treatment in our land, nor is this method found in any of the ancient texts; and it's possible that this treatment is new.
And these are the forms of the types of drains so that one can use them on those who don't know how to handle them:
And they should be made of bone or metal properly, and their ends have this subtle triangular shape, the pointed end like that is the form.
Chapter XXIV.
Regarding the treatment of wounds in the nose.
When there are various kinds of wounds in the nose from which one can cause an ailment that is assembled into the weighty poison, or into a land polyp; this disease is called polypus being akin to that land as it represents. And if his nose is cancerous, discolored, of a dark hue; and from him it's that the nose is of lion not of a dark color.
Therefore in that one which is in these lion-colored but not fraudulent or cancerous tissues, know to make the patient sweat between your hands and expose them to sunlight, and inhale their nostrils, and pinch with your thumbs in those tissues. And then remove that in the parts beyond, and carefully discontinue what you've understood from those at the sharp, subtle opening of one part inside where you know that all the tissue has been removed. If there's a cause within the patient for which removal is possible, then do so with this one among the finer tools to facilitate its extraction if it causes harm within. And if the nobleman is afflicted with an abscess or a pus-filled area, then pause for him this sweating; or if it's from malign pus, then you should cut and cauterize that where the disease has spread and all cavities have been opened.
And when there is bleeding in the nose near the discontinuation, add water or vinegar. And if the nose has opened and from him there is moisture within the palate, then know that he is already healed.
And if the moisture does not penetrate as he sweats, then know that inside him there is no pus in the nasal bones from which dissection has been done.
And when sweating begins from him to the extent that there is any swelling, use hot fat on him in his sweat, and pause between each nut of fat with an amount equivalent or monthly, and make the patient sweat and insert one end of the reed into his nose either towards the ray or for another cause which is possible for him.
And once this has been done, let him inhale his odor until it reaches the canals of his nose, and be seated on his couch, which attracts many injuries akin to this action that children perform at schools, and is a slight reason for whoever wants to do so.
And then pause both ends of the reed, one end that lies above the nose and the other that penetrates into the nose, and prepare suture in the fat which is on the reed, and do this until you know that the tissues are already on the fat of the reed.
And then remove the reed, pause in the nose near the extraction of pus with a small knife, and do this for three days or more until the liquid that comes out from the tissues is no longer pus.
And then at the end of the treatment, leave a lead tube in the nose for several days until he is healed.
And if you have finished with the treatment that dries out (wounds), use this method.
And this is the form of the tool called nose purger, which distills oils and medicines in the nose:
And do this with silver or wood, which resembles a small open lamp, like a small basin, and the shape is similar.
And if you want, make a closed tube like a reed, and the tip of this tool for nose purging is flat, exposed; on which there should be a handle at the end part of it, from where you guide that when you immerse in oil or whatever you want from its fluids and easily extractable substances.
Chapter XXV.
Chapter XXV deals with blisters in the extremities of the nose.
Blister-like injuries are found in the extremities of the nose, it becomes inflamed and oozes over several days during which the condition of the patient is observed.
And for this reason, when you notice it in the beginning stages of its appearance, eradicate all of that. And then place over the spot or apply a cautery or burning medicine where it was.
If her appearance takes too long before it magnifies, then consider if it is pus-filled, hard, dark-colored and of little sensation; in this case do not touch that with iron which is a pustule; those reddened spots around that which incises this pustule are likely due to the great malice of that upon which that one had.
And if the pustule is leon-colored and not dark in color, and there are times that an incision is possible throughout all of it, then evacuate the patient and incise that black spot with caution, and treat the area where discharges occur so that it becomes healed.
Chapter XXVI.
Chapter 26.
Understand that when you encounter the dissolution of continuity in one of these cartilages, there is little need to intervene during such an operation rather than in some individuals.
So sew, when you encounter any cause of those, consider if it is a fresh ulcer at its site, then adjust both the edges of the wound's lips with sewing, and afterwards treat that area so that it becomes healed.
And if the lips of continuity dissolution are already separated, and one is made healthy, then sew that you remove any part of its outward manifestation while ensuring no infection remains. And then adjust both the edges of the wound with sewing and strengthen those; upon them sprinkle powdered dragon's blood and apply a dressing. Place a blob of diafinicon paste or another consolidating plaster on the powder, and let that be in place for two or three days. Then remove it, replace the plaster, and allow it to heal where the granulation tissue will detach itself naturally, and treat with ointment until it is fully healed.
The method of sewing involves adding the continuity's dissolution to the needle as we have recommended in the abdominal sewing, or add the continuity's dissolution with granulation tissue so that you know how to proceed.
Chapter 27.
Chapter 27.
Reddish spots appear around the lesions in the divisions of their lips such as hard pustules resembling fat from tumors, and some are smaller while others are larger.
So sew that you transform the lips and each of those hard consistencies at every part, then fill the removal with a covering of trissat so that the infection is strengthened, and afterwards wash it with vinegar and treat the area where there's constriction until it heals.
Chapter 28.
Chapter 28.
Redness appears above the adjusted flesh in the gums which the ancients called "albulum", so sew that you suspend that with an awl or whatever you have for this task and incise it while maintaining its continuity, allowing the healthy blood to flow or the infection to drain.
And then place on that area with trissat or other constricting powders, or exfoliating agents.
And if that flesh returns, then incise that again, and apply the cautery to it; the resulting coagulation will not return.
Chapter 29.
Chapter 29.
When there are rough spots, lumps, and sometimes blackish discharges within the divisions of teeth, as well as in the anterior areas and between gums, they lead to corrosion and yellow or greenish exudates appear through this decay, resulting in soft teeth.
So sew that you separate the patient from your assistants and place their head on this spot, then remove the teeth where those rough spots and similar conditions appear so that no serious cause remains from them, doing this for blackness, yellowing, and other changes until they are altered.
So if it is the same as what is in those of the beginning of tooth decay, good; otherwise, you repeat the tooth extraction on those and to the next day and then again until you reach the last molar where you want.
Know that teeth require various sizes of drill bits and different types of tools according to how you prepare for your operation. And know that the drills for removing teeth from their internal divisions are different than those used to scrape between teeth in other ways; these drill bit forms should be prepared by you and you will see them shortly:
Chapter 30.
Chapter 30.
So sew that you treat the tooth for its pain across all of your skills and take care in total tooth extraction, noting that there is no cause for the swelling to remain after removal when it is removed, using sublimated substance as a relief during tooth extraction.
When the patient insists on having that tooth extracted, you must firmly ascertain which tooth is causing pain; red spots separate the pain and fall from under a healthy tooth when removed, so you extract that tooth, and then the pain does not cease until the diseased tooth is also removed; we have seen this through operations on rabbits.
When determining if you are certified to know which tooth hurts and having the knowledge, then cut in the area of the tooth where there is some virtue, within which it's dissolved from the tooth of the gum all around, and gradually move that with your fingers or through fine knives starting at the tip, until it reaches the desired point.
And when applying pressure to the patient's muscles with large force for good communication or tension, place the head of the sick between your knees such that you have to avoid causing it pain, and move the tooth according to its correct direction in a way that does not break it, nor cause greater pain to the patient.
And if it is not extracted properly, then take one of those instruments, and place this under them from all sides with ease, trying to remove the obstruction so that it works as intended.
If the tooth is broken or corroded, then cover that with a cloth and hold it at the subtle tip's end firmly so that it does not get stuck during your compression on it while holding.
And when you open exquisitely during the incision all around of the gum tissue and maintain your strength not to break it and damage any part of them, return over the patient for the cunningness that is greater than their initial pain.
And remember not to do what the ignorant barber surgeons do during their rash excision and recklessness in eradication, as they don't administer what we have advised; large diseases can be brought upon men from such operations which are more difficult than being stuck by them, or all of their wounds become inflamed, or some of those wounds, or when you remove that among bones of the jaw like visible things we have testified.
And after removing it from him, rinse his mouth with water or add salt to it.
And if there is pus coming out of it, like visible things do, then apply a certain amount of garlic and sprinkle it on the wound; if that garlic does not work, apply cautery.
The shape of the forceps and delicate tongs under which the tooth is held at the beginning should be long at the outer end, short in the handle and thick, so that they do not bend when you work with those.
And they should be such that within them, when stretching them to those, they are not bent, but have long handles.
And they should be made of Indian iron with long handles, and the outer ends of those have teeth of which one nestles into the other and stretches through compression from the bottom up strongly, some visible are the outer ends of those like the bill of a bird that has the name stork, it is a harness, and they have strong construction.
Chapter XXXI
On the removal of teeth and extraction of jaw bones that are pierced.
When you need to remove a tooth that is pierced, then take care to press on the area with your fingers for one day or two until the place becomes softened; and then enter with force or use the handles of those which are assembled like the bill of a bird called stork or a harness, the shape of the forceps:
The outer ends of them should be made inside like a file or an axe.
And if you do not adhere to this sense with these forceps or tongs, then take care to dig into the root and remove all the flesh and insert the tool which is called an awl, it's a small lever whose shape is like this:
And may have a short outer end thick at one end, and not be bent because it should not pierce.
So if the root is extracted by this means, it's good; otherwise, help yourself with these other instruments whose forms are like this: the first tool has a triangular outer end which has some thickness:
The second tool's shape is that it should be triangular and have a more delicate outer end.
And already using this tool having two ramps, as this is the shape about the next: And with other tools which precede in tooth cleaning; as when done with this tool that resembles a large wild boar, and this is its shape:
Of the triangular twisted or short outer end which has some thickness and is not bent because it should not pierce.
And you should know that tools for cleaning teeth are like these, and similarly the other tools.
May those artisans be wise and subtle in their art, discover for themselves according to what this operation means to them and the various illnesses; they are of the illnesses to which the ancients would neither say nor use proper instruments, due to the different shapes.
If it is pierced the bone of the jaw or other bones of the mouth, then place your weight on that in its place according to what suits them for the tools and forceps as we have said in the extraction of tooth roots, help yourself with this gesture whose shape is:
And make it of some thickness gradually, and hold or keep it in the mouth so that it doesn't escape or go into the bone until all the bone is extracted; then return to restore the place with suitable medicines.
If there is a small pus pocket in the bone, then cut through that part of the pus and its darkness, and treat that inside so it may heal.
Chapter xxxii.
On the treatment of prominent teeth over others.
When the teeth are prominent not according to their natural position by that form being set, and especially when it happens in women, especially in the most venerable old ladies; hence consider this: if a tooth is close to another tooth, and there's no possibility of extraction or use of a balm on it, then that one is implanted; but if it's not attached to another tooth, then you incise that with this instrument whose shape it has; and it resembles the cut of pork, made of Indian iron with an extremely sharp edge.
And if your incision is on the place where you would cut that tooth over several days due to the hardness of the tooth, and it's not as sharp as another of the teeth.
And if the prominent tooth is worn down to the point of being cut by a file, then file that with an Indian iron file whose shape it has:
And it's entirely of Indian iron, the groove is made; and it has useful points like a file with which holes are drilled step by step in a few days each, to ensure that no other tooth is cut and falls out. And then draw that along the end, and cut that with one of those razors.
And if it's a tooth where one part is broken and the tongue touches it, then consider that you should shave that inside where the roughness of that fraction is stopped and made smooth, to ensure that the tongue doesn't hurt or the word doesn't get distorted.
Chapter xxxiii.
On restoring teeth made dull with wear on gold or silver.
When it happens to the teeth in front of concussion and removal through percussion or impact, and the patient cannot support what is eaten, you have treated that with stiptic medicines, and your treatment has not worked. Therefore, considering that gold is stronger than silver, and if there's no need for any days when dealing with gold, but not so with silver which turns green over time, it should be noted that gold does not change color even after years.
And if the gold is in such subtlety and roughness according to the quantity that can enter between the teeth; as for the shape of the restoration, take the gold and place twice its amount between two healthy teeth. Let it grow between two curves of the gold on each side of the dull tooth(s), whether one or multiple, so that the thread can reach the healthy tooth of the other part. And then repeat this operation into the part from where you started, strengthen your hand with ease and knowledge so that it doesn't get dull.
And if your stroke is on the part where you strengthen the gold, make sure not to smudge it with the teeth.
And then incise the excess ends of the gold with forceps or cut them off and place those in every position where you've worked, and integrate those and the hidden ones between the healthy tooth and the dull tooth to prevent injury to the tongue. And then polish that as you would with a Roman grindstone.
If it's shifted or broken, strengthen that or those with another piece of gold in the same manner throughout its time.
And this is how teeth are and the figure of restoring two healthy teeth and two dull ones, like this when they're joined together:
And when one tooth or two are returned close to the place of each, and they grow back as we have described, and get dull again.
And do not perform such tasks except for skilled artisans and wise individuals.
And sometimes certain conditions are suited for the bones of cattle, and it's done in this way like a tooth shape, and placed at the spot where the tooth has fallen out, and is strengthened as we have said, and remains and serves that purpose for a long time.
Chapter xxxiv.
On the incision of the cord that exists in the tongue and inhibits speech.
This cord that leaves the tongue in some cases or is innate as one is born, or accidentally occurs due to an illness which has already hardened.
And the operation in this regard is that you open the mouth of the patient at their tongue's place; and lift their tongue, then incise that cord nerve according to the width where the tongue should have been after its recent position.
If there's any hardness or concretion in that area, and this has become fixed due to the consolidation of an illness, then you apply heat and cut that along the width where you've incised the cord, so as to dissolve the lump.
And remember not to create a cut in the edge of the flesh, but cut here so that there's an opening for pus to come out.
And afterwards, wash the traces of the incision with water or with vinegar or with a rubbing alcohol; and leave the tongue undisturbed for several nights to ensure that no other illness is consolidated.
If pus flows out, place a moistened glass over the affected area. But if the pus doesn't flow, then apply cautery to the spot with a small stick of resinous charcoal that you use for this purpose. And that doctor treats all other causes so that they may be healed.
Chapter XXXV
Regarding the extraction of a hernia, leave the tongue.
Sometimes, certain boils may occur on the tongue, resembling small blisters, which prevent the tongue from performing its natural function; and it's important to ensure that this condition doesn't worsen until the mouth begins to smell.
And in your operation, you should open the patient's thigh sixty degrees towards the sun and consider the boil.
And if you find a dark or black color, hard and causing discomfort in the thigh, then do not touch that part which is inflamed.
And if it's turned to whiteness, characterized by moisture, then you place the scalpel on the thigh and incise that area gently, cutting all around; and if there is a smell during your operation, then you pause with your knife between your thumb and index finger, in which the smell remains.
And then return to your work until you have treated with respect for him, after washing with vinegar and salt; and treat that with another cure until it is healed.
Chapter XXXVI
Regarding the extraction of a boil from both ears and that which is nothing in the glabella, as well as other boils.
When you encounter in the glabella, they are glands that are gathered in a cluster like cotton wool, which occur outside and are named as two ears. If you treat them as we have said in the division and they do not heal, then when the boil occurs, consider if it is hard, of dark color, with little sensation; then do not touch that part with iron.
And if it is of reddish color and the root is thick, then do not touch that part with iron for fear of releasing the smell; smooth that out until it matures, and then either you drain that area or it will burst by itself.
And if it is of white color, round, and the root of which is subtle, then that is one that should be incised.
And in your operation, you should consider before your operation if the boil has rested on its own, with rest completed or if it has diminished somewhat; then place the patient facing the sun, his head towards you, and open their mouth. The servants take hold of their hands under their noble operating instrument whose form is:
And let it be made of silver or gold, and should be subtle like a rod.
So when you press that tongue and the boil is shown to you, then place your attention there. Take the scalpel and make it in contact with the skin, and pull that out as far as possible from all directions while you can. Otherwise, if there's any cause related to the tunics, then when you're done with that, cut into that area using an instrument whose form is:
Otherwise, if there's any cause related to the tunics, then when you're done with that, cut into that area using an instrument whose form is: It resembles forceps, however, the ends of them are curved, so that each hole of those is in the direction of the other one, sharp points, which should be dipped into iron.
If this tool is not available to you, then incise that on the skin which has this shape like mine: It should be sharp from one side, not sharp from the other side.
And once you have incised one seam, incise the other according to this half manner of incision, and when you incise near the patient, they should be rinsed with water.
If you encounter pus from the wound, rinse with decoction of rhubarb or rue water and proceed as with the other causes where the flow of the pus is restrained, then proceed to treat until it heals.
And some boils may occur in the glabella other than those two ears, and you should incise those as I have said and explained in the incision of both seams equally.
And I have already treated a woman with a boil which was located in the glabella of her, that boil was turning to dark color, with little sensation, it had already expanded into the glabella, and the woman could barely breathe from hunger, she had also been prohibited food and water consumption, and she was already very close to death if not treated for another day or two.
And the boil had swollen so much that it contained two garlic cloves between its skin and meat.
And I cut it carefully with the forceps and held it in one of its hooks, then pulled it out, removing a large part from its body. Then, when I was sure which side to use the scalpel, and made the patient open their mouth, I grasped their tongue, and placed the scalpel into that boil area.
And then, I excised a large part of it, and only a little pus was coming out instead of much blood. So the glabella of that woman was completely cleaned up, she started drinking water immediately and soon resumed food intake. Therefore, I did not stop incising from that boil for a long time, and instead of that boil, another one appeared in its place which also continued to be treated by incision until it lasted.
And I applied that and used a cautery on the glabella of her, then came this addition; and I wandered around wondering what God had done to me next.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
Upon beginning to understand when it is injected.
When inflammation occurs in the uvula and it is swollen and elongated, then it is named as a perpendicular one. And if there's a thick and round part at its beginning, then it is called a lump.
When it is healed with what we have said in the division, and you do not continue your healing process, and especially if an inflamed point has been cauterized already and left at its place, then that needs to be incised; and if it's along that line, and it bleeds of a dark color or black, and is not inside the body, then that means you need to proceed with incision, because there might be something concerning within the patient.
And when you do that according to the method I have told you about its whiteness and length, check if there's something wrong with the patient and press their tongue against an instrument whose shape you adapt to its contour, making it stick in the new incision, pull that outwards, then proceed to cut the second one among two instruments as was instructed in the method of cutting two masses.
And remember not to incise that but only what fits naturally at the end of your procedure; if you incise more than necessary, it might harm their speech.
And during the incision, use that which we recommended for cutting two masses; take care of it inside until it is healed.
If the body is frightened by your incision, remember to use forceps during the cauterization procedure and follow the method of cauterization. The cauterization process should involve using only hot water; place the head of the patient in front of you, press their tongue against the tool we mentioned, take the hot water that we recommended at the beginning of this chapter, apply it gently to the living part, avoid pressure on anything thick or thin, and ensure that the area is fully covered by this liquid:
Let the cavity of your operation be prepared in such a way that medicine can be placed there like the preparation of a herb garden, place the tool with the medicine on the ulcer, and have the patient lie down so that they can spit or produce phlegm from their mouth due to the internal medicine, thus preventing any potential cause of pain in their throat and allowing them to speak.
And place your hand on the medicine, and squeeze it over the uvula for about half an hour until you see that part of it has been reduced and calmed by the chewing of the medicine.
And if you wish, grasp and envelop that around the tip of the tongue, immerse the tool in the medicine, insert the tongue into the tool through an overlying tube so that the tool adheres to that tube. Perform this process as many times as necessary until you achieve the desired outcome from the cauterization of the uvula, and then let it dry; it will fall off around three or four days later.
And if you feel that you need to repeat the medicine, do so. After cauterization, clean the area around the uvula using a tool dipped in the medicine's broth. Modify what is in that area of your patient where the medicine's circuit is, and wash with water. Clean it further with rubbing alcohol, and then apply ointment externally, and take internal remedies until it is healed.
And this kind of healing makes the incision safe and eliminates fear for both you and your patient.
Some ulcers are healed by this subtle cauterization and incision method. To do this in this way: collect calamus, thyme, wild marjoram, ruda (commonly known as mugwort), gum arabic, chamomile, coriander, and similar herbs, adjust all these causes or some of them into one broth, and immerse them in vinegar; they should boil. The broth is then strained to remove the solids, and a small spoonful is placed in the middle of the broth on an incising tool made of silver or gold according to this method.
And immerse the tip in the mouth of the patient so that the steam rises to the uvula above the tongue; while this is happening and when the uvula is somewhat blurred.
And proceed to apply this treatment on those ulcers until they dry. Remember not to perform this healing procedure immediately after the appearance of blisters, as it might over-treat in them and prevent their proper healing; instead, you should declare that there is a blister case and cauterize accordingly.
If you don't have this tool at hand, take a cane and apply a wad of butter on the tip of your patient's tongue, making sure that it covers the mouth of the patient so effectively that the steam from the butter doesn't burn their mouth.
And this treatment is good for health.
Chapter 38.
On the extraction of thorns and that which adheres in the throat, as well as other causes.
Thick ulcers adhere in the throat or a thorn from a plant, or some other cause.
Then proceed to remove what is clearly visible from those ulcers, as you can see it. And press the tongue against the tool in front of your eye, so that you can clearly determine what's inside the throat.
And what is not visible and is hidden in the gutters, you must make the sick person vomit before the food begins to decompose in the stomach; if this causes vomiting due to its passage through the gutters. Or let the sick person swallow a piece of bread or grated lettuce or a spoonful of dried milk; or take a piece of marine sponge that has been squeezed, tie it firmly with a rope and make the patient pass through it; then he will vomit, as when he reaches the place where his intestines are exposed and removed. And take an eel and tie it firmly with a rope, then place it on the ground and gradually pull it out; or take a stick and gently insert it and gradually extract it.
If they are not expelled by those causes that we have said, then use a lead tool according to this shape:
And make it as thick as a small nail, and at the end of which is a cavity that you insert into their throat to facilitate passage.
And have his head raised towards the sky, and be careful not to touch his bone of the throat, so that it does not damage him or cause the bone or spine to come out, or that the doctor with his hand.
But when the sick one inserts his stomach into this, according to their knowledge of the location of the attached cause and penetrates downwards, they pull his hand towards the tool, all of it as per the amount that is prepared within so that it can be expelled.
Chapter XXXIX.
On extracting a hernia attached to the gutters.
When treated with bloodletting as we have said in the section of treatment with medicines and if it does not respond, then consider this in the gutters of the sick person towards the sun, since you have understood their tongue with the tool which we recommended to you.
So if you rotate the hernia, extract it at a pinch or through subtle movements in a gentle manner.
And if it is not possible for you to extract it from there, then take a concave catheter and insert that into the gutters of the sick person, and place in the concavity of the catheter an ignited iron, and do this so many times (while the hernia is dead and leaves the gutters) and keep the patient away from water for the whole day.
And then take a basin full of water, open the mouth of the patient in that and wash the mouth with it; do not swallow any cause from that water, keep washing the water on their mouth one hour after another with your hand, as soon as the hernia feels the water.
But if it is not expelled as we have recommended, then sub-fumigate the patient with garlic or with turmeric using the tool that we have recommended for fumigation of the uvula.
Do this, so until it passes.
Another method of operation in fumigation is that you take a lamp with burning coals and the lamp should be covered with a cloth in the middle of which there is a hook, and place the end of the tool in this hook; then proceed to give off the fumigation above; have the patient put their mouth at the end of the catheter and close their mouth so that the fumigation does not pass through until you know that the fumigation has reached the hernia, as soon as the hernia begins to fall.
And if it does not start immediately, then you should repeat the fumigation several times, and keep the patient from drinking, eat salty foods and fruits, and do not drink water, and it is necessary that this regimen be followed.
And this is the form of the tool with which hernias in the gutters are treated when observed; it is similar to forceps like that, except if it is curved in any way for you. It should be flat towards the gutters, and the end of which is similar to the beak of a stork, that it is rounded, in which it is filed down, so when you grasp any cause, it does not slip.
Chapter XL.
In which is the summary of the discourse regarding blisters and in the section about them.
Blisters are special spots, of bodily sensations, according to their recall, from any in this book.
And they are various in piercing and section of them by two ways, from which the one is for blisters themselves that enter; and due to the removal of moisture.
And the second way is for the places where they occur in the body, when blisters occur in the head it is another of a blister occurring in the anus; and the blister in the meaty place causing an accident is another from a blister causing an accident at junctions; and each one has its method for operation.
And there are some blisters that it is sufficient for them to be penetrated only upon the maturation of the medicine in those or completion of themselves.
And there are other blisters that it is sufficient for them to be pierced when they cross, and do not mature according to their completion, as with blisters that are close to junctions, where the blister when it approaches a junction, its being extends until you place what is in its circuit, and it corrupts your muscle or nerves of that joint, causing contraction of that limb; or if it is a blister close to the main member, then if you delay piercing it before its maturation it will affect the main member; or if it is near the anus, so pierce what is not matured; and it is sufficient that you pierce it crude, from incomplete digestion, but that which is close to the anus, so that you do not disrupt its flow and it extends into the partitions inside the anus, causing a fistula, or it is made in the end of which is not cured. When you know the time for the pus pocket's puncture, this happens when it has matured.
And know that it has matured when the pain subsides and the fever ceases, and approximately the decrease in redness and pulse, and the sharpness of the head of the abscess, and other signs.
And know that you should puncture in the place of pus left by the abscess and the pus coming from the healing of the appendix.
Puncture at the right length for the thickness of the flesh or body parts, if abscesses are in the areas of limbs or feet, and on spots with lumps, along the tendons, nerves, arteries; and, similarly, throughout equal locations where reflection does not occur. For those that do reflect light, puncture according to that part's specifications.
When the abscess is in a fleshly location, then it's customary to confirm digestion of this as per the compliment, just like we've said; if you puncture before that point, it extends the duration of the pus and mucus formation, and thickens the skin and depth.
Such abscesses should be punctured according to the size of the flesh or body as required, or based on which part of the member needs it.
And know that you should administer small punctures, and for large abscesses, a larger and wider puncture or incision according to the variety of sizes of the abscesses.
And for others among abscesses in which it is necessary that the canal be returned to its original position and heated, this should be done like bread; when it's done this way, it already continues, just as happens with many cases of stone disease and bubonic plague.
And for those that are incised in a section with three corners; and for those it's done like a figure of a thistle leaf, as with the abscesses of gout.
And among them are those where a round section and a crescent-shaped section are administered, resembling those.
For that which doesn't allow this, just like with superficial lion abscesses, it's necessary to puncture that with a superficial puncture, or flatly simply.
And when the abscess is thick and has formed healthy mucus, puncture that without worrying about draining all the pus in that moment; after removing some of it, let the abscess heal inside another day. Then remove a larger portion, and proceed to make drained granulations according to degrees until the opening becomes large enough for drainage.
Especially if the patient is of old age, or a woman in pregnancy, or a young child, or an old person in decrepitude; because when the animal spirit's mucus is resolved by its exit with healthy mucus, it hardens the body and you operate them.
Give great caution to this chapter, and when you puncture these abscesses in your operation, be sure to cleanse the wounds; consider if the mucus of the abscess is small, or a flat section, then administer either from here or from traditional practice; and if the abscess is large, and the openings are granulations, then it's necessary that you pause at each thrust until they reach their time.
And if in the abscess you have removed part of the canal or made it concave within its circuit, then it's necessary that you complete it with old thread or a needle sewn from the cloth here, just as when you pull dough or stitches, consider moisture; strengthen this on the third day; and proceed with this and treat whatever comes from the ointments until it is healed.
And if bleeding occurs during your operation, then you should administer water baths and vinegar in which you dip a cloth here, and place this over the area of the bleeding mucus granulations.
And if the bleeding persists, then it's necessary that you administer regulation and treatment and powders which I have recommended in local areas of our book and division.
And if it is during winter, and the location of the abscess is a spot with nerve mucus, then it's necessary that you fill powders in vinegar and oil, and place these over the spots.
And if it is in summer, and the spots are fatty, then you should place powders rubbed with water and oil or vinegar and oil, all of which should be wiped for three days as we have said. Then it's necessary that you drain the abscess, cleanse this, and administer whatever suits him during his treatment until he is healed.
And this is what's necessary for knowledge of the treatment of abscesses in general, but according to the method of distinction already described for all abscesses regarding how their treatment proceeds for each one specifically, per chapters.
Chapter .xl.
Regarding the section of abscesses which occur in the canal of the head.
In the canal of the head small abscesses, which are special nodes containing tunics that are their substance; and the species of their mucus.
And they are pungent, and those that contain moisture similar to lime. And those which contain moisture resembling dust, and resemble them; and those that are hard, brittle.
And in the section of all, and in extracting those, there is no fear, like you should extract those without causing obstruction to arteries.
And the operation in sections is that you expose those among instruments which have a shape somewhat like this, which is called an intermeditor, so you know it contains.
And if what is inside is moisture, then divide that among sections according to length for superficial sections as this form:
And start at the section of line .B. between the line of .G. Then as moisture is evacuated, then you abrade that skin which contains that moisture, and do not leave any cause from it all, when those examinations are done, if there is any cause remaining from it.
And then immerse it in Egyptian oil if it is present, or if not, in water and salt; fill that with the wound and leave it to heal inside until another day, when you have corroded everything that comes from under that skin.
And then rub that skin with Egyptian oil twice and subsequently if you need it, while you trust that there is not any remaining cause of that skin; then treat the wound with oil until it is healed.
And if pus contains fatty lumps, then you cut into it according to this form: In the section in the shape of a cross, you make incisions between two edges of the section and cut it from all directions, and use your strength to extract the tissue which contains that.
If it goes against your will, then do what I told you at first.
And similarly do for the fatty abscess in the section and during treatment according to what we have told you; and for an abscess that is milder, which has few stings and little moisture.
And some of these abscesses are in the head in some men from all sides where there is no moisture; which cause is that I cut into an abscess on the head of an old woman and left it like a dumb pebble, hard and white, which could not be drained, and if there was any in that place pressed, she would have a wound.
And for other accidents in the head besides this caput, such as abscesses that come to the heads of children and the causes of ear infections, but for all these they are superficial sections.
And pause the perforation of those from the lower part of their body so that the body's health may be relieved in the parts with pus.
And then treat those according to what is suitable for treatment.
Capitol forty-two.
Section of scrophula, which occur in the throat.
These abscesses are often found in the throat and under the jaws, as well as some in other parts of the body.
And those that occur in the throat are lumps that are produced among them, and all scrophula of those is within their own tissue. Like the nodes and abscesses in the head, as we have recounted.
And the types of these scrophula are lumps that contain moisture in some of them and others contain pus. The malignant ones do not yield to treatment.
And in that one where you use good judgement in the Touchment, whose color of what is manifest corresponds to the color of the disease, and it manifests everywhere, and it does not adhere to the tissue of the throat, nor to the veins, nor to the arteries, and it is not swollen, so when you cut into it on a dry superficial part from above to the part below in relation to the body's line .G. between the line of .B., and burn that completely, and extend the edges of the disease area by one or by small parts as needed if you have them, like we said for abscesses in the head, and extract it little by little.
And more caution is that it not be cut into the vein or nerve.
And if the knife is not sharp enough to fit your hand in cutting or to calm the patient, then do not cut what is unnecessary; so if you were to cut a vein or artery and are prevented from continuing your operation, then leave it as an inflamed sore with powders that continue pus flow, strengthen the wound, and leave it until the abscess inflammation subsides and the wound becomes softened. When the pus is drained.
And return to your operation while you have fulfilled it.
And then ask yourself if there is any cause from the other small scrophula that you mentioned, and cut those and cleanse those.
And if it is in the root of the large vein, then do not cut that scrophula from its root. Before this, when you have placed it firmly, leave that so that it falls naturally by itself.
And then fill the wound with old skin which you have already immersed in Egyptian oil, and then treat that.
And if you cut the entire scrophula, then when this happens adjust the two edges of the wound and make sure that there is enough pus to prevent any further excess.
And if you realize there is excess pus due to the size of the scrophula, then when this happens understand how to cut its root, remove that and perform suture as was said.
The treatment for those containing dampness of the scrophulas, puncture that at the surface here in the area of the patient's maturation spot, and make a puncture with the pus base of the body, just as we have said.
And then administer puncturing, you must smear and resemble those, in order that it corrodes what is rotten from the corruption. And when you turn the wound once it has healed, then you treat that with the salve of generative flesh where it is healed.
Chapter 43.
Section on the division of the abscess cavity within the gallbladder.
The ancients divided this section in the appendix, and we have not seen anyone in our land who has done that.
And this is the record of the discussion of those.
And in men there is pain, because the removal of the appendix must be avoided, as thus it should not be done prematurely, given that all the veins and major vessels of the body are here.
And in those who have abscesses there or in the gallbladder or the ears, when the disease is not in the ear canal, one should use the section of the appendix to avoid the disaster which is caused by puncturing.
So when we want this, that I incise the appendix through three circles of the circles of the appendix, or four on a smaller section by width in that which is between two circles for quantity, that the section be at the root, not in the cartilage. This place is suitable for the section, which is free from flesh and the blood vessels of his are buried.
And if the surgeon is hesitant, then here he extends the incision of the gallbladder until it reaches the duct, but avoid the blood vessels and organs from those if any cause exists.
And then incise the appendix according to what we have recommended; this signifies on the section of the duct by the swelling which is from that exit to where it is from his rupture and for the removal of the pus.
And leave the wound open for some time.
So when the time is ripe for the feared puncturing, add two layers of the duct of the wound, and that single layer is the cartilage.
And then administer medicines that promote the generation of flesh until it heals.
And Al-Bujakasi says that the greatest discussion of what we have recommended, exposition is simply that some of those abscesses have already perforated the gallbladder of the body, and the body has gone into death, and his life was cut off. Some went to incise the epiglottis so that he would breathe the body over the area of the wound for a breath, and be saved from death.
And for that reason we command to leave the wound open until the malice of the body is consumed; and this malice is three days; and then from that point on we command like this with the wound, and treat it so that it heals.
And what I have seen personally is that a servant put a knot in her gallbladder and incised on one part of the lung canal, and I was called to treat him, and it smelled like the dead as if they were moaning, and uncovered the wound and drank the pus which was exuding from the small wound of the body.
So I confessed that it had not incised a vein or artery, and the wind was coming from the wound, and treated it until it healed.
And it did not happen to the servant girl or even in pus, and after some days returned to treating his conditions.
And I also say that there is no fear in the section of the appendix.
Chapter 44.
Section about abscesses that occur outside the gallbladder and are called gallbladder hernia.
This abscess called gallbladder hernia is large according to the color of the body, and moves in women.
And it occurs in two ways, either naturally or accidentally.
And in the natural case, there is no need for treatment.
And the accidental occurs in two ways of which one is like fatty tumors, and the other way is similar to an abscess that is made by the obstruction of arteries, and in that case there is fear. And do not assume that it will affect him like iron instead in the one that is small. And you should examine that and investigate as per the instructions, and if you find it resembling fatty nodes, and is not suspended from any of the veins, then you should incise it like the nodes, and extract it with what contains him from the skin and serous membrane; and otherwise, you should thoroughly examine his entire body, and treat the area according to what promotes healing until it heals.
Chapter 45.
Section on the types of tumors.
There are various types of tumors, and I have already mentioned all their types in the division.
And you should note that there is this difference between a tumor and obstruction that can cause confusion.
And I say that with obstruction there is warmth, fever, and strong pains while the boiling of excess subsides; and the process of putrefaction ends when the fever, pain, and heat cease.
When there is no heat or fever nor pain, and examine that animal's lion which is in their own bladder.
And it depends on the color of the body, and the patient's intake is like a diet, and is done in this way like an empty stomach, whether it is larger or smaller. This follows two species: either they are fatty and contain moisture, and the colors of the moisture are spots, as I have explained in my division.
So when you reach the treatment of diseases, remove that and inquire about its intake with a weapon which is called an introducer. According to how its form comes in the head, which is close to this.
And this is the method of inquiry for abscesses and all diseases. You should take this instrument and introduce it into the pus-soaked place that you find in the abscess, and you will move your words little by little inside until you know that the instrument has penetrated the chain.
And gradually move your hand according to the size of the abscess, and then remove the introducer and consider what is left in the footprint of it.
And if the moisture is discharged freely, regardless of its color, then you should incise on the superficial section as I have said in other abscesses.
And if there is no moisture left in the footprint of the introducer, then you know that it is fatty.
Dry over it as if it has a crooked form according to this shape: And this is how you are instructed to do it, suspend it on a hook, and remove the chain from all sides with ease. And keep the skin or bladder over it if possible, then extract that healthy part from the node.
And if it breaks during the operation, it is not possible to extract that healthy part, and cuts should be made in this way, then you remove it piece by piece without causing any injury.
And if there is some injury from it, whether small or large, the node returns as usual.
And if you notice that there is some small part injured from it, then complete the wound with some caustic powders and strengthen the wound. Place your hand over that which is the pus cavity, and treat the other disease until it heals.
And if it's a large node, then cut both of its lips and heal that which is inside it.
And if there is a pulsating one towards it or not, then you remove and heat the area where it is swollen that is inflamed and ease that strain for two days or three until it heals and until the boil of the blood subsides; and then return to incising what was injured from the node.
Capitol .xlvi (This likely refers to the 46th section or chapter)
On the forms of the instruments necessary for cutting and puncturing.
Among those are the forms of the introducers, and they have three species. Some of them are large, others are of medium size, and some are small.
The form of the large introducer is this:
The form of the small introducer is this:
They should be made of iron, bronze, or suitable cutting edges, so that they cut into the abscesses.
These are the forms of experienced ones, and they are called almond-shaped, and one of these is called a burin.
And there are three species, which are large, medium-sized, and small.
The form of the large experienced one, its form:
The form of the medium-sized experienced one, its form:
The form of the small experienced one, its form:
Make sure they are for those abscesses,,fistulas, and boils so that within them there are bones and other causes.
And these are round pins, thick ones, lemons, like large needles on which the threads are sewn, and they are made of bronze, or of iron, or of silver. And the best ones are those that are made of citrine bronze.
And they are experienced pins of black feathers, which it is remembered that for those the fistulas open in the cavity where reflections are seen, that they are reflected by their levity at those reflections.
And they have three species: some of them are long, and others medium-sized, and still others short, according to the amount of the opening of the fistula and the restriction of it.
The form of the large experienced one made of lead:
The form of the medium-sized experienced one made of lead:
The form of the small experienced one made of lead:
The forms of the hooks are of specific motifs; among them are some simple ones that have only a curve and they come in three types: large, small, and medium.
And there are hooks (uncis), and these also come in three species.
And among those hooks have two curves, and they too come in three species.
And among them are three curves each, and these also come in three species.
All of these are necessary in their place.
The form of a small single hook, its form:
A method for treating a large kidney with two curves: A method for treating a moderately enlarged kidney with two curves: A method for treating a slightly enlarged kidney with two curves:
A method for treating a large kidney with three curves:
A method for treating a moderately enlarged kidney with three curves:
And these are the forms of the scalpels according to which they cut and cauterize the nodes and abscesses, and there are three kinds of them; among those, one is large, another is moderately sized, and the third is small.
Form of the large scalpel:
Form of the medium-sized scalpel:
Form of the small scalpel:
The tips of those are sharp and cause incisions when they are used, while the other ends are blunt. They are not held in such a manner, but rather so that during the cauterization of nodes, there is no risk of damaging a vein or nerve, and for these reasons, the patient finds relief and tranquility. A slight adjustment to this results in finding the cauterization of abscesses.
And these are the forms of needles, and they come in three kinds: large, medium, and small, like thorns.
They are made from reed and resemble rays with which alcohol is applied.
And in the tip there is a punctured spot on the hidden surface; within that area, you can move both inside and outside it, as you wish, just like you see.
The forms of the spatulas, which are hidden between your fingers, allow you to puncture abscesses without feeling the pain, and they come in three types: large, medium, and small. And these are the forms of those:
The forms of the suction cups that remove the flow from sickness are these; they come in three varieties: large, medium, and small. The forms of which you're referring to are as follows:
They are made from reed like a citrus fruit, round with some length, and they are delicate.
And choose these varieties of suction cups in large, medium and small sizes, so that when you need to quickly remove the flow from illness, or otherwise when your first aid is not medicine.
However, do not use those to evacuate blood everywhere in the body; instead, only use them on fatty areas. Like that of the swellings and thighs, and like those of the elbows, breasts, nipples, belly, armpits, and similar fatty swellings.
Sometimes, certain areas are made with those tools, other small points resembling spots according to this shape; when blood is drawn off or a vein or artery is damaged by incision.
And some areas are made round according to this form:
Chapter XLVII
On the treatment of male breasts which are gathered by females.
Some areas are inflated with the nipples of some men when they start becoming hairy, and these nipples become inflated. The nipples gathered by females resemble them, like small bumps that are far apart.
And for those who apply this, make sure to incise in the form of lunar section according to this shape, between line B and line G. Then remove all roughness, fill the wound with ointment medicine completely, adjust both edges of the wound for sewing, and cure that area once it is healed.
If the nipple sags to the sides and is softened by its size like in women, then it should be cut into two parts for pus drainage, with two incisions resembling a lunar shape. Each one should contain within the other, where the major line contains the minor according to this form of lines B and G. Then remove the seam between the two edges of the wound, take off the swelling, follow the instructions given about sewing and powders necessary for internal healing once it is healed.
And if you do not complete the incision for this to bleed due to anxiety of the patient or bleeding from illness, then make sure to cover the wound with a compress submerged in corrosive ointment and leave it until that corrodes what is fatty tissue, then cure that area once it heals.
Chapter XLVIII
On the puncturing of abscesses that occur below the nipples.
Those abscesses that occur below the nipples are of the species of scrofulas, lumps which contain a pelt that is secreted.
And among those that contain moisture; and for those containing moisture, make sure to incise in the form of lunar section according to this figure: from line G. to line B. And once all inside the abscess is evacuated with healing medicine, then cover it with a dressing and leave it until the next day.
And then keep pressing on it until it heals with a suitable ointment, within which it will heal.
And if there is an abscess at the lymph nodes or in the scrofula, then you cut over that area just as we said in the section on scrofula, in the same way.
And if the wound extends to an area where it will blister, then administer the cautery according to what we have explained earlier.
Section forty-nine.
From the section on abscesses that occur due to pressure or through veins.
When the pressure is burst and the vein becomes solid which is on that side, then it causes an abscess. The signs by which one can recognize whether the inflammation and abscess are due to a pressure or a vein: when the abscess is due to pressure, it is long extending in front of the body; and if you press on the abscess with your fingers, you feel a whistling sound beneath it.
And that which is due to a vein shows up more clearly in front of the body.
And this section about this abscess is erroneous, especially concerning the symptoms present in it, and in anginas, and in the throat, and in localized body pains; and it's a large one, therefore, its treatment should be avoided, and that which is at the extremities, or at the head, should be avoided.
About that which is due to their pressure from the inflammation of the artery opening, divide in the vein section over its length; then cut the section with scissors and cut near the artery, and remove the tunics underneath it.
And then place the needle over that area and allow it to penetrate into the other side, strengthen the artery at its double length point - which causes pain in your hand during extraction of two arteries which are within the temples.
And then press on the spot that is between two ligaments within the space where it causes pain throughout it, and have the abscess dissolved.
And then apply treatment in which pressure is created within the space where the ligaments would be; and treat that with suitable ointments until it heals.
And if it is an abscess due to the section of a vein, then you should have your hand like this so that you reach into the space where the abscess is on the surface with your fingers, and then introduce the needle at the spot which you previously touched with your hand, and allow it to penetrate; and there is a thread inside that doubles within where you extract it from the other side, and then bind the abscess around each ligament as I have told you in the thread of grapes4 from both ends of the string.
If you fear that we will extract the thread, then insert the needle into that spot with your fingers throughout the entire abscess. You must start the action of piercing the first needle and strengthen your needles at four places.
And dry the abscess in its middle until you are sitting as it is within it, then cut off the excess of the skin and leave what adheres to it.
And then place over the powder which you have submerged in wine and oil, and after that administer the treatment which is done with candles and ointments until it heals.
Section one of abscesses which occur due to twisting of nerves.
Just like abscesses occur in arteries and veins, similarly abscess occurs in nerves when it happens due to their impact or unnecessary labor, and by similarity.
And the way it is done in places near the arms or legs, or throughout all areas where there are swellings.
And it's a heavy abscess, and it resembles the color of the other parts of the body, and is in its major positions with signs that are similar to heat stroke, and when it is extended, you feel faintness beneath it.
And it's not an abscess that extends in front of the body, and by itself causes pain throughout the body and does not move to parts ahead or behind.
So about those that are in joints, it is not advisable to be exposed to iron, which tends to promote contraction.
And for that which is on the head or forehead, let the wound be open. And if it's a small abscess, then have that area covered and remove that from the surface.
And if it is large, then suspend it with a string, scrape that area, and place it there; adjust the wound with stitches, and treat it until it heals.
Section 51.
From the section on abscesses that occur due to cold, which happens in the abdomen.
Consider the following symptoms observed in the bellies of those individuals and in various parts of their bodies, which are called fungal due to similarities with fungi from these. The cause is subtle, its head is large; already the mouths of those are converted, it's from those that is small, and it's from those that magnifies greatly.
And I have already seen one case where in the belly of that person there were two parts which resembled fungi, and there was no difference between those whites, they were subtle in size.
And the mouths of those would be turned inside out and would split open; moisture flowed from that continuously.
Then I enter those and search in each foot measuring eighteen inches. And the other measures six inches.
And in the operation at their location, if the patient is wet and the color of the wound is white, moist, with a thin redness; then you should enter through the broad side, and in your presence apply cautery to the fire, so that the reddened areas are expelled from that section; and if you find pus, cauterize that area.
And if you find the patient weak and fearful, avoid entering with iron; rather take a lead ball, heat it, and place it on that wound, in which manner we have described; leave that for two days.
And adjust properly at the junction of the lead thread; therefore, do not cease to strengthen the lead greatly in that area until it is separated and falls out on its own.
And if that area is thick with redness, then there is some cause for fear and anxiety, especially in the case of those affecting the abdomen.
It's possible that you might separate its state, then proceed to cauterize that area so it doesn't recur.
And treat that until the wound is healed.
And watch out not to presume to enter any area that has a dark color, little sensation, and is long in recovery; for such are cancerous.
And I will come back with more reminders nearby.
Chapter 52.
On the treatment of navel swelling.
Navel swelling is caused by various reasons; through fissures on the stomach which is above the belly, and leaves the body or hernia according to what it does in other ruptures; or due to pus that flows from veins or arteries as was said earlier, or due to constricted wind.
It might be due to a tear in the stomach and leakage of body fluids, in which case the color of the pus resembles that of the body; it has a lion-like pain, and shows up in various locations. And if it's due to the protrusion of the intestine, then that situation is similar to what we've recounted, with even more intense diversity. When you press that on your fingers, it becomes hidden, and soon returns; a strong, mild feeling should be felt when introducing butter and vigorous work.
And if it's due to dampness, then it has a lion-like quality and doesn't become hidden when you press with your hand, nor is it constricted, nor does it swell.
And if it's due to pus, then these signs appear on the pus turning blackish.
It might be due to nothing but flesh, in which case the pus is heavy, thick, and hard, resembling a fruit.
It might be due to windiness, in which case touching it has a lion-like quality.
And the operation for it is to consider whether the navel swelling is due to arterial or venous pus, or windiness; henceforth you should refrain from treating this, because there's fear and anxiety in that situation as we've taught you in the chapter on pus caused by arteries and veins.
And if the navel swelling is due to an intestine or a body, then advise the patient to keep his hands warm and lay flat; then test around the entire navel area, and advise him to place his hands between yours on his sides, and surround it with lead on the circumference of the navel over the area you've identified through the test. Then extend the size of the pus to each side up to eighteen inches; and bind tightly in the circuit with a strong lead or cord, using the method of decent binding.
And open the middle of the pus that is extended over the muscle and insert your finger into that spot to search for the intestine; if you find it neither in the muscle nor through the muscle, then now remove it and push the intestine back towards the deeper parts of the abdomen.
And if you have found the body, then take that with an inch; and remove the excess of it.
And if it is against your artery or vein, then surround that area and proceed to your operation. Take two needles and insert them into those two strong cords; then insert the needles around the pus area in a crisscross manner, which you should make penetrate. And strengthen the pus over the needles in four parts.
And if you wish, or leave the needles and let the flesh stretch over it and fall by itself; or insert that when it becomes thin and is laid out, and proceed to treat that with what boils in between until it heals.
And if the navel swelling is due to nothing but flesh in it or by dampness, then you should remove the pus just as we have said and drain out the pus or dampness which you find inside, and proceed to treat that with what boils and consolidates the area.
Chapter 53.
On the treatment of colds.
We have already mentioned in the division, a specific type of cold and how it should be treated with medicine, that treatment with iron is avoided until the wound isn't ulcerated; we have also mentioned colds caused by the negligence and caution in treating them.
And it was said by the ancients that some inflammations in children can be completely eradicated at certain locations, such as in the head which is found in the breasts or thighs, and similarly located to parts of the body where they can be entirely removed, especially when they start small.
When it is old and severe, don't try to heal in them, for I cannot cure such things, nor have I seen another way, nor has any remedy reached this.
And the operation for them is as we have said, you proceed and leave the patient to purify themselves of black fever, remove some inflammations, and then if it's trapped, fill out its obvious manifestations.
And prepare the patient for surgery in the preparation where the operation is located, and proceed by cutting the veins that lead to it; and then make a concave from all sides with the incision so that there is no cause of any pain during thorough removal. And let the infection flow, do not puncture it lightly, squeeze the spots, and clean off the pus from your hand or on the tool with which you are able of the tools.
And if there is opposition of pus, or if it is obstructed in the vein or artery, then cauterize that inside where the flow of pus has ceased, and proceed to treat elsewhere where it is healed.
In the head. Please provide more context for a more detailed translation. The term "Capitol" here might refer to a part of the body or a specific location related to medical procedures. However, without additional information, this remains speculative.
Regarding the treatment of dropsy.
We have already recommended, in the division, of the types of dropsy from water, and the signs for each type, regarding their treatment we have medicines.
And that which is cured with iron is merely the type of splinters alone, and it does not approximate to the type of tympanicus nor to the type of dysentery, for which this one is fatal.
And when you have treated this type of dropsy from the ear with medicines and your treatment does not seem effective, consider that if the patient has already achieved debility, or there is another illness affecting him in addition to this, such as if it's cough or stomach pain and similar issues, then refrain from treating with iron for fear of this.
And if the patient's health has been overactive and he doesn't have any other illness but just dropsy alone, not young or old, then the way to operate on him is that you raise the patient between your hands, and apply to his abdomen with your hand, drain his body of water from its stomach, expel the water in the place left by the pincer, and take a thorn spade according to this shape:
It should be of two parts sharply pointed, with an acute end like a thorn. However, it should also be somewhat shorter and smaller than that for each person individually, in such a way that during the operation, you do not penetrate to the intestine, and that you handle it carefully.
And consider carefully if the generation of dropsy is from within the intestines. In that case, you should understand that in relation to the navel, there are three fingers' width away from your section on each side, towards his right over the pincer.
And if the generation of dropsy is due to an illness in the stomach, then your section should be on the left side of the navel by three fingers.
And if the generation of it is due to bile, then your section should be on the right side.
And do not have your section near the side where the patient wants to lie down on, so that excess fluids don't flow towards that location.
And then puncture the tool through the entire length of the incision, and insert it into that section. Lift your hand with the thorn between the incision and the siphon (a term possibly related to abdominal anatomy). And scrape that area; if the amount is as large as one fingernail or slightly more.
And then pierce the siphon so that the thorn reaches the desired location, which is where water accumulates. And then extract it and insert another tool of this shape: And it is similar to a fine silver cannula; it's made of silver or copper or iron. There is a small hole at the bottom part of this tool and three needles on its sides: two are for one side and one for another side; the tip is cut in a feather-like manner, as you would see:
And at the end of this tool is an opening where water flows out. When the tool reaches the water, it immediately starts to flow over the tool, so drain off the water in half quantities during that time. If you remove more than necessary from it within that time, weaken the patient through resolution of their spiritual-animal essence or cause them to fall into a coma which is akin to death.
Remove from there according to the quantity of the virtue of the patient and according to what you understand from the position of the body of the patient, as well as the significance of his pulse and his goodness.
And then extract the instrument, and remove the water which causes so much of it to be retained in the canal that carries it through the channel where you will perforate according to that manner.
And then take the instrument to the other side if you find that the body tolerates this, and remove a small amount of water, and do this for several days out of fear, and be careful not to let any of the water be released until very little.
If you fear for the body, and release a large amount of water, then treat that area by burying it in hot sand, washing with sweat in bathwater, and waiting under the sun for a long time; treat that area with desiccating medicines until it is healed.
And cauterize on the stomach, and prepare the mixture close to the water extraction, according to what I have recounted in what has been described beforehand.
It seems like "Capitol" is written but without any context or proper translation is difficult. In historical contexts, it often refers to a location such as a government building or the city of Rome. However, without additional information, I can't provide a specific translation.
From the treatment of children who are born with unperforated urethral openings.
Some of the children are expelled from their mother's womb, and the head of their mixture is not perforated (or it comes straight or is not in its proper location).
Then cut immediately upon the perforation as soon as it's born with a subtle incision according to this form:
And then place in the wound a small lead wire and connect it, and stay for three days or until the wound heals.
And when they want to urinate, let them urinate; and then return that part.
And if you do not stop the lead, it is possible that the urine which goes over the place will not close this closure.
Let that part of which the lead has come out be treated with a lead wire like we have said, for too many days until it is enlarged.
Let those in whom the lead is not in its proper place be treated, which causes this to certain ones who are born with their lead coming down inside them, you should let it go to the tip of the penis so that they cannot urinate from their internal parts; and it is not for their generation, because their sperm cannot reach their mother according to rectitude, and it is a malady stuck in motion.
The method of the operation for them is that the body should be above their two legs, and then extend the tip of your penis with your left hand with strong extraction, and incise on the tip of the tip of the penis in the perineum area with a sharp blade, like the shape of a feather or whatever part you do not recognize, so that your scrotum resembles the tip of the penis and the lead falls into the center place according to how it's done.
And remember that in your operation for pus discharge, what spots occur here; pause with them on you as when you cut off the pus, and treat the wound until it heals.
It seems like "Capitol .lvi" refers to a reference or identifier possibly related to a chapter or section in a medical text or document. Without additional context, this is its literal translation.
Concerning the whitish substance that occurs in the prepuce at the tip of the penis and in smegma, discoloration, and adhesion of the prepuce to the tip of the penis.
Spots occur with this whitish substance on the foreskin, it is an indication of stuck flesh.
And from that one is malignant and another is not.
Not malignant, let it hang with a small hook and remove that within which you have lost everything; then place over that spot buried under Egyptian oil; and over that, treat the area with transparent oil until it heals.
And if the whitish substance is malignant, then note its color; thus you should apply cauterization near its incision and its length.
Let it be known if whitish substance is in the foreskin at the tip of the penis in uncircumcised individuals; and when one part of the whitish substance is inside the prepuce and the other part is outside, then let it be understood that you remove the whitish substance which is inside from the beginning until it hardens; and then treat that external area, so long as you treat that time the foreskin, it cannot be ensured that it will not shrink.
And it also occurs in the genital region and in the prepuce with discoloration and corruption, therefore let it be known that you remove everything that has already deteriorated and that is about to corrupt or that is already corrupted; then apply a line above this area with honey, which becomes mixed with flour from bran of bran and crushed grains.
And then treat that with the other treatment until it heals.
Let's say if you need pus discharge, then apply lunar cauterization according to this method:
And for the lunar cauterization it is in two simultaneous dispositions, that is, during pus discharge and when the wound becomes corrupted.
And if the tip of the penis is corroded and all has been destroyed at that time, then let it be known that you should insert a lead catheter into the middle of the prepuce so that the body can urinate through that.
In the adherence of the foreskin to the head of the penis (and this adhesion occurs only in that individual with which the foreskin is joined, and on him circumcision is not required; and when an adhesion occurs due to disease or abscess) it should be treated by cutting with a blunt blade until the ligament is dissolved and the head of the penis is delivered from all sides.
And if it's difficult to free those (body parts) precisely, then you should cut with the blade in some cause of the head of the penis and foreskin, and similarly when the foreskin, which is thin, is accidentally punctured by its thinness.
And if needed, separate the foreskin from the head of the penis by a thread of its thinness, which is already wet with soap so that it won't adhere to another part.
And if needed, treat with astringent balm until it has hardened.
Head: 77.
On the transformation of children and on treating what may occur to those who have been circumcised.
Circumcision is not a solution like other diseases: rather, it's more akin to our operation and will, and unlike that one, in children, it is necessary for us to allocate the best operation and lose less through it for health.
So say that the ancients did not prescribe circumcision in certain free people, who do not use it in their laws, but rather because we have acquired this practice through experience, the reason being that I have found that most craftsmen and tailors use circumcision and transformation on foreskins and testicles; they use ligature on the penis and excision on the thumb.
And I have tried all these methods and found that the best transformation on foreskins, with ligature on the penis and excision like on the thumb, prevents more cuts above, which is where the chain of the foreskin exists in two tunics, and leaves a more delicate layer below, making it less prone to other excisions and secure pain. And for the transformation done by awls, which are digital, and where blacksmiths use them, it is not guaranteed that excision at the end of the male member occurs, as it merely enters the groove of it.
And in the operation on the thumb, if you use iron and contaminate your operation, it may affect its outcome. And the cord of the child is naturally short, and cuts do not occur in such a manner that it would require transformation, which I have seen.
The benefits of the transformation done on foreskins and ligature on the penis, as I have discovered through experience, are that the foreskin cuts are proportional to each other, so the sharpness above is like that below; thus when you press your hand it provides two sharpnesses, cutting according to a comparison in one time; it performs compression on the penis at the shape containing the foreskin from all sides, which does not make any mistake throughout.
The method of the first operation is that you should have the child stay more if it's one I understand to be slightly small, and only bind the penis with a band on its foreskin, leaving it alone until the next day.
And in this manner, if you can do so according to your ability with what the child comprehends, make them happy. And have them stay between your servants preparedly, and let there be no more than two of them; hide the foreskins in your hand or leave it with your foot, so that the child does not see those or any other tools.
And insert your hand to the penis of them and blow into the cord, and pull that inside until the head of the penis is released, and proceed with transformation on what is added in its foreskin.
The shape of the foreskin during transformation, this is how it is:
Let some of the edges be not-cut and others be cut, so that there is no excess on the key's arm, and make the length of both sharp edges as equal to the length of two fingers equally.
The mistake in transformation is when one excessively removes the intrinsic chain entirely or partially; you should avoid this excision.
So you should extend that part of your time to your thumb in front of the abscess on the site, and cut that according to equality.
And if you cannot hold it with your thumb, then extend that part onto a finger and cut that accordingly.
If it has passed three days and it is observed that the testicle swells after removing the inflammation, then you need to look inside to see if the abscess cavity has softened under the cautery, and cleanse that area well, and apply this second remedy afterward which you have prepared.
And protect your head of the testicle, for it will not be for him.
And then treat that area with the powders which we have recommended in the chapter on powders.
And if it has broken through to the skin within measure, follow the instructions about them, so that you don't disturb him.
And treat that area as we have said until it is healed.
Chapter 58.
On the treatment of retained urine in the bladder.
Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by blockage due to sand or infection, or by sediment or gravel, and it resembles those we have discussed regarding the methods of treatment in the section.
And if it is not dissolved as we have said and the cause is forcefully acting upon the patient, then guide so that you administer extraction to them with an instrument which is called a syringe, of which this is the form: It should be made of silver and be thin like lion's hair, similarly like a needle from a sewing kit in thinness as long as one palm and half, with it being thin at the tip.
And the method of injecting urine through that is: take the pointed end of the needle and bind it with wool or cotton for good adhesion; and place the ends of the needle inside the opening of the syringe, and cut any excess from the wool if there's any cause to do so, but rather insert the rest into the tube forcefully. And then compress the syringe against your thigh and against the palm of your hand.
And have the patient lie over their body, and bathe the bladder and the scrotum with rose oil, and olive oil and water.
And then guide the syringe so that it reaches to the tip of the scrotum; and then bend the scrotum over towards the lower part of the abdomen; and then push the syringe into that area; and then press that area so that it reaches the bladder, and that point being reached by the urine, instead of doing as instructed, proceed according to where there is tortuosity.
And then extend the needle gradually with cotton, for the urine soaks the cotton.
And then extract that and proceed with urine treatment, use the syringe, do not stop doing this and use the syringe until the bladder is emptied and the patient finds relief.
Chapter 59.
On the quality of bladder washout with lime and similar instruments that should correspond to this.
When an ulcer or abscess occurs in the bladder, or there is infection within it, or it is constricted by sediment, and you want to distill water and medicines inside it, then this is what should be done with the instrument which is called lime:
And if in the end of it there's a blockage, then it is closed off. And within that there are three tubes: two on one side and similarly the other.
In the beginning is a concave place where that which is inserted goes in and as much as you push it, you add more, so when any cause pushes out moisture from there, it is pushed out, and when it is expelled, it is pushed out again, and when it is expelled long, according to how the lime reacts with it, they use naphtha in sea battles.
And if you want to stop moisture in the bladder, guide the end of lime into the moisture and draw out what is pushed in towards the upper parts, where the moisture is drawn away from lime by its cavity.
And then guide the end of lime towards the scrotum as we have recommended in the syringe; and then press out moisture like what you are pressing, for when that moisture reaches to the bladder immediately, the patient feels it.
Shape of the subtle catheter through which the bladder is washed out, and this is its shape:
And it should be made of silver or tin, with its tip resembling a small feather, and the inside hollow like a tube.
And then take the bladder, place it in that humidity which you want to dry out in the bladder, and tie it between two pieces of strong leather, fasten them together on both sides, and heat that humidity over the fire.
And then insert the tip of the catheter into the urethra.
And then press your hand on the bladder with the humidity in the elongated structure inside where the patient bends, as that humidity has already reached the bladder.
If you do not have a bladder present, then take one of the animal skins and make it into that circle; and puncture it all over its curvature; and insert strong needle through those cuts, as they are rolled up; and attach the circle this way also, because when you place your hand on what you want from the humidity, heat and water.
And then you fix that in the tool and do it this way as you did with the bladder, expressing your hand where the humidity reaches the bladder.
Capitol. lx. (This seems to be a numbered title or section, possibly referring to "Chapter 60" in Latin.)
On the extraction of gravel.
We have already discussed the types of gravel and its treatment with medicines, and the difference between gravel formed in the ureters and gravel formed in the bladder, and the signs of that.
And we have discussed the gravel in which the operation involves my hand and section.
And the gravel formed in the bladder is that which gets stuck in the bladder.
And I will explain it openly and briefly in exposition.
So it is stated that gravel formed in the bladder mostly occurs in children. The signs are: when urine discharged from the bladder resembles water in its thinness, and there appears sand-like material; then the patient rubs their penis, has hot flushes, sweats, and subsequently develops this condition which goes through the anus with particles of those substances.
And it is rare for children to recover from this condition after they have reached the age of fourteen years; and it is difficult to treat the elderly. In young people, it almost always happens through this medium which is between those things.
And from the one where the gravel is larger and recovery is easier; and if it is small, it is contrary to that.
So, how do we achieve the treatment of this condition? Start by improving the patient's state as they begin to control their bladder, which drains all the openings that are within their intestines; some hot compresses prevent the gravel from spreading during examination.
And then hold the patient's bladder with their hands and massage vigorously until they feel it, so that the gravel can descend to the base of the bladder, or escape from any place, or through some compresses.
And then do that with the prepared cushion under your hands, and let all other things concerning them be done by you, so that the entire bladder can be made to descend towards the parts left.
And then ask for that and everything related to that preparation.
So if you feel the gravel in the space, then you immediately cover it with your hand on it.
And if you cannot touch it all with your hand, then do this: rub your left-hand index finger in oil, and apply the sign of your right hand's middle finger, if the patient is an adult or child. Then insert that into their anus. And ask for the gravel to be in place where you have your touch. And gradually convert that small amount into the neck of the bladder.
And then press on it with your finger and push out that substance to the outside through the anus where you have made the opening.
And command the attendant to press on the bladder with their hand; and command another attendant to stretch their right hand's thighs up towards the opening above, and with their other hand apply pressure to relieve the condition in the part where the opening was made.
And then insert an ointment spoon from which this is its shape: And then divide that which is between the anus and thighs, not in the middle location, before the left side of the buttocks; make the opening on top of that gravel and your finger is in the anus, making a cross-shaped opening, so that the opening outside is wide and inwardly stretched according to the quantity that the gravel allows it to be as possible, without being too large, forcefully pressing your finger which is inside the anus for gravel relief, causing the opening to become effective against any obstacles, and is forgotten about further abilities.
And know that there are some gravel pieces which have angles and edges, causing their discharge to be made difficult by this.
And there is gravel that resembles a lion's mane, and it is round, causing easier discharge due to this.
So if it is that one with angles and edges, adjust it in the fissure.
And if it is not like that, then do this: you generate about it, or strengthen it about it in a decent manner, the tip of which is like a rasp on which you strengthen over the gravel and does not escape from it; or insert your subtle instrument with curved tip.
If you cannot do it about that, then widen the cut a little bit, and if you see the release of fluid, cut that forcefully with vinegar.
If the bladder is more than one, then at the beginning you push your hand into the opening of the bladder, and then press upon it. And similarly, if there are more than two openings, do so accordingly.
And if the bladder is very large, then it's ignorance that you would insert that at a great section where there occurs in the patient one of these two reasons: either it remains or it leads to the continuous distillation of urine, thus causing the location not to be completely consolidated.
You should administer the expulsion from inside until it is outside, or in the process of the operation within where the ribs are located, you extract that at a force.
So when you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with ointments of aloe and dragon's blood, and strengthen that. And place over that cloth soaked in oil and wine, or in crushed oil and water rubbed together, so that the scab from the wound might be removed.
And then have the patient lie down on his back, and do not let him remove the bandage until the third day.
And when he has removed it, wash the area with water and add oil, and then cure that with a powder of diathizolicon and an ointment of dibazilicon until it is healed.
If in the wound there occurs pus and corrosive scabs, treat them as if the blood is in the bladder frozen, and hence it's urine that's prohibited (and this is known by the excretion of the blood with urine). Therefore intervene with what you said in the wound and extract that blood, which if Roman causes the bladder to corrode the bladder and its putrefaction.
And then wash the wound with vinegar, water and salt, and against all species, where you need for its cure until it is healed.
And during the entire course of treatment, take care of both thighs and adjust the medicines which are placed over the area.
If the bladder is small and is within the base of the penis, and urine discharge is prohibited, then treat it with what I recommended before you reach the section, which are drained by this treatment and are confirmed to have reached that section; and already having done so, then take an electrified needle, of which this is the form:
With a triangular end, sharp, fixed in the handle.
And take care to hold on with your finger, making sure that the bladder does not return to the bladder when you remove it.
And then insert the needle into the penis with ease, so that the needle reaches the bladder when you pull it towards itself. And rotate the needle with your hand in that small bladder little by little, you puncture the opening of it as soon as you make a hole on the other side; then urine is immediately freed.
And then press your hand on that which is broken from the bladder of the tip of the penis, where it has shrunk, and is punctured by urine, and the patient is healed.
If this treatment is not appropriate for any reason that prohibits it from being done in this way, then hold a finger on the bladder and another one above the bladder. And press upon the bladder in that penis between two fingers. And then extract that (the bladder). And then remove the bandage and change the hardened blood in the wound.
It is not necessary to have a finger bandage on the bladder, but only so that it does not return to the bladder. The other bandage above (if any) for this reason: when it is removed the finger nears the exit of the bladder, the inflammation returns to its place and takes over the wound.
And for this reason, it is necessary when you have the finger above (the bladder), that you lift the inflammation to those parts above, or if it should return you must complete your action here and take over the wound as we have said.
Capitol. LXi.
Regarding the extraction of bladder (or perhaps uterus) from females.
Bladder in females occurs rarely.
If you find a bladder for any of those cases, then treatment becomes difficult for it, and is prohibited by means of various procedures.
One of them is that the female, if she has not given birth, retains her uterus.
And the second is that you cannot find a female who has given birth and knows how to inform the doctor when she is pregnant, or comes from female virgin women.
The third is that you won't find a woman who knows this art, especially the operation by hand.
And the fourth is that the location of the section above bladder in females is far from the location of the bladder, so you need wave-like access and there is fear there.
If necessity prompts you for this, then take care that you have a skilled female doctor, who is not lacking.
If you are lacking that, then bring near the skilled and subtle surgeon, or present a married woman who is experienced in female operations, or a woman who has completed part of this art.
Then make that presentation and command her to do everything you tell her, from inquiry about the bladder to beginning; which is because she should observe if the woman has given birth, then see what she said in her own place and seek for the bladder.
If you find that spot, pinch it and keep your finger there, then command them to prick it.
If it's not a testicle, then command the midwife to insert her finger into the patient's belly and inquire about the pain, for she places her left hand on the bladder, pressing firmly enough.
If you find that spot, then gradually move your hand until it gets slightly tender under the patient's belly, where its effect reaches up to their thigh.
And when you prick that spot located under the patient's belly, you feel the pain reach some part of their thigh. Center the pain in that area and ensure your finger doesn't get numb from the pain as you continue with this task for them.
And the section should be gentle at the beginning; then insert your finger into that area. If you feel pain, adjust to that section according to how much pain you can tolerate until it stops in that area.
And you should know that pain sensations are spots: among them, some are small and big, hard and rough, long and round, having a tapering end.
So you should know how many types of sensations there are for you in this way that you convey about what you want.
And if you want to feel the heat flow, adjust to the point that feels warm and leave it for an hour until the heat subsides. Then return to your operation when the pain has disappeared.
And prepare for yourself the tools needed for the extraction of pain in men as we described them earlier, so that you can assist yourself with these during your operation.
And if you want to feel the heat flow, and know that expulsion of the heat is from the vessel that is pricked, then you pause with dust over the area and strengthen it with powder and constriction descent. Do not repeat this; let the pain stay and do not forcefully extract it; otherwise, the patient will die. And cure the wound.
And once the intensity of the heat subsides after some days, and the area heals, then return to your operation when the pain has disappeared.
Chapter LXII.
On hernia section.
Hernia of the wet type is nothing but an addition of moisture in white flesh, which contains the womb and is referred to as the uterus. It is named the uterus.
And some instances occur in the natural abdomen where it prepares the womb for the patient, when it becomes another womb; and this is the passage of the generative function between white flesh as we have mentioned, not that other thing which is called a knot.
And the cause of this hernia is due to overexertion which affects the reproductive organs, so it pours out this substance into them. Sometimes it occurs through hitting actions made on the reproductive organs.
And this moisture has various colors; its color can either become yellowish or bloody, or reddish, or black and fatty, or watery white, and that is what happens most often.
And the signs by which it is known where this accumulation of water is in this case: if it's within the uterus as we mentioned, then the swelling appears extending a little along its length like the shape of a womb, and the reproductive organ can be seen, as the moisture affects everything from all sides.
And if the moisture is within the natural abdomen, then the swelling appears at the part of the womb and for this reason we estimate that it's another womb.
And if the moisture is between the passage of the reproductive organs and white flesh, then you can feel this centering.
And if you want knowledge of the color of the moisture, then you expand to see the color of the moisture in the swelling through the pricked point whose shape comes next; according to what it stands out in the mark of the prick, judge about what is inside.
And when we come to the treatment of this patient, then you should command that they urinate freely if this is possible for you and make them full in their body.
And place them on their back for some time or another due to certain causes, and leave your wet cloths under them.
And place yourself on the left side of them, and command that the attendant follows to their right hand, which extends their arm from one of the sides up to the passage of the reproductive organs and the belly.
And take a broad blade, cut open the passage of the reproductive organs from the middle of the body longitudinally towards the navel.
And make the cut according to rectitude equidistant from the line that should be the skin of the reproductive organs, until it reaches white flesh encompassing it.
And scrape that area, observe it, and take note to prevent you from scraping too much; your scraping should be at the place where you scrape in parts shows hanging closer to the womb more gently examine your scraping according to how possible for you.
And then puncture the white flesh completely full of water with an ample hole, and extract all the water.
And then separate between the two labia of the cut with scissors and extend the white flesh up to the parts above; don't touch the passage within the reproductive organs encompassing them, and prick the white flesh in that manner as is possible for you. And you enter that in its entirety or in pieces, and especially over its delicate part; for if you do not examine the entry meticulously, it is uncertain whether the water will return.
And may the procedure occur outside of their body during your operation, when you have completed the section on circumcision, return inside that, and adjust the two parts of the genital ducts for suturing, and treat that wound as the others, so that it heals.
And if you find that the body is affected by other illnesses, then dig out the vessels that are under the scrotum, and remove the body, and treat that according to what we have said.
And if the water is added in two parts, then you know that there are two hernias; therefore, enter that part as you did in the other equally; and if it is clear to your view that it is an operation, then do so.
And then you cleanse the wound, and in each section immerse wool or cloth in oil or in rubbed oil; place another layer of fabric that has been soaked in water and oil, and spread this over both legs and the abdomen; place layers of clean cloths and powders above them, and cover this area with a material according to this form:
And then let there be presses of two cloths, filled with wet cotton according to this resemblance; and have their ends on which they are pressed either by hand or by wet wool, and add them to the structure in the crotch of the trousers, and one end takes from behind into the other, and the other goes to the crotch of the breeches, and two ends on each thigh leave out and another two over the knees, and all bindings must be adjusted in the crotch of the trousers.
And in some cases this hernia is medicated artificially with a cautery instead of a section using iron; and you take a fine surgical knife and enter that into the genital ducts, and ignite it according to what we have recommended so that the white flap containing the water can be exposed, then take a cautery according to this form: And it resembles Greek letter.
And then puncture that flap, and ignite so that all the moisture is expelled.
And then extend that flap with scissors, and abrade it with scissors, and abrade it with a finely ignited cautery; and enter that according to what is possible so that you can eradicate all of it; and protect yourself from the water that the fire might touch.
And know that this operation is safer and more distant from the wound than an operation with section, and better than an operation through incision.
And if during the incision or when using a cautery, or from an operation wound, you encounter a pus-filled blister against your will, then find out how that adverse effect affects you through this process, and adapt your treatment for it according to what is said.
And if the patient is weak and does not expect a second operation due to its horror, then perform perforation according to what I have advised; and it is when you confirm this through what we said about meanings that this hernia is watery.
And you should find out that you make the patient lie on an elevated surface, then puncture the blister in the lowest part of the body with a slanted knife, and complete the puncture according to the length of the body.
And let it be that the opening is wide enough for all the water to escape.
And place your hand on the wet area and smooth it out, in order that the remaining water can flow away. And then treat that while the wound is healing.
And if the adverse effect is against the discharge of water during that time you puncture it: and this operation should not be done unless the white liquid in the wound's opening causes an adverse reaction, preventing water from being expelled. Then find out how to introduce a needle or tool into the wound with which water is extracted from dropsy, and its form precedes; or adjust in the protrusion of the wound a little piece.
And know that the water returns, and is expelled around 4 or about those months; and if it is added, then puncture according to that method described, so that the patient will pass their days.
Capitol .lxiii (This likely refers to a chapter or section number in a medical text or legal document, possibly 63rd).
Concerning incision on a fatty hernia and its treatment.
And know that in the incision regarding this hernia, there is a fear of spreading infection through larger dispositions; for which it appears to me as better to leave it and be saved by that means.
And I am remembering the operation in that place and the characteristics of the blisters.
Therefore, state that blisters naturally occur on the bodies where the testicles are located, and this is done due to certain causes: or by an acute overabundance of pus, which spreads in the testicles, or through a blow.
And the color of the blister is according to the color of the body, it is not palpable in its pain, and it is a heavy blister.
And the soft and light blister is cleft, whose color is dark, and there is no sensation in it.
And sometimes the pain is caused by blockage of the veins, and by swelling in those areas where their return has already been perceived, or by swelling in the veins.
It is known that when there is swelling of the veins, it manifests as a spreading inflammation when you press those areas on your thighs; and do not touch it because it might cause pain.
It is when there is swelling due to veins that is not spreading for any reason; you should only press those areas on your thighs.
And it is possible that in this specific case you may make a section and on other meats; it means to puncture the veins' channel, then gently press on those areas above them, extract the white fluid from the testicles, release the suspensory ligaments of the vessels, tie them up, and then puncture the pus sac as soon as you drain everything out from all parts of the area.
So if the testicles are already enclosed in those masses, then you should remove the testicle and puncture it.
And if there is adhesion due to some reason inside the scrotum, or between what is within the veins, then you should remove all that adhesion and puncture it through a round incision.
It is when the meat forms within the area of adhesion which is behind it; then you should puncture all that belongs to it, and remove the testicle as we have said.
And once your operation is complete, then fill the wound with oiled beeswax and oil; and thereafter take care of that as you would in any other healing process until it heals.
Section 64.
On the treatment of hernias that occur in the thighs.
There exists an abscess enveloped by some sheath resembling a bud near the softening of the testicles; it makes physical exercise and walking difficult on the thigh.
And in treating this condition, there is fear that its past perception might recur.
However, let's call the operation as I did in the first one when I performed it.
And say that when you lift the thigh on a raised pole; then place the testicular suspensory ligaments at those places left behind; and guide the channel of the veins near your thighs where they are pushed towards the buttocks; and keep those other assistants with you, and extend them in strong extension.
And then puncture through the flat longitudinal incision in the middle of the vessels where you will find the vessels.
And then remove everything from all parts as we have said in removing veins which are inside the thigh muscles.
And then place there a needle that has been bent double, tie this in the first location where you find veins, and tie another incision at the end of them. And then puncture these through the middle area for a right longitudinal cut according to the length of the body, and remove that which is accumulated from the humors that are putrid and decayed.
And then take care of the wound with the treatment of other wounds in which you wish to heal due to what fell from the veins that you removed one or two testicles for; this is not harmful.
It is when veins flow throughout all the muscles; then you should remove the testicles or remove one of them as it drains from the veins, in order to be deprived of all nutrition by puncturing the veins and allowing them to harden, or to prevent being young at those places.
Section 65.
On the treatment of intestinal hernia.
The occurrence of this hernia happens when there is a section that extends in the intestines over the belly from parts of the small intestine's valve, so that the contents of that rupture tend towards some of those intestines.
And this rupture is either from the intestines or from within that area, and it happens in these two species due to various causes: impact, or through jumping, or through shouting, or through being lifted by some heavy cause, or through something similar.
The sign of this (hernia), when it's due to the extension of the intestines, is that it occurs gradually over a long time and doesn't occur suddenly; theres an abscess equally distributed within the preon because the intestines are compressing the contents.
The sign of this is when it's due to a section in the intestines; at the beginning it causes sudden intense pain; theres an apparent abscess leaving the channel that appears nearby, and this is due to the movement of the contents, and his body towards those areas further forward than the intestines.
Some punctures are made in the content's membrane, and this is called intestinal hernia by swelling.
Some punctures are made due to windiness; some punctures lead into the content's opening, and it gets stuck there; this is a large mischief in the thigh, and some punctures cause bad pain that's worse when pressed.
In treating the species of this thigh ailment, there is fear; you should avoid touching that area.
The method of the operation for that is to command the patient to guide the content back to his hand towards its cavity inside if it returns with its return; then have him place himself between your thighs, and elevate those parts.
And then narrow the incision where it cuts the testicles' ducts above, and cut the testicles' ducts completely in length; and later divide the section into two parts according to your needs for opening that section with those.
And if you can possibly drill through from there, do so according to the size of the section.
And then scrape that layer from the parts left of the testicles' duct, while it's exposed, revealing the white hard pith in each part.
Then you insert your finger into the location where it cuts the testicle, into the area between the white pith, which is left of the urethra duct, and between the piths secondarily, and free from that adhesion in the part behind the penis.
And then take the testicles' ducts in front of them, and for this do extend the white pith on your left hand, and raise the penis to the pith at that part; and instruct the attendant to hold the penis and you dissolve that adhesion behind with a complete solution.
And check all your fingers so that there is no reason for the intestine enclosed in the white hard pith. If you find any cause from them, then remove that to the stomach area for them.
And later cut into the part left of the testicles' duct by sections where it runs with disease and health as we have recommended in what we said.
And then apply wool soaked in oil, and pause at the wound; and apply the bandage (and some parts of the white pith is cauterized, which we have described near the opening of his testicles for the discharge of disease, where certain parts emerge from these) and lay the bandage so that it can fall by itself.
If his healing is delayed, then use hot water for bandaging and pause over that part where it can fall as we described.
And then treat the wound with another method of treating wounds until it is healed.
Chapter LXVI.
On hernia suction.
In this hernia, it has not been seen that any part should be heated during the treatment of it.
And the first ones would say that it is done in this way as we have recommended for the hernia that is on the side; which means you should tighten the vessels near the section towards there; and later dry out in the middle area around where I do this, so that the vessels can fall.
And treat the wound according to what we said until it is healed.
Chapter LXVII.
On the disorder that occurs in the arteries.
Some parts may burst in the arteries as we said, and expose the site.
And do not allow any cause of the intestines in the groin; and if they do, it is little; and return to this throughout all times.
And if the time lasts with this, an opening is made in the pith so that descending to the pith occurs; and this happens due to the extension of the pith which is in the arteries as we said, the cause being that the pith has been extended, and later softens the site causes an abscess and discharges.
And the treatment of him is with a cautery as it was preceded in the description of this.
And some parts are treated with iron according to this manner: which means that the patient lies on his back over your two hands under their buttocks, and later dry out the site of the rupture of the abscesses lying down through the width according to the size of three digits.
And then strengthen the white pith which is below the duct so that it can be exposed.
And then take the thread and pause it on the prominent site of the pith, and press that on the belly button.
And then tie the two prominent sites onto the end of the pith thread, and adjust one of those to the other with stitching.
And then extract the end of the thread, do not cut into the pith completely, nor extend your penis, or any other cause as I should know in the treatment of intestinal hernias.
And then treat that with the treatment of wounds, and when you cut into the threads, clean that and restore the wound until it is consolidated; which means that the pith contracts and does not allow the protrusion to be tightened again.
And a cautery is better in this place, which is closer to health.
Chapter 68.
Regarding the softening of the cord of the testicles.
Swelling observed in the cord of the testicles in some individuals is softened by this means because the muscles that are within it are softened, and there is care for them.
So it is necessary for the one who attends to his treatment that he lie the patient according to their back and uncover the entire cord which is softened over the natural cord; and adjust two lips at the suture.
And if you want, as in the beginning, on the excess of the softened cord with three stitches or four and a tight suture.
And then insert between the stitches; and then treat by curing the other wounds inside so that they heal and fall the pus.
Chapter 69.
Regarding castration.
Know that castration in our law is anathema, but due to the information I have received, I remember it in this free text; and there is no need for this remembrance of it unless for two ways, both of which are important when asked about it as part of a physician's knowledge, so they can know how to treat any case that might come up; and the second way is that due to various reasons, we often require castration in other animals like our young ones for those purposes, just like in dogs, cats, pigs, and similar animals.
And thus I say that castration is done in two ways: either by dissection, or by incision to sever.
As for the one where it is done by dissection, the way of the operation is to cut off the animal in deep water so that its reproductive organs become softened and drained. And then take those ones with your hand until they are resolved, and do not allow any marks to appear from the touch.
As for castration done by incision and severing, you will have the animal and press on the cord of the testicles with your left hand.
And then stretch the suspensorium and make an incision on each side until two of them are cut.
And then drain those puss that you have opened in any place. And do not leave any reason about the ones on the scrotum, but rather a finer skin which is over the veins.
And this way of castration is better which is done by dissection as it leaves no cause for the testicles due to a mild cut that allows the animal to desire sex.
And then treat the wound until it heals.
Chapter 70.
Regarding the treatment of androgenism.
Androgenism in men is according to two ways: the first one is when orifice appears in the cord of the testicles, where it's between two testicles forming like a female chest with hair.
And some cases show that urine flow is in the cord of the testicles.
As for the females, it's a special case: that is, the female chest above the pubis is like two male testicles each with a little more or less in size and in front as well as the penis of men and two testicles.
And the treatment is of three kinds: for both men and one kind for females. And it is that you will have to make incisions in those constricted areas so that the secretions of that can escape, and then treat those wounds by treating other illnesses.
And in the second kind of men who pee there, which is in the cord of the testicles, neither treatment nor operation is necessary for it.
Chapter 21.
Regarding dysentery and meat that stands out due to female causes.
Mild dysentery, when it is adjusted by natural causes and becomes irritated, requires regular attention; some cases show that it can be magnified in some women to the extent of spreading like in men and persists even during intercourse.
So, you will have to grasp the excess of dysentery with your hand or a tool and make incisions.
And do not conclude in making incision especially at the front of the anus, so that no discharge of pus occurs.
And then treat that by treating other illnesses until it heals.
And then there is the born inside meat that develops in the uterus up to where it fills it, and when it's slightly extended towards the front according to the shape of the belly (for this reason some early ones called it "tail castration"); so you should make incisions like you do with dysentery, and treat that until it heals.
Chapter 72.
Regarding the treatment of arrhythmia.
Arrhythmia occurs when the female chest is not pierced, or if it has a small tear. And it can be due to either natural causes or accidents.
Accidental is because of previous castration, and that is done either by an improperly adjusted meat or a finer tougher skin.
And it can occur in the front of the mother, on her ribs, or from excess pus within her, or from lower pus, and you should prohibit sex, pregnancy, and childbirth, and strongly prohibit menstruation.
And the knowledge of that is made by observing the physician, if the treatment is visible, approach it closely; more so if it is not visible, then you search for that with your fingers or along your rays.
If the treatment is by cipher hidden, and it is close to the two lips, then you remove and open that.
And that means placing on the two lips dusts, and then place your index fingers under both their elbows.
And the woman should be on her back, her thighs extended, and then expand both lips until that subtle cipher is broken and treatment becomes possible.
And then take woolen cloth and oil it up, placing that over the area, and leave it there for a day to prevent the incised place from hardening.
If the cipher is thick and dense, then carve where you will incise it on the skin or under a leaf of myrtle.
If the treatment is through surgery, then suspend that with thread, and incise that.
And use the medicines that stop the flow of saliva and mouth ulcers, such as anise, saliva from a dragon, and ginger, add them to almond milk.
And then apply a broad lead cannula so that the wound does not harden quickly.
And keep that for several days and administer garlic juice.
And then treat with another consolidation cure until it is healed.
And some times occur in the main origin of other meats, and then carve as with this method. If it is by pus abscesses, in the main abscess which is in the meat, do not make a mistake when using iron in any manner.
Chapter 73.
Regarding the treatment of hemorrhoids, and tail and red boils that occur in the passage of women.
Hemorrhoids are the appreciation of the openings of varicose veins where blood flows continuously from them; and as old hemorrhoids have been done in this way.
And I have already explained in the division of those types and their signs, as well as saying those that receive treatment and those that do not receive treatment.
So say that hemorrhoids and boils when they are in the first month of pregnancy and do not appear to the touch, then no treatment with iron should be done in those.
Those are the ones which are on the opening of pregnancy that you feel, these are the ones that are treated.
And then have the woman lie down in sand and then extend both arms or on rough cloth, and incise those with the razor.
And then powder over those should be the flow of saliva from one of the digestive powders for mouth ulcers, such as anise and similar to those.
And then scrape her feet for an hour, and then leave that in hot water.
And if the saliva continues to flow, then have her take a decoction of suman and withered grapes and garlic and similar things.
And then take flour of bread and mix that with honey and wine to add and make a poultice over her back.
And if the blood is absorbed, it's good; otherwise, apply to two blisters, and over the nipples do scratching.
And then take wool and immerse that in the juice of vinegar or in the juice of elderberry or in vinegar and water, to apply it to the place; and then treat the place with oil until it is healed.
And treat that until it is healed.
Chapter 74.
Regarding the perforation of appendix accidents during pregnancy.
Types of appendicitis that occur during pregnancy, such as inflamed appendixes and gallbladder abscesses and ulcers and infected wounds and herpes and boils and other abscesses. And I have already explained these illnesses and their types and their signs, as well as their treatments in the division.
And you should know that I mention in this treatise about abscesses cut which comes during pregnancy when it concerns abscesses that heal naturally, and if you want to know how the operation is done with iron for it.
Then consider if the pain of the abscess at its beginning is sharp on percussion and pus and fever, and sometimes it reddens and if you feel over that, then note to incision of it, and treat it with what helps in maturation until the severity of the accidents ceases.
And then have the woman make incisions on a table that has two slants; lie down on her back and adjust her feet to the bottom of the pus left from the belly, her thighs are extended, place her elbows under her knees, tie several around comfortably.
And then the midwife follows from the left side and administers the tool with which she opens the opening of pregnancy, its shape will come about in those causes that will be done later.
When you want to administer this instrument, place it at the edge of the bed under the mother's hand, and what enters the abdomen through the instrument should not be larger than the mother's hand, and cause no harm to the patient. If the instrument is larger than the mother's hand, then you should sprinkle powders over the surface of the mother's hand to prevent all instruments from entering the mother's hand entirely.
And you should cause the substance that moves within the tool of the male's lower part to flow upwards, and have the minister hold the tool while stirring the substance inside until it has opened the mother's aperture.
And when the excitement appears and touches the hand being sweaty and slippery, then you should dry that by rubbing his head with a damp cloth.
And when the fever is expelled, then you should place on the wound a cloth immersed in rose oil or turpentine oil containing some astringent properties; and place his foot in the area under the patient's hand.
And dampen the mother (patient) and over the navel, place a clean wool cloth immersed in water containing walnuts.
And after approximately two days of applying the ointment which should be used until it is healed.
And some washes are given to the mother and the wound is treated by washing it with water and honey, then returning to the water in which rue or aristole leaves have been boiled, and subsequently returns to the application of ointment.
And if the wound is inside the swollen mother's abdomen, then you should prevent its cure with iron, instead treat that with what we have said in the section.
Section seventy-five.
To teach the midwives in what manner to treat newborns when they are sick according to an unnatural figure.
It is necessary for the midwife to understand in the consumption [afterbirth expulsion] the figure of a natural birth by signs of it, and when you see the woman being pushed during labor and she desires to smell the air, and on this she is excited by whatever is happening upon her during childbirth, and stimulates the passage of the newborn, then know that this part is according to a natural figure, and it is its exhalation towards its own head, and the second one towards the first or suspended or hanging from the umbilical cord.
So when you notice those signs, then make the woman's abdomen contract by itself so that the fetus descends lightly as it comes down over its own head; let her give birth to the second one, and discard all excess with good sanitation.
That which is another like this part is unnatural and unmanageable, when the fetus comes down on its own feet and the body of the woman faces in front of her head and her feet, and one hand of hers or near to her foot,. Or when its head faces towards her and her hand or her stomach is placed on it; or it is turned heavily onto its neck, and resembling the impossible figures of birth.
It is necessary for the midwife to be knowledgeable and discerning in all these matters, and that she guard against error and deception.
And I am showing you all the figures of these, and what is the cause in them by which they are indicated and have a state upon them.
When the fetus is resting on its head through natural force, and that is vigorous upon the woman and made difficult for her, causing the virtue of her already weakened, then make her sweat, or use what women have in them, and evaporate her body with fenugreek leaves and with damp olive oil.
And then the midwife should intervene between her small intestines and the opening of it, or dry that with her hand in which runs whatever moisture is inside. And press the woman's belly until the fetus descends.
If it doesn't descend, then you should have the woman fumigated with colic water and fennel water vapor.
And then instruct her, and stimulate her, so that she contracts herself, making her sneeze with the conditions; and open her mouth and her nose for an hour, as soon as the fetus makes a passage.
And if both parts of the fetus are expelled at the beginning, then you should reduce those to ease the passage gradually. If you don't obey the instrument, then have the woman lie on her side and lift her feet up, and gradually turn the side towards the ground; and let the woman be held so that she doesn't fall from the concussion.
And if the parts are not turned inside and push out the fetus, then insert those and remove the membranes of the fetus or by his side in the woman's hand with cloth and remove that when it makes a passage.
When the fetus comes down onto its own feet, then you should push those upwards, and gradually turn the fetus, and try to equalize that, and take one of its feet and stretch those gradually.
When it is resting between the thighs, then you should instruct her to push and make her sneeze with the conditions, as soon as a passage makes if God wills.
And if it is not yet finished with what we have recommended, then you return the action little by little into where you place that second natural figure, which will now be finished with a slight easing.
And if it is forbidden to do all that we have recommended, then take a bandage of high quality and dissolve rubber, and crush them all in the mortar with good pounding, and apply the mixture along the waist line of the woman, at her belly button, and on the lower part of her abdomen. And make that incision in hot water so it reaches the lateral parts.
And when you have finished with the parts that belong to you, then do a sub-herbal smoke treatment with myrtle for them. And when you have done the sub-herbal smoke treatment for an hour, then make that incision over a needle, and afterwards cause her to sneeze and open her mouth, then lift from there, and press the lower part of her abdomen lightly, so that the action will be soon finished.
The outcome of the action in a lateral hanging position on one of her breasts. The process should be about reducing the arm of the patient, more so if you cannot reduce it. If that's not possible, then lift the woman and let her go through with it.
And if she cannot go through with it, then have her lie on the table, and vigorously knead her thighs, and administer powders which I know and recommend from medicines.
And if there is delivery, then make that incision over the needle, and study about reducing the arm, and equalize the action according to its natural figure, and cause her to sneeze and command her to herself while it finishes.
The outcome of the action on the back, spreading her breasts and the skin of her is as wide as her mother's. Make sure that the midwife has the arm of the fetus and gradually turn that little one by little, making it easier.
And when it is like this and they are equalized, then pause on her chest with what we have recommended using oil and medicines.
And then command her to eat little by little, and when you have done this, then make that incision over a needle and command her to be inclined on the right side of her stomach, and also command her to close her mouth; and make her sneeze in condition. The outcome of the fetus when it is prepared for lateral position.
When it escapes from the mother's horror according to this manner, consider it, and then you should pierce the second one in your nail so that it can be evacuated of moisture.
And if the fetus is hanging on the face and neck of her, then you should pierce that in the navel, so that it is not retained and suffocates.
And then push the fetus to the parts inside so that you stop it according to what is needed, and command the woman to squeeze herself several times, and it will be completed in a slightly longer action, if God wills.
The outcome of twins or multiple fetuses. Understand that twin bumps are natural, and some take three or four months, but this is strange and difficult; mostly these are caused by nature, not will.
Count those, whether they are multiplied, one by one, and separated by a ligament, distinguish them in the navel of each of those. Some take several months like this, and some actions are completed so that it's almost natural birth, and others require an action that is impossible like what we have recommended.
And if some of them are difficult for you, then proceed with delivery and achieve what we have said about the non-natural figures, then treat those ones as we have recounted.
And if the midwife is skilled and does what makes it easy and refinement, and in delay, and is crafted according to every figure as she has been prepared by her skill leading to health.
Remembering the formation of what is created from embryos and miscarriages.
Some ulcers are formed in the mother's belly one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and more than ten, and you should verify that if a female aborts her fetus, then another pregnancy with all forms, which causes it to happen due to measurement of the divine senses.
And all of this depends on the knowledge of women's health, which greatly resembles this issue, and therefore one should be careful about it as one should with such matters.
Chapter 76.
On the extraction of the fetus when it is dead.
When you care for a dead fetus in accordance with what we have discussed in the division of medicine and it does not expel itself, and you find yourself compelled to use surgery by hand, then consider whether the woman is in good health and has not suffered from any accidents that could cause loss on her.
You should consider whether the woman is lying on her back over a table, and that her head is inclined downwards and her thighs are raised.
And the minister should have that [the woman] in both parts or be bound on the table by him/her, so that the body of her does not extend beyond the extraction of the fetus.
And then you moisten the mother's mouth with oil and with a mixture of sage, almond paste, fenugreek, and poppy seeds.
And then apply oil and mixtures to the woman's hand, and place her hand under the woman's (in this context likely referring to the fetus), and carefully position your own hand in the location where you will find the umbilical cord in the fetus.
Place your hands conveniently in this situation: then you need to consider if the fetus is ready for delivery by turning its head down, and in that case place the umbilical cord at its navel, or in its neck, or in its mouth, or on its palate, or leave it hanging below the chin, or near its throat, or use a suitable location near its back, or let it hang down to its lower abdomen.
If the descent is happening from below (i.e., it's coming out through the feet), then place your hand in the groin area, or near its back.
You should have the umbilical cord in your right hand and place the curvature of her (referring to some unspecified part likely related to childbirth or anatomy) at that spot which is between the last two fingers of your left hand. Place your hand conveniently and let the umbilical cord be in one of those locations we've mentioned, so it reaches down to the cause of birth.
And place and let it be in the position of her another cord or thread if needed, so that there's equal traction, and not extension according to its straightness only.
And give your strength to every part, so that the expulsion of her (likely referring to a body part or process) happens as much eased as when teeth are extracted.
And consider between them that the extension should be softened; and if any part of her is being held back, then you need to have the woman oil her fingers with oil and insert them skillfully while revolving around that which is being held back.
Then if the part of the fetus is outside, then let the cords be placed in such a position that it's more convenient; and do this until the entire fetus is delivered.
If your hand is in front of the other's and it's not possible to reduce that through squeezing her, then you need to have a cloth cover that part; and proceed with extracting it until everything is delivered, and cut it either at the wrist joint or at its elbow.
And do this in the same way for the other hand and for both feet.
If the fetus's head is large, or you encounter squeezing during delivery, or it's in contact with its water bag at the head, then consider inserting your thumbs into the space between her fingers to open the head and expel the water. Or find an instrument called "alundat" that has a similar shape to other tools in this chapter which is somewhat close to our context.
And do likewise if the fetus is large due to nature: then you need to cut that (referring to the head) with ropes, or take it with an instrument as we have mentioned; and proceed to extract the bones with forceps.
And if the head is delivered and squeezed below the collarbone, then it needs to be cut where the moisture in her (referring to some unspecified part) can be released.
If it's not complicated and doesn't require delivery, then you should cut the head immediately as suits your capability.
And if the abdominal organs are stuck or in her water bag (uterine), then consider that you should puncture it where there is moisture within.
If the fetus is below her (a woman), then the traction of it is slight and the direction of it towards the mother's mouth is slight.
If it's being squeezed below her abdomen and pelvis, then consider that you should extract that with cloth which you will have wrapped around your hand, and cut the abdomen and pelvis where there flows what is within them.
If the other limbs are still in place and you turn the head, then the midwife should insert her left hand; but if the mother's mouth is open, then she should insert her hand into her belly button area, then around that part of the head, and pull it towards her mother's mouth with her hands. Then proceed to insert one or two cords, and pull her (the fetus) towards those.
And if the mother's mouth is being squeezed by a boil that occurs in her (a fetus), then consider not to pull it too much over it. Before this, proceed to administer an application of oily wet causes. Apply bandages; continue to care for the patient with waters that soothe and moisturize.
And if the injury is on his side, then ideally it should be sutured: and apply what we have said to treat live injuries.
And if that's not possible, then it should be done with poultices, and extracted.
And ensure no cause for a recurrence remains.
And when you have completed all your operation, apply what we have said about the treatment of abscesses that occur from the mother.
And if pus flows out, then soak in warm water and proceed with the other treatment.
And I have seen a woman in her belly who was pregnant with a dead child, and then about that womb another abortion took place, and the other pregnancy ended in death. It happened to her that there was a long-lasting abscess in her belly; and it swelled up inside until she opened, and began to bleed.
And I was called upon for her treatment, and I treated her for a long time, and the wound does not heal.
Then I applied some powerful anti-inflammatory plaster to her, and soaked her in water for several days, and then another bone was extracted. And I was greatly amazed because there is a bone inside the belly.
And then I thought it must be from the bones of the dead fetus.
Then I cleaned the wound, extracted bone fragments from inside her, and she was left with her bones arranged in their usual positions. And I treated her for such a long time that she bled out just like this.
And I do not consider it strange, rather that in this there is knowledge and assistance for what the doctor by his art administers for treatment.
Of the forms of the instruments necessary to extract the fetus.
Shape of inversion in which the mother is opened:
This is the form of stretcher on which they are equalized, to which two inversions belong at the ends of two fetuses. Yet this inversion should be softer in its rigidity, and made of leather or cane.
And let the width of any stick be two fingers and the margin on each side be one finger. And let the length of each be a hand and half; and in the middle of two sticks there are two adjustments for these cane poles, which are already set. The length of each is about half a palm less, and the width of each is two fingers or slightly less than that.
And these two attachments should be inserted in the mouth of the mother so that they open when you rotate the two prescribed inversions.
Another shape similar to that, more subtle and lighter:
It is made of cane or bamboo sticks according to the similarity of forceps. Yet at the end of it are two attachments like this, and the length of those attachments is about a hand, and the width of each is two fingers.
And when you want to open the mother with those, then have the woman lie on her back with her feet hanging down, and expose that which is between her thighs. And then open your hand with the tool like this as you would with scissors equally according to the amount that you want of the opening of the mouth of the mother inside which you guide her when she wants.
The form of inversion as described by the ancients:
Shape of the implement used to push out the fetus:
Shape of the aid in which the large head is contained.
And it resembles forceps with teeth at the end like this, and some abortions are done long like this like forceps according to this shape, like this, with teeth like those of a rasp on which it is scraped and contained. Shape for a small aid:
Shape of a tool having one spine:
Shape of a tool having two spines:
Shape of a tool having two ends on which the head is cut off:
Shape of two spatulas laid out:
All those instruments are practiced, and when you have multiplied the species of that tool and prepared them as much as possible, leave them to be done by artisans, more light to their operation and more suitable for men according to their quantity.
And do not use those tools already that you must prepare yourself with, for the need of those is not excusable.
Regarding the extraction of the second womb.
When the second womb is retained, you should have the childbirth continue, then understand that you command the mother to retain her alae, and make that sneeze with the condition, and strengthen your hand on her mouth and her nostrils, and if she sneezes out by this means it is good.
And if not, then take a hot one and pierce through the cover with a needle and pause in that herb to open the mother's mouth, like this with heat and rudely with mint, chamomile, saffron, Arabic gum, cinnamon wood, and St. John's wort. All these herbs or some of them should be submerged in water in a vessel, and place that over the fire.
And place a fennel pipe in the mother's mouth, and let that be so that the vapor goes into the cavity of the mother.
And perform this sneezing as we have said, and the second one out comes quickly.
Proceed with this treatment if it is successful and not rejected, then instruct the midwife to immerse her left hand in thyme oil or in an alum suspension, and place that inside her until the second one comes out quickly. Once you find that, then take that slowly, month by month if it matches well with the mother's condition, then proceed with your usual treatment. When she finds the second one, extract that gradually according to correctness so that the mother does not lose strength due to strong urges. Above all, make sure that it is well drained both on the right and left sides for ease.
And if the mother's mouth is constricted, we have already recommended treatment with sneezing and water therapy with herbs.
If it is not expelled by all the causes we have recommended, then take care not to tire yourself with repetition of treatment. Instead, make sure that what comes out from him to the mother's mouth lies on her stomach, and apply ointment and fourfold medicine; for this will dissolve over a few days and be fully expelled.
When it dissolves, it raises bad odor to the head and stomach, causing illness; then make sure that inhalations and suitable things are administered to that.
As such, the ancients have already recommended an inhalation of thyme and dried figs.
Formulate a tool for the instrument by which the woman is inhalated to control menstruation and the second one:
It should be made of reed or of herbs.
And the subtle extremity is placed inside and the wide one over the fire, and the inhalation should be placed above the flames of the fire.
And let that be so that this inhalation is consumed and another one follows.
Regarding the treatment of an unperforated child's anus.
A newborn boy or girl has not yet pierced their anus, which is somewhat swollen and inflamed. Then instruct the midwife to pierce that swollen area as directed; if not, pierce it with a sharp needle and make sure not to touch the wound.
And place on that wool dipped in vinegar and oil; and treat it with ointment so that it heals.
If you fear it is inflamed, then place a fennel pipe in the mouth for several days, and stop when the child wants to defecate.
And it happens that inflammation of the anus due to consolidation of pus or abscess; then make sure that this consolidation is incised, and proceed with the treatment and lead-acetate therapy that we have said about treatment and lead.
Regarding the treatment of fistulas that cause discomfort.
Fistulas that occur in the lower part of the anus lead to low pus and coarseness which occur near or outside the anus.
And it is either a fistula or warts.
And when that congestion is old and corroded by the moisture of white or pusy powder, some spots are due to these fistulas sometimes penetrating them.
These penetrations are recognized by what comes out of them through discharge and through wind; some people suffer from the illness due to discharge, and others experience a bad smell from these worms.
These fistulas sometimes have spots that penetrate into the bladder, and into the penis; and these also penetrate into the space between the thighs and into the genital notch.
This is how you recognize a penetrating fistula in the anus and not penetrating one; if you insert your finger into the anus as directed, and insert a subtle piece of reed or iron into the fistula when there is no obstruction.
If there is obstruction in that one, then insert a subtle lead or horse hair into it as you feel the hair or the hair on your finger.
And if you do not feel that or there is no cause of elimination, motion, or smell as we have said, then know it is non-penetrating, and take care with the treatment.
And when the fistula penetrates into the bladder or into the penis, then this means her urinary discharge from that and prohibition of her to add anything that makes that area swollen with medicine.
If it penetrates into the space between thighs or inside and is inflamed with pain in circulation, then this means her finger goes inside here if there is no obstruction inside the bone, and inflammation of pain in circulation; that she suffers from continuous pus; and this does not apply to that medication, nor does it heal with ointment.
And in all those tubular openings that are not cured by any means, and the cure for these is laborious work and the expertise of medical surgeons over which they decide.
In the one that is not penetrating and not old, healing by iron is hoped as I will tell you to recommend, and what I already have and approve.
And it is that the patient lies between your hands on their back, with their legs elevated under them, their thighs inclined towards their stomach. You should try to place something of lead or mercury if it's in a twisted tubular opening, so you know where the obstruction is located.
And if that place is around the lungs, then cover where you have indicated with your hand on the lung.
And if you feel the obstruction already by itself descending to uncover it, then if you feel something between your indicated spot and that siphon or flesh, then you will definitely know that this is penetrating. And from then on do not work in this area, for there is no healing within this, as we have said.
However, some people say that it is healthy in certain cases.
And regarding the treatment by which young healing is expected in them, you should apply a subtle cautery according to the size of the tubular opening, as previously mentioned, and insert that flame into the tubular opening until it goes around the lungs; and then repeat this process two or three times until you know that all those fleshly parts adjusted to form tubular openings resemble goose feather.
And then treat that with warm baths containing herbal decoctions until all those fleshly parts are healed, and treat that with medicines to generate and strengthen the flesh, and if it is healed, then it's good; otherwise, then it's not healed in any way for another treatment.
And if the obstruction enters and does not penetrate into your indicated area which is in the rectum, then between that and the fleshly part that quickly grows in a spongy manner or by siphon, and when the tubular opening is in the skin surface, then dry the skin from the beginning of the tubular opening, and you see it drying on the obstruction, and if it's within the tubular opening until the drying reaches the location where the extremity of the obstruction passes through, and by the obstruction is liberated and dies.
And then make those tubular flesh parts smooth which are assembled like a goose feather tube, and do not damage any of them.
And when pus and disease repeatedly come between you and your operation when you touch those flesh parts, then let the amount be that which is needed, and with a lighter instrument apply fire or acute medicine to it, where applying fire with heat fits well. This is the adjustment of those adjusted flesh parts, and removal of disease by drying up moisture.
And then treat that with warm baths or in the place where the wound is treated by trisat, and then apply treatment for the wound using hard flesh medicines to generate and strengthen it.
And these are medicines in which there is a drying effect and evaporation; when then the restoration is completed, it's already healed and you don't fear repetition.
And if the tubular opening already passes into the anus and is extended from the skin surface of the body, then insert your indicated spot into the anus and inquire about it.
And so if the obstruction is in the middle of you and it's quickly spongy or fleshly, and it approaches penetration, then this is not an operation on them but only through faith and hope.
That reason is to administer one of three ways on them: either to apply a cautery as we have said; or to dry up that place until you reach the cavity so you can easily insert those parts and the obstruction is within your reach; and don't make cuts in drying areas so you do not enter the hollow containing the anus, and act according to your wish on the inner surface of the opening's direction with your will; and then treat it as we have said that strength comes from drying up. Or extend this quickly and remove the pus that dries up inside almost by the anus, as we have said, or in the obstruction or with another sharp instrument, and then make those tubular flesh parts smooth which are in the drying area between where you can pass a needle; and then strive to achieve the restoration of all the wound through drying up, and if pus above is not hardened, and continues from the opened tubular opening towards the anus, then less pus will flow from the inner surface. And sometimes the tubular opening is completed in this manner: when you insert the obstruction into the tubular opening, and it's at the end of the anus around the skin surface near the skin, and along the margin of the anus, then it takes on an obstructed extremity, which is like a needle preparing to sew the stitches according to this form:
And insert into that line enclosed in many lines or around those; and then insert obstruction inside the line within the tubular opening until you reach its cavity.
And if it is penetrating at the margin of the anus towards inside, then you extract the thread from that trail as you insert your indicated spot into the anus; and remove the extremity of the thread and adjust both ends simultaneously, strengthening each one, and let this rest for one or two days. And when more of the thread enters the flesh, strengthen it in between those parts which are between the two ends of the thread and fit together.
And then treat the wound once it has been consolidated and healed.
If the fistula's openings are not penetrable, then make them penetrate in any manner you have prepared, but not directly into the preon, for it is not for you to do this so as not to damage the organ; and then make that opening so that it becomes healed.
The shape of the cut in the spinous bone where the fistula is opened: one part is sharply curved and the other is not, so that you do not damage what is unnecessary, thus sometimes.
Sewing veins in which there might be a risk during their operation.
Veins can occur in two ways, either they are like charcoal in the anus or else they resemble raisin fat. And those veins are small and large. The time when the bleeding from them occurs is uniform, it's a constant issue, they're clots, they're inside the anus, and at the extremities of that area.
However, those that are inside the anus follow the conditions of a little humidity, where water is yellow or there's a small amount of blood continuously in the body, and according to the color of the body.
And the treatment for that which is inside the anus is to command the patient to remain and to express themselves while it burns, and then when the veins appear before you. Therefore, touch it and suspend with a string or what you have those ones on your finger, then when you apply the heat to them, aim at their roots.
If the strings are not in those due to the moisture and softening of them, then take those with a rough cloth or with a rag or with flannel, remove those on your hands, then when you apply heat to them, place some powdered chalk near their roots; or cauterize those as explained in the chapter on cauterization. And then treat those with another method once they have healed.
And if the anus does not allow for expulsion, then anesthetize the patient with anesthesia where there is a small bite, and wash them with that which is in the anus that facilitates slight expulsion when the patient squeezes.
If the veins are outside the anus, then their cause is slight, so you take those with your finger or you take those with a string, insert them, and then treat those as we have said once they heal.
And for the one who has removed the insertion, follow this method when administering treatment: take an enveloped needle and insert it into the thread, then extract the veins from their respective sides, and make them penetrate with the needle into the root of the other side; wrap the two ends of the thread around that part laterally; strengthen the vein with a strong stitch, then remove the thread and pull out the needle.
And do this to all of them, leave one unsewn though, because the excess blood will flow from that.
And place on the anus cloth dipped in rubbed oil or in wadding; and place that over the rectum and command the patient to rest. And then let that settle in until it heals; and when it is used up, treat those with ointment or with another method once they heal.
And since they are old and do not benefit in that medicine, then you should remove those at the tip of the bone or with your finger so that they become moistened and treated with pus above which prevents consolidation; and then treat those until they consolidate.
And you should remove those with much pus, the first in which bleeding occurs and they are scraped off; then treat those until they heal.
Know that abscessing is key, and not whether it's a round red spot resembling the end of a needle, which occurs throughout the body and especially in those parts where there are pains, and for those you should seek its cause.
And then know that what should be done is to apply the remedy within the circulation of the key, keep it on the fingers or with a string, and remove its root; and treat that accordingly.
And if you wish, cauterize it as explained in its chapter.
Verruca is a small, rough, pimple-like bump that appears round on the surface of the body, and moles are often seen in most children.
And for treatment, you should spread and insert that, or strengthen it with a needle or thread until it heals. And if you wish, as we have said, cauterize this with fire or with acute medicine.
Ant: A small, felt-like or pustular lump is formed on the surface of the body in the anus, and when you touch it, it feels like a bite from an insect, and it occurs around the body.
And for the treatment of this, take a needle or needle from oxen or cattle, it must be strong, and place that over the sting inside which contains the circle of the needle parts of your body; then turn your hand around in the needle as you pierce that into the circuit of the sting, and stop that at the edge of the flesh, and remove the sting from its root.
And if you want, do this with a needle or iron in this manner:
Make the part at the top of the needle smooth and silent (meaning unperforated), covered so that from what is below it appears to be removed, and the rotation of that.
And if you want, apply the cautery according to what was mentioned before in the cautery of ethyl in the tip of the cautery.
In terms of the instruments that are used for bleeding.
Some bandages are made for bleeding with silver or tin or melted iron or hammered metal; and some bandages are made from those small and large instruments according to which they are used, that is, the ones used in treating infants should be small; and from those where the wounds are fresh or painful, the bleedings from those should be small.
The form of large bleeding:
The head of the needle above where the bag is tied should be wide according to this manner; and it is at that distance from where the bag is tied that you place the needle thus sometimes.
And the tip of its pus below, which enters into the wound, should be silent (meaning unclosed) like a lion's claw with sharpness; and on one side of the loop of it there are two claws, and on the other side one claw, and the width of the claw according to the thickness of the rays and thicker ones being small.
And let the bag in which the medicines of beast bladder or sheep skin are placed be at the root of its hand one palm.
And let it be pierced with claws like when they are being rotated; and if the space which is between the claws the thickness of what has been said.
And then insert into those claws a strong piece of raw wax which is the size of ten pieces of wax or roughly that size; and adjust this bag to it; and when you place the bag on it, make it tight in the tip of the bleeding between two distinguishing at strong constriction, and bleed with each claw: More specifically, the quality of bleeding with each claw is that you fill the bag with medicine, which should be heated according to the tolerance capacity of the patient; and beware that it is not too long nor too short.
And then the patient should lie on his back, and raise their thighs while placing something under them or a pillow; and let someone apply to the end of the cautery with oil, or with egg white, or with fenugreek extract or semolina; and let him insert that into the wound for convenience, and let the doctor take the bag and squeeze it in two places repeatedly with force until everything from within the bleeding is drained out completely; and then remove the bleeding from the patient while they raise their thighs to the wall.
And if the medicine causes that to swell, use as much as you can tolerate; and if it sleeps in that for the entire night, it is better later in youth.
More so if you bleed him in the patient's stomach ailments and his body sweats, then you should continue the bleeding until he is healed.
And if in the wound there are hemorrhages or boils, then let the bleeding be subtle and lion-like, of those bleedings that are treated for infants.
Regarding the treatment of infections.
And I have already mentioned in the division of the treatment of infections what was suitable for freedom, and so I also describe the treatment of those with me and with medicines according to harmony.
So, I say that infections are diverse according to what kind of infection it is and according to the place where the infection occurs on the body.
And the causes for which lesions occur in infections are such as injury to flesh, or cutting of space or a vein, or hitting with a spear, or with a staff, or with an arrow, or similar injuries causing lesions.
More specifically, the infections that are in parts of the body are such as a head infection, or neck, or foot, or belly, or genital region, and similar to those affecting limbs.
And I am recommending the treatment of some infections because you should apply this reasoning and rule to the others as well.
And I begin with simple head infections, for the recall of compound ones will come in the beginning of the next chapter.
So, if an infection occurs on the head that is simple and not a fracture, then consider this: if it's due to flesh or some other cause, and you've already drained the pus only and the infection is large worrying about the potential boil of the patient, then you sweat out and perform percutaneous bleeding right away, without delay; remove from under the skin according to the amount of virtue of it unless there are any prohibitions against bleeding due to some other cause, especially if the pus that comes out from the infection is small.
And it refers to the counter-bleeding of the opposite side from the affected part; and one should keep the patient free from overeating, drinking, and heavy foods.
If you suspect any cause of my disease, then reduce food intake and do not approach meat or drink.
And apply to the wound, if an abscess appears, press with oil rubbed in or with wine that is styptic.
If you are sure of an abscess, then apply to the wound, if it is recent at its seat and the air has not changed that powder which I recommend slightly.
And if the air has already changed there, then apply to some ointment until it is healed.
If the wound is large or due to swelling and disfigurement, and if the lips of the patient are not closed by stitches, then adjust those with suture according to what I recommend for their suture.
If the wound has already been revealed from bone and flesh, and it is not retention but just a small suspensorium, then incise that and then cure the wound with medicines and restore the flesh in place of the defect. And command the patient to eat foods that are easy on digestion: cabbage and beans, which suit them, until they are digested.
And if you find decomposition in the defect and it doesn't stick to the bone, then you should incise all that pus and drain it, and then cure it.
If in these wounds there is an artery or vein from which blood flow might occur, and it cannot be cut with medicines, then you should inquire about the artery. If you find that it is not incised, then you should incise it with a point, or tie it; and if necessity requires that what we have said does not apply, then you should cauterize until the blood is cut off.
And if these wounds are simple and small, then their cause is slight; therefore, you should sprinkle this powder over them until the air changes those.
And the method of the powder is as follows: take one part of olive oil from beeswax, two parts of dragon's blood oil, and three parts of unextinguished grease; mix it thoroughly and sift it, then apply the mixture to the wound until it is filled, held in place by good compression until it sticks to that and coagulates with the blood.
And afterwards sprinkle that with powder and let it rest, do not remove it until it has healed, wait for the medicine to be fully absorbed before it is cured.
And sometimes you must do this alone with a cautery, when it is not available now with beeswax and dragon's blood.
And carry out this operation for large wounds when it should be paused over them and tightened, and those wounds that are recent at their blood, which the air has not altered.
And if the air has altered them, especially when it's during summer, then it is not advisable to place this powder in its usual position. Instead, treat those with what we have said, and do pause over those some digestive ointments or sprinkle on those powders of flour from bread with water and honey until they form pus; and later treat those with another cure until they are healed.
If it happens that there is a fracture in the bone and it's small, then you should extract this with your hands.
And I prescribe the treatment for skull fractures in what is poisonous.
And about the wounds of the throat.
If the wound occurs in the throat, then it doesn't make a difference in treatment, just as with a simple skull wound.
If the nerve or artery in the throat has been incised, then if it's a nerve, it shouldn't be treated in the same way as for the patient; instead, avoid treatment with what causes strong vasoconstriction, such as zinnia and those that resemble it but don't affect the nerves and constrict them. And don't pause over the wound for any reason that causes it to freeze; as the substance of nerves is frozen and its continuation is in the brain, which is the source of all fluids of all members.
And if this is treated with mild medicines such as washing with lukewarm water, some infusion in oil, either rubbed or not, and thyme when it's washed with lukewarm water, and the other powders are sprinkled according to this method, and ointments are moistened.
If the wound is large, then you should apply suture or tie up the lips of the patient, and then treat that with powders until it is healed.
If the wound has depth or occurs at the lower part that forms pus, then puncture it in the deepest area of that place.
If the wound has already been incised and blood flow is obtained, then separate or dry it, or tie it, or cauterize it if necessity requires that.
If you have already incised the tendons of the jugular or all of them, and so have saved the veins in the throat, then adjust the lips of the defect with suture over the lumen of the jugular without touching that; equalize that and return it to its natural shape, and strengthen that with a decent structure afterwards, let it rest for several days; and treat that with ointments where there is vasoconstriction and stimulation until it heals.
If the infection has already spread throughout the body, then you strike there, and if it contains pieces of the infected material, extract all that you can from them; and for what cannot be seen or is not visible to your naked eye, look inside until the infection recedes, separate it, and remove it completely so that it will alleviate his suffering.
And if the disease is recent, then sprinkle over it the powder which has been recommended to you. If there is a fistula in the disease, then treat that with what will bring its memory to your head, approximately akin to surgery.
If it's a rib or breast impact, and you measure its depth, then note that if the patient feels windiness during pain, it means that the disease is fatal.
And if there is no depth to the disease and it's recent on their skin, then you should apply to them with the first mixture of powder, but don't rub it in case it gets retained at the depth under him and returns to his body causing pain. Instead, pause on them with an attractive ointment, and rub that twice a day.
And if the ointment is not available, then you should press on the opening of the disease to let out what comes from humidity; and make the patient sleep over the diseased area so that what is in him can flow out.
If for three days or more the disease has passed without causing the patient seizures, cardiac palpitations, nor constriction of his limbs, and he remains in good health with other good treatments given to him, then you can conclude that the disease is saved; and from then on treat it with rest and along with other remedies until it heals.
If the healing of the patient is not justified, and this has been open all the time, then you can understand that a fistula has already formed; so treat it accordingly from its head.
And if the disease is due to a cut in the armpit or breast, and it's simple on the surface of the leg or both, then treat that with what precedes suture if it's large, or with powder if it's small.
If it has already spread throughout the body and you have incised him several times, then you tighten the disease and extract those pieces if they are separated. If they are not separated, then you allow everything inside until the disease subsides, and extraction of them is alleviated.
And for other diseases that occur in the other limbs, juvenile treatment follows what we have said.
For diseases of the abdomen.
The indisposition which occurs in the stomach is either large, or small, or intermediate.
And a small disruption is made difficult by another method, and you realize that the reduction of them is much more difficult, if you do not take care of their intrusion into their place immediately, which when it opens becomes larger because the material of him makes its operation difficult.
And therefore the best disruption is intermediate, where the reduction of the intestines is not difficult there, similarly to how it is difficult in the other two species mentioned above.
And know that suture of the stomach is according to four ways, but two stitches are common that you should consider in stitches of other diseases of the heart.
And there are two other proprietary stitches that communicate with other diseases, but they are more proprietary in the stitch of the stomach.
And I advise you on every exposition and declaration.
So I tell you that when the disease is small and a cause of the intestines occurs there, making it difficult to reduce that, then this situation can happen in one of these two ways: either due to the smallness of the disruption as we have said, or when the intestines are swollen by the coldness of the air.
And when this is so, you must cut that away by submerging a sponge in hot water alone, or you take it from water squinting, and cyperum, and spices, and you immerse the intestines into that until the swelling resolves.
And sometimes this is done by doing it in which there is astringency, and it's better than water alone for resolving the swelling.
And so when you have resolved the swelling, then you moisten the intestines with water in which garlic and marjoram are added, for through this its material is alleviated by a few causes.
If its material is relieved with this treatment, then divide the disruption a little with a tool on which there are needles.
And the first treatment is better when it's properly done that it doesn't dry out, and there shouldn't be an operation to dry out near necessity and deficiency.
Of the tool, if its shape is as follows:
The one part of the tool is sharp, and the other part is not acute, and its extremity is subtle, but it should not be as subtle as a needle before being blunt for just a little.
And so when the wound is enlarged and extends beyond the belly, then it must ensure that its reduction follows the shape of its natural form, in its proper place. If possible, this should be done on the belly, which is better.
When the disruption is extensive, and it's in the lower part of the abdomen, then you must make the patient lie on his back, place his hands higher than his head; and if it's in the upper part of the abdomen, then you should place his head and feet higher than the sides.
And similarly, if the disruption is in one of the two parts of the abdomen, then you should contemplate and consider at once regarding it so that the part where the wound is can be higher than the other.
And thus, you should administer this in large wounds and in medium-sized wounds.
And in small wounds, use this as your preparation, and make sure that the one who administers it is among your best, so that he has all of the disruption under his hand and adjusts the patient's limbs. Then proceed to uncover from one place to another, making sure not to cut any stitches unnecessarily.
This is the common method of suturing: when you take the needle, or count the number of needles according to the width of the wound; then lay off from the tip of the disruption of the ring finger, and tighten the needle one, or another such that no thread gets into either end of the cord, both ends of the middle part where the threads are left inside, so that it makes that penetrate that part; and you have added both ends of the cord and both ends of the middle part, making four rows.
And then tighten the thread double in the circuit of the needle, and stitch both sides at once for several times, and then add both the limbs and wound by gradual addition; and then smooth out the thickness of the finger and place another needle there, and stitch that with the same as you did with the first needle; and do not stop doing this until you have completed all the contraction of the wound.
And let the needles be medium in hardness and delicacy; for fine needles lightly cut into the flesh; and thick ones are difficult to insert in the thread, so you must ensure they are medium in both delicacy and thickness.
And don't have the needle placed in both ends of the thread closely together, so that the flesh is not cut lightly and the wound opens before its healing.
And don't extend stitches unnecessarily for the wound not to be prevented from healing properly.
And then insert the ends of the needles so that they don't displace the patient from their sleep; you will place powder for spreading over all sides on top of the stitches, having the needle ends there; and leave them until you know that the wound has already consolidated.
And this type of suture with needles in a hand method is more suitable for small wounds, where until the stitches are made using one or two needles around them.
And the second suture is common: it involves administering stitches with all four ends, both ends of the thread and both ends of the middle part, in one go, using a needle where the thread is enveloped evenly in terms of delicacy and thickness.
And when you have penetrated these four ends with the needle from this midpoint part where it began, return the needle to that same side part, so that the thread retracts from the lower part towards the wound, so that the stitches follow the stitch of fabric on which the fabrics are tightened.
And pause between each stitch for the thickness of half the width of the finger's middle part.
And this suture is known to men.
And with this type of suture, I healed the wound that happened to a man in his abdomen which was hit by a stone, and it was the disruption of the larger wound being as wide as one palm, and it was located about two palms away from the belly at the middle point; and then I reduced that deposit after the intestine had been pulled out for twenty-four hours.
And the wound was consolidated within fifteen days or so, and I treated it until it healed; then apply that poultice with warm water for several times, and then it is discussed in its condition.
And other doctors judged that it was not healing; by miracle though, for I did not treat it with oil, which was in a place where oil could not be found or any medicine either. Instead, I would apply on the wound like a thick layer twice each day and frequently bathe it with honey water until it healed completely.
And I will tell you two kinds of my own suture methods according to Paul's narration.
And it is that you begin with the stitch of the thread, and insert the needle from the outside to the inside part.
And when the needle penetrates into the thread and in that, it inserts nails according to rectitude and length throughout the entire body, leaving the end of the middle part in which you have inserted the needle. And make the needle penetrate at the other end the needle from the inside part to the outside part at the other end of the spine.
And when you have made that penetration, then make another penetration in that middle section of the body's extremity on the opposite side to where the exit was; and see the extremity of the spine which is in this part, and pierce it with the needle through the inner extremity of the exit to the front.
And make that penetration also through the middle on which you made the other one in the spine, at its extremity which is at his inner part where all of it will penetrate.
And then start from this middle side and pierce there at the extremity where is the spine on the other side, and remove that needle from the thread which penetrated it, then return that to that thread, and pierce its extremity of the spine which is in this outer part at this extremity; and remove that thread from the other end which is from his part.
And do this once and again, and do this once more between them where you will sew all that is outside according to that example.
And the completion of this method of suturing is that you sew with suture thread through the skin where you will stitch the skin together, so that you sew the spine once from the part of the end of the needle line and then leave that second round until it is completed.
May this second specific suture method which is called Gualia by some surgeons, and it consists of their discussion about it and what they recommend, that you sew it according to its similarity where certain surgeons stitch it. So they add the entire part to its corresponding part based on nature; and apply the extremity of another one from them and the extremity of the patient to the other extremity of him, and this is done according to how I have recommended to you.
When you place the needle at your fingertips of the outer part, make that penetrate into the inner part in that sole, and leave two extremities of the spine; then return the needle and make it penetrate from outside to inside through two extremities of the spine.
And then return those twists, and make each one of the inner part penetrate inside to the outer part in two extremities of the patient other than they are on this opposite side.
And this method of suture is better than the common light sewing, and it is a suture from which there should be a reminder.
This is the method of Gualia.
And thus they would say that abdominal suture is corrected with two needles, so you will insert into these each one a thread, and begin with the needle introduction of what should be yours, then make it penetrate inside to this opposite side according to those who stitch them in equal bodies.
And know that when the rupture is in the middle location of the belly, then this stitch will be more difficult than from other locations of the belly.
And the judgment of treatment for plague is the judgment of the other plagues.
And this reason is that when you acquire plague in its initial stage before the air alters it, and reduce the swelling and stitch it up appropriately afterwards, then place upon it carminative powder.
And if the air has already altered the plague, then place upon it some ointments which are among your possessions so that they harden and bind the threads, and make the spine and patient firm; and then treat it similarly as with the treatment of other plagues so that it is healed.
And if the medicines are not among your possessions, then place upon it immediately, because it begins to weep pus and yellowish fluid, and change that two times a day, as you have been taught, until it is healed. You would not need other medicine in various conditions when the plagues are simple.
And if you fear that the plague might spread to the main limbs, then consider this: immerse wool in oil of good quality or in melted oil, and place it around the areas between the armpits and leave the rest alone.
And if there is pain or putrefaction in his swellings, which are at these times, then cover that with a black stinging vinegar, and especially if the pus has spread inside the swelling and has caused penetration discharge into its cavity.
And know that that which is from the larger swellings is of lighter pus for healing, while that which is in finer swellings is different.
And it is difficult to heal that which is called "gun" where there is no recovery from plague for it spans his entire body; and this is due to the large number of veins that are in him and the vastness of them that are in those areas, and due to the subtlety of his body's nature, and due to its proximity to the nature of nerves.
And if what you are dealing with from the plague is the skin, and you acquire it recently, reduce it according to your straightness on which you will reduce the swellings equally.
And if it has already spread in him and turned to yellow or black, then strengthen that with a thread over the area that is discolored by him, so that blood flows from this, because in the skin there are veins and arteries.
And then incise where is another part of the ligament, and place two ends of the thread hanging from the outer side of the plague exit hole for you, so that the attraction of him might be alleviated by your removal of the skin and the expulsion of the pus of the plague.
Recollection of the plagues when they occur in the intestine.
When disruption occurs in the intestine and it is small, then it is possible that it can heal in some individuals. This is why I saw one who was hit in his belly by a spear, and this was the abdominal plague from the right side of the stomach, and the plague was old and had formed a fistula, and he suffered from cramps and flatulence due to this condition.
So I pursued the treatment of this already, not satisfied with his healing, but sought to find out that which is healthy within and that the place has been consolidated.
And I saw the place already consolidated, that you would experience an event of bad on him in his belly; and did not incur any other such bad accident by this mishap and disturbed his natural digestive processes eating and drinking, but instead bathed himself in moderation and exercised in accordance with his diet.
And some experienced ones have said that when there's an inflammation in the intestine and it is small, then one should tie it according to this manner: you take large leaves; then adjust the edges of the inflammation and place a burning leaf over them; so when he holds onto those and tightens his mouth, cut off its head, which sticks and does not dissolve.
And continue to place another burning leaf next to the first one, and do not cease this process of applying more leaves as many as necessary for the entire inflammation.
And continue to reduce that and thus heal the inflammation; and break off those excess leaves inside where the intestine is until it heals; and do not harm the patient in doing so.
And it is possible that the intestine could be tied with something very fine which is made from beast's intestines, because they are thicker; this being so, you should take hold of the end of those intestine threads, and if they are well trimmed, place their tip next to the end of his own thread, encircling it, and insert that thread into needles and inside that patient's intestine, then reduce it in the inflammation.
And this method of stitching with leaves is merely according to a trusted and hopeful path.
Perhaps if the inflammation is large and wide, especially if it's in one of the finer intestines, then merely treatment involves refinement, rather than a full healing.
Regarding the cure for ulcers and fistulas.
Know that all inflammation and abscesses when they fester and become old, result in an ulcer, which does not heal completely over time and is not able to be removed. Therefore, wherever it might occur, this condition is universally named a fistula, and we call that type of ulcer azukem.
And by the truth, a fistula is a hard, feathery blockage, white in color to which there is no pain and against which one can apply pressure just like with the pressure of squeezing out pus; hence it is called that type of ailment too, namely pus.
And in some individuals, there's moisture which produces pus; and if the humidity is reduced, it can be expelled within several hours. And in some instances this moisture turns into pus; it's small, dense, and fine.
All these causes have been shown, along with their signs and treatments through medicines as detailed in the division.
Thus I will explain to you the treatment for fistulas which are performed through surgical means with my own hands.
Know that fistulas can occur in all parts of the body; among those, there are fistulas that arise from large veins and arteries, or nerves, or the spine, or intestines, or bladder, or along any ribs, or along some of the vertebrae of the back, or anywhere on joints formed by composition such as the hands and chest. They tend to be close to the main limb part and resemble its structure.
Therefore, this type of fistula is characteristic of difficult healing and non-healing conditions, and dealing with it involves hard work and ignorance.
And if any of those fistulas does not reach to the locations that were mentioned and you hope for its healing and trust in it, wanting to gain knowledge about it, then you take a risk with iron or force. If the fistula follows a straight path, examine it with him.
Perhaps if the fistula is twisted, then investigate it with a fine lead weight, for as lead in his body is lightened and curved, correct the twist accordingly.
And if the fistula has no harmful motion, it is not within your ability to test or indicate over them.
Then you cleanse the openings with their own openings, for the moisture by which you enema that must go to the other openings and flow from them.
And inquire very carefully, according to the manner by which you know if here are nerves or not, and whether it is a distant or close cavity, or an enigmatic opening with openings that is above this entire thing at your full strength, through your questioning of the patient, through your examination, in which you question the patient about it, and regarding the cause of pain you apply your pressure to the area with your hand, resembling the understanding and causes of complications to the abscess.
And once you have considered all those causes at your stationary position, then proceed to treatment according to confidence: it is that you now assess if this is an apparent nearby fistula or in a location of the body, distant from joints, or from nerves, or arteries, or veins, or any of the locations I've mentioned and told.
Then you dry out the fistula as previously mentioned in its description of the patient, and maintain this until it has filtered through the decaying flesh, and this which is born within the tissue's orifice, or parts and similar, and treat that inside once it has been healed.
Should the fistula be of distant depth and along the rectum, then cut it into whatever is possible for you to reach inside, and properly modify that with all its decaying flesh; then administer heated bandages wrapped in sharp medicines, and insert those into the cavity of the fistula, which you have understood through iron.
And do this several times within it so that the sharp medicine will corrode all that is rotten in the cavity of the fistula.
Then restore her with ointments that generate healthy flesh once it has been healed.
Should it not be healed by this method, then you cauterize it according to what we have recommended.
Should the cause of the fistula be bone and you need to certify this, then inquire about it and dry it out according to what we have recommended. If you do not prohibit any cause from a vein or nerve or major body part as we said.
Should the bone be revealed to you and there is corruption or blackness in the patient, then cut it open where all the corruption can be reached; then treat that part by allowing the flesh of the patient to regenerate until it is healed.
And if it is not healed and the blood is as it was before, then know that you have not achieved total eradication of the corruption; and thus uncover about them again carefully and proceed with the examination and modification to their final strength, then restore that.
And therefore if it is healed, then that's good; and otherwise, know that this corruption is in the distant depth of the body, which has not been achieved, and thus for you there is nothing else but to leave it.
And if the corrupted bone is small, or you can pull it with forceps, then you will pull it with fine forceps that suit to this.
And if it is bones that are moving, then very carefully perform the extraction of all those, and from them leave none behind at your strength.
Should it make any resistance from the moisture content, and in their incision there is neither fear nor error, then cut those ligaments or flesh if they are here, and release the bones.
Should you not be prepared to take out the bones of your time, then place this over the wound so that the wound remains here, and leaves it within where this is around those bones and ligaments, and guard this wound from being consolidated, and hold back the section you have cut into during your operation.
When it comes to cutting off if you fear it, place this over the wound submerged in a heated oil bath, or the wound submerged in an Egyptian ointment, or any of the other ointments that will release these ligaments when cut, and once they are separated from the bones, this makes you rejoice.
Should it be a large bone like the bone of rib or thigh or similar to that, and that which in them is corrupted is only the flesh of them, then cut this off only from behind where you can reach that darkness and corruption, and then restore the wound.
Should what is corrupted in them be a large part, and the corruption has already reached to the marrow of the bone, then this is necessary to close that off and that one completely cut into the location where it has been invaded by the corruption, and then treat that until it is consolidated.
And I recommend to you as an example and auxiliary for when you should place this over someone in their thigh bone, so that it remains as an example during your operation.
Take an adolescent person around thirty years old, to whom pain occurs in their thigh. The parts within that are affected are about the substance within the body where the matter has invaded the thigh, and this is material of abscess with large abscesses, and does not focus on the extrinsic cause.
And then extend this over it for the error of doctors until the abscess erupts, and drain the moved substances, and his healing is approximately finished once the change becomes fistulated, and make openings in those moving orifices which all contained pus and body moisture.
And after receiving the training of many doctors over two years, and not concentrating on them, within which I was called.
And see the contents of him and the substances that were flowing from him through large openings; and already his body was completely stiffened, and the color of him was lemon yellow.
And then I inserted a thread into one of those openings and brought the thread to the mouth.
And then I carefully examined all the openings and found out how they were connected to every side of the cavity.
And then I opened and cut into one of those openings where I found a part of the bone, and found that part corrupted, and it was already rotten and spoiled; and already had decayed a part of the cavity into which it had penetrated to the depth.
And then I made sure what was revealed to me and prepared that which was discovered from the bone found.
And I made sure that it was not within the bone but rather that corruption which caused and spread it, and I had already removed it.
And then began to restore the wound with long-term consolidating medicine, but it did not consolidate.
And then I repeated and discovered again on the bone after the first discovery, and found continuous corruption on the bone.
And I made sure what appeared to me from that corruption, and then began to do the repair of him and restoration, but it was not restored.
And then I discovered another way over him and did not cease to gradually cut into the bone precisely and completed the restoration of him, but it was not restored until I cut around his palm, and he extracted from his marrow, and then he restored that with medicines, and it was slightly consolidated and healed.
And there is no need for repetition in the operation of him and his section but due to the disposition of his nerves and due to the lack of tolerance and fear of death that happened to him at all times due to an excess of emptying, bad syncope.
And so healing is through complete healing, and nothing is in place of hard bone tissue; and it makes good disposition for him in his body and returns his health; and he converses with his dispositions and does not oppose him during walking or damage in any cause.
If the bone is prominent in a location of the body already excavated, then follow this method: and you should grasp firmly that which protrudes from that prominent bone, and command another to extend it on his sides; and place that piece of thread much thicker than the first thread; and then let it rest on the skin where the bone was left, and extend its end so you pull the skin towards those places left exposed, and uncover the skin over the location you want to cut in order for the saw not to damage the skin.
And place a rod or table under that bone properly, so when you do this, it is not forbidden to use the saw which does not cut through the rotten skin.
And you should make sure that the saw cuts over the rotten area little by little, so if it is in the concavity of the corrupted bone and does not appear at its manifestation in feeling, force another cut on this occasion.
And if the bone is corrupted and non-prominent, before that one part continues to another, and the corruption is at its center or in a part of it, then you uncover the flesh from all parts completely; and then place a support under you, and then cut that from the first part where the corruption is inside so that the sawing continuity of the other part remains.
And let the saw be according to the location of the corruption a little, as we have said.
And if the corruption is at the junction, cut into that corrupted joint, and saw through the bone where it continues from the other side.
And if corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it's not just within but also externally.
And if corruption is in the elbow of the hand or chest, it's quite difficult; however, you should inquire about how the corruption appears to you, and cut into that, and reveal that according to every disposition which is possible for you, and let each tool be corrected for you when it doesn't oppose your veins or nerves.
And know which are the ones that penetrate and saw through these bones depend on the location of the bones, the preparation of those, their thickness, the delicacy and size and smallness of them, and their hardness and their rarity; so you should ensure when preparing for every type of operation a suitable instrument convenient to that operation.
And know that operation means for you about the type of tool you need; when this is extensive study and long with knowledge of these methods in this art, and experience from various types of illnesses, so that now you have it all under control to apply what is suitable to each tool for every ailment.
And I will inform you about the tools you should prepare at the end of this chapter, which will be simple ones among which you will proceed with your prohibition which you will experience on the others. Shape of the saw:
Shape of another saw:
Shape of another large saw:
Procedure for treatment: For this procedure, form the head according to the shape of the star-shaped keyhole, and the points follow the shape of the points almond-shaped.
And only rub with that until the heads of the joints become smooth when they are corrupted, or it is a large mouth that is greatly widened.
Procedure for the smaller razors:
Procedure for oblique razors:
Procedure for another type of saw properly made: have it cut the curvature of the pus upwards and the sharpness of its edge downwards, while the member of its handle is punctually cut downwards. Shape of it:
Procedure for razors that have a concavity:
Procedure for another subtle razor:
Procedure for another curved-ended razor:
Procedure for the small razor resembling a spider web:
Shape of another smaller incisor:
Shape of another type of incisor; this one resembling a ray, and its end resembles a saw, it is exhibited in various locations along the bones:
Procedure for rays that correspond to the ones that penetrate through the bones:
And its end is triangular and sharp.
And it is made of Indian iron, similar to the coverings for all the causes we have discussed about razors and incisors and saws.
Of the ends of incision and the lock on the bones.
The ends are pressed either due to an intrinsic cause or an extrinsic one, or according to how you have treated that corruption with curative medicine and the cure does not work, or sometimes the corruption spreads from that member without any cause; then cover that member into that place where it covers the corruption so that the patient dies or suffers the greater harm of that member.
And the sign of where it happens is that the member turns black inside until it has burned, or you place the darkness inside so that that particular burn goes into that member causing it to consume everything in its path; and thus make an incision at that point.
And similarly, if it is caused by the impact of certain poisonous causes such as that of a sea scorpion or vipers or snakes and their like.
And if the corruption or impact is at the end of the finger, then you cut the finger and do not give space for the corruption to spread into your hand.
And similarly if it reaches the hand, then you cut that at the joint of the wrist, and do not give space for the corruption to spread within that forearm.
And if it affects that area, then you cut the arm between the elbow at the joint.
And if the corruption passes beyond that area and sometimes around the elbow, then it is death for the patient; and administering another cause to this in treatment is a quantity of virtue.
And similarly do it for the chest when corruption affects the rib of the chest, then you cut that between one of the nipples.
And if it spreads to the back of the chest, then you cut the whole chest. If it penetrates into the abdomen, then you cut the belly between the abdominal joint.
And if corruption has already reached into the abdomen, then it is not an operation but an evacuation, and leave the patient to death.
The method of cutting the member or sawing it is that you strengthen one tendon in the part where you want to cut, and leave another there; then extend your hand with another tendon between those parts. Extend your hand with another tendon across them; then you separate the flesh that's between two tendons so that the area is exposed completely, and then you cut or saw it.
And cover that with a cloth from all directions so that it doesn't touch the place of injury, and bring to the patient an adjusted wound and scab.
If there is blood leakage when you operate, then you apply the cautery moderately to that area, or place some powders on it that strengthen the blood; and then return to your treatment until it's completed.
And when you have treated the injured member with tendon or as is convenient, cure that until it heals.
And I advise you to do this when it happens to someone in their chest, the incident that I and you recommend, which often occurs to them turning black in their chest as if assembled with fire's combustion.
And that corruption initially happens at the tip of his finger spreading throughout his chest.
And then that person prepares for themselves to produce pus which causes the healing to spread through his body with the intensity of his pain and the heat of it. He cuts the chest between the joints, and heals.
For a long time this corruption incident occurs in that part of the hand I'm pointing to.
Then it reaches me and I decide to address that surplus with what has been applied on the hand of medicine, around the transformation of his body; and the surplus does not reoccur but starts spreading to another finger starting from the hand.
And he asked me to apply grease to his hand, and I did not want to do this fearing the consequences of that excess, rather than fearing the application of the grease to his dead hand, for the power of the patient was on the verge.
And since he died of me, he returned to his land and informed me that the man had prepared and applied grease all over his hand, and he recovered.
And I have not recounted this story merely because it is a helper for understanding this illness, and its significance is why it is said and according to which it was performed.
Regarding the treatment of colic and qualities of enemas with medicines.
When an abscess occurs in some fleshy limbs and the space of the abscess is extended into collecting pus, and then it bursts and perforates, and pus escapes from it, leaving the area void as if it were a vessel, and the channel that opens there is likened to fine fabric under it, and does not proceed to later corruption, and does not spread into bones or nerves or sinew, it is called a sinus, and it is not named a fistula.
However, if the space is extended into where corruption begins in some member, then it is called a fistula and does not stop there.
And the treatment of it is to open that channel all through like when it twists, especially if it's fine and done like a fabric, and make sure not to stick to the area by its corruption.
And if you hope that the channel will adhere and that this corruption has not occurred through subsequent consequence, and in the channel there is pus on its face, then you treat it with an enema.
And you consider the sinus, and if it is large, the arm that yields this odor, then treat it with an Egyptian enema consisting of oil and vinegar and honey, divided equally in parts, which are adjusted in a vessel, and placed over the fire until the medicine boils and reaches the sweetness of honey.
And then you take what is necessary from it, dissolves it in water and honey; treats it with the said on the sinus, strengthens his opening, and lets the medicine remain in him for the quantity of two hours.
And then you extract that from its price; do this for several days until the sinus is cured and his moisture is restored.
And some times when you cannot present this medicine, you take ashes from wood and mix it with water; then boil that and treat it with the said treatment until you are convinced that the sinus is gone.
And if the patient doesn't tolerate the Egyptian medicine or water from ashes, then treat it with water and honey, mixed with diluted vinegar, and treat it with vinegar and honey. For the property of honey is to cure and wash, and wine makes the sinus adhere, especially when there's excess of astringency and dryness in the wine.
And when you do this for a few times and are convinced that the sinus is already healed, then treat it with what causes birth in him.
And you take diaphanic ointment and dissolve that in rubbed oil and vinegar; or you treat it with some medicines and other ointments whose properties I have already written about in the treatise on ointments.
And if the opening of the sinus is too tight for the insertion of the enema tube, then you gradually enlarge it with a small metal tool, and stop in that place covered with Egyptian ointment or basilicon ointment until it is enlarged.
And similarly if the opening is large, then you stitch his lips to him with stitches and let there be a quantity within him that fits an enema.
And if the opening from which his arm flows is elevated to its parts above, then dry it in the pus base place where it is in him so that his arm can flow into it. When his arm is constricted in the depth of the sinus, the flesh will be generated in him.
And if it's not possible to dry the sinus inside the base of the pus as you wish, then you should perforate that prepares the member for preparation so that his arm flows from him lightly according to what is within your ability and ensures no obstacle for the arm is kept in him.
And that which is on the opening of the sinus, which you heal constantly so that it does not allow what is in his arm to escape. And to know whether what flows from him of his arm is much or little, or if it's digested, or not digested.
And always when you consider that place in him, if you feel pain or not in the patient, and if it is in his abscess.
And when your treatment is extended in such manner, and you see the matter that has seeped over the openings of the wound already adheres or is acquiring adhesion, then keep it moistened with water or heat it. And when you moisten the wound, change the bandage for another and renew the ointment.
If in the wound there is ample space where small viruses can spread, then do not give up on its adhesion; it's for the sake of healing him that this happens. For some individuals, it takes a generation of flesh in these various wounds, and for others, it does the opposite.
And if in the wound there are several days of undigested meat, then know that the wound does not adhere; and if the adhesion to the wound is delayed and due to prolonged treatment, then you adjust it in drying out the medicines. And if the medicines are wetted by their substance and their effectiveness, they should be dried just like animal fat when there's an excess of digestion.
And the best method after this is to take animal fat with it and dissolve it in rubbed oil, then apply that on its substance, and place it close to him, and use it accordingly.
And when it seems like this action, without having meat, apply animal fat, honey when you place it inside that makes it expand, and use it; or take myrrh and aloes and grind them, and mix them all with honey heated on fire, then spread this mixture over a cloth and strengthen the wound. And spread this over the wound while mixing it with honey until it expands, and grind it over the cloth and strengthen this.
And sometimes it's necessary to give advice for the long-term treatment and consideration of celestial lilies (and these are celestial lilies), as well as flour from ashes and centaurine, and use those simple remedies or adjust them accordingly. Grind those together, sift them over the honey I've prescribed; and use this method.
And if the wound is prolonged and isn't healed by this treatment, then know that corruption has spread within him, and already investigates in the bones or in other hard parts of his body or joints; then you heal it with a tubercular treatment, as described above.
Regarding the treatment of ingrowing toenails and thinned nails, and cutting the finger and excision.
An ingrowing toenail is an abscess that leaves the nail off the tip of the hand or foot, causing the other nails to press in. If it's prolonged and its treatment is expensive, one can perform a cautery on this abscess, or if it's corrupted, it will eat into the root of the nail, corroding it completely. It spreads corrosion all through to the bone where it smells unpleasant, and cuts off the extremity of that part, making the color blackish.
And so when you have that which we've discussed in the division and if your treatment doesn't work, then consider that you should cut off all the excess that has accumulated under the nail and apply a cautery to the wound nearby this area. The heat from this will be beneficial here.
If the bone is safe and the nail is healthy, and if the parts of the nail have already joined with the flesh deep within, they start to pierce it, then consider that you should place a subtle object at the angle of the nail that pierces the flesh. Push this forward until it cuts through the flesh easily, then pause on what remains of the flesh that is burned by corrosive medicines within which everything has been softened; and treat this with an ointment so that it heals.
If corruption has already spread into the bone, then consider that you should cut out the bone from this area, because there is no healing when the bone within him is corrupted.
And if you see the corrosion and corruption spreading into that part, then consider cutting it out along one of its joints according to where your memory leads you, and treat this area so that it heals.
If there's pressure or scratching on the nail and it causes intense pain, then consider that at the beginning you would bleed the patient with an incision. And cut off the nail with a sharp knife across in its center upwards towards its root, make sure that the drying doesn't reach the flesh left by the nail, which will cause the patient intense pain leading to the creation of excess flesh at this location; then treat this area with whatever relieves pain.
This adjustment was mentioned previously, which is natural in many people. It weakens the flesh all over, it also weakens bones, or it can affect the nail itself.
These are natural in the root of the joint, or they are the nature of this within certain joints. That which is natural in some joints is not harmful, whereas that which is natural at the joints tends to be detrimental.
And for those that are naturally fatty, the drying is mild; so you should cut this area under its root with a sharp knife.
That which is natural at the root of the joint, healing is difficult; so be careful not to remove it.
In that which is natural in this part, consider to cut along its joints; you should cut the flesh at the beginning inside the bone by an incision round into the joint and proceed with the operation using one of those suitable saws on this, then treat this area so that it heals.
The accumulation which happens among them [diseases] in the midst of their various causes or due to human birth that manifests itself, or due to the consolidation of plague or due to burning with fire, or due to resemblance, then seek out and allow that accumulation within which those diseases return to their natural form.
And place between their sheets in oil that has been rubbed, so they do not consolidate lightly, and separate among those [items], or place a thin sheet of lead between them where consolidation will occur according to what is sought.
And similarly, if consolidation occurs in some diseases on the palm, then you dry that consolidation according to preparation and conform it to the figure of the limb.
With respect to ailments, they are varicose veins.
Ailments are varicose veins, and they are thickened, full of melancholic superfluities which appear in the regions of the body's limbs. Their predominant manifestation is found on the chest, especially more so on the chests of travelers, workers, and carriers.
So when you administer the heart's purge of black cholera to some cases for forceful expulsion, and then make the patient bleed from the basilic vein.
The treatment for these cases is done in two ways: the first is to incise and remove that black poison, and the second method is to elevate the vein and remove it entirely.
The operation is done in this way: begin by placing the chest in water as if it's in the stomach where the large poison is dissolved, which becomes liquid in the chest and then strengthen the chest of the patient up to the upper part of the thighs under that of the patient's buttocks, and place your hand on the vein at a location, or in two places, or three with wide sections, and then elevate the black poison near the mouth from within the cavity up above it, and up into it, while draining as much quantity of the poison as you want until it is enough, and this will be tolerated by the patient.
And then guide her, commanding her to refrain from eating black cholera-producing foods.
And repeat the treatment with bloodletting when the veins are full and this is observed in the patient.
The elevation of these is done in this way: you must massage the chest of the patient, if there are movements in their stomachs and then immerse them in hot water and place your hand on the patient's chest in cold water as they become flushed and the veins become swollen; or it may be exercised by vigorous exercise, if bathing is not available, while having their limb rubbed.
And then dry the cord along the course of the vein for section in the long or at the back of it you should have the buttocks, or at the bottom part of the patient you should have the legs.
And then open the cord by incision and scrape the vein from all sides until a sensation appears, and you should observe the appearance of the patient that corresponds to this operation turning towards blackness.
And then when you have removed from the cord you let that white come out which is the cord.
And then place your hands under this ray so that it is elevated and hung from the cord, and suspend it at an ox leg or lion's shoulder.
And then dry another section near that section for three fingers, and scrape the cord from the part above the vein until it appears.
And then elevate that and incise that in the last section near the heel, and then extract that and elevate it until it reaches the second section, and then extract that from the section which is above that.
And do this until you extract that from the section which is more posterior or any other of all sections, until it's completely out; and then incise that.
And if you do not obey to extract and elevate it, then insert a strong double thread needle and guide it in and pull it out, or insert your fingers under this cord and move your hand around completely until it's hung. And make sure not to pierce it; for if it's broken, you'll find it difficult to elevate that movement and it will come upon the patient through that injury.
And once that's completely hung out, then place over the location of the wound wool submerged in vinegar and oil that has been rubbed, and olive oil not rubbed, and cure it where it's healed.
And if the vein is contracted without having curvature, and does not follow rectitude as we've said, then seek out to cut across that at every part of its curvature and at the locations of wrapping around it, and then suspend it by threads so you lift that completely.
And be careful not to pierce your section and do not trouble that, for it will be difficult for you to lift that; exercise caution in that.
The form of the incision when the vein is dried:
It is not treated in this way as with the fingers nor is it of sharp extremity so as to trouble the vein; and it has great flexibility like a lion's leg, for if it were subtle, it would pierce the vein by its subtlety; instead it has unnecessary thickness as we've said.
From the extraction of the leg vein.
This vein is produced in the thighs on southern lands, like Al-Ategi in the desert areas of Arabs and in the dry southern parts of India where there's little fertility and in which no grass nor bushes grow.
And it is also generated in other locations within the body, such as the thighs.
And the origin of this is from putrefaction that progresses like a poison throughout the body, as it were a serpent within the corpse carrying diseases and parasites, worms, all multiplying between the body's defenses and its tissues.
And the sign of this body's vulnerability to disease is when this vein occurs in the thigh with violent inflammation; and then that area swells up; and subsequently, a vein starts from that swelling point as if it were the root of a plant.
And when you see it at the end, then carry out that you place on that a weight of lead whose weight is equal to one drachm. Inside two drachms, and place it and let the lead hang suspended from the belly.
And for as many times as an illness causes it to swell outside the body, encase this with lead and place it. And if the disease is prolonged, then you cut off a part of it and wrap what remains; do not cut directly into where it's still free or it will be retracted inside the body, for cutting there causes contraction and entry into the flesh, leading to abscess formation and pus in that area and a bad ulceration.
And when it's treated gently and extracted little by little, so that it doesn't get stuck at the back of the body or cause any discomfort within the body.
And this vein extends in some individuals whose length reaches up to several palm widths and beyond, which I have experienced personally extending as far as twenty palm widths.
And if it is cut during its treatment, then the tool enters through the skin and punctures that along its long length throughout the body, until all the contents of the matter are evacuated. Then administer putrefaction to the area with medicines for several days; subsequently treat that with treatments for abscesses.
And this vein sometimes has many branches, especially when it appears at the joint of the breast or within the breast, and brings with it additional openings, and can originate from any kind of opening.
And thus treat that in the same way as we have said in the division and with what we have stated about it.
From the section above the worms generated beneath the skin, this is called cow sickness.
This sickness is named cow sickness in some territories because it often affects cows and causes worms that are naturally born between the body's defenses and tissues, which move throughout the entire body up and down. It's evident through the feeling of its presence from member to member, interrupting bodily functions and causing an expulsion from the body.
And its generation is through putrefaction of some fluids, such as causing worms, snakes, earthworms, and roundworms in the stomach.
And it is found through the mischief of this, when it moves within the body and rises to the head, then violently erupts in it and enters the nose, destroying the nasal passage, and causing various swellings.
And when you want to treat and extract that, then do not proceed without considering its development and manifestation in your body sensation, and then notice what is over it and what remains with intense pressure and tightness. And afterward, dry it up around it and remove it.
And if it's embedded in the flesh and you don't feel anything, then place a hot cautery on that spot where it resides, and the major fear is corruption of it which corrupts that area as we have said.
And if it has moved to the head near the nose, then press on the eyebrow with a tight pressure, and afterward dry it around it, and remove it; and notice that the patient uses transformation of their body through medicines removing bad putrid fluids, and avoid foods causing body corruption.
From the section above regarding cow sickness.
This sickness is called Nafir in our territory, and it's pain that occurs in some limbs, and then spreads from limb to limb.
And I've already seen this second one as I will recount it to you. I was called to treat a sick woman in a village, and I discovered her arm and saw a small swelling on the funis vein of the arm. After an hour when it was punctured, I observed that the swelling moved up like a worm going upwards towards this point, but more gently than water, as if it were living silver moving from place to place.
And then felt the pain of that area and found it embedded in the muscle, and stayed here for an hour.
And afterward moves across the other body to reach the other arm.
And afterward, I was told that it moved throughout her entire body as I observed; and I was too amazed by its transformation and the speed from member to member. And I had already seen something like this in front of me according to that manner, but I have also seen cases where the pain is transformed from member to member. When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
And I do not consider this to be as it is simply because of this gout that was in the woman's veins, where there are parts of her body and exposed veins, and in this situation there appears the sensation of that displaced breeze.
And it is necessary that this backward flow not appear in those who are exquisite and have human veins swollen with moisture.
And when you desire the treatment of this patient, and they feel this pain, then it is not as obvious to your senses as we have said, so you press on that area and leave them lightly and dry over that spot where that displaced breeze can be contained, and cauterize the area.
If you do not notice this in your patients' veins, then you treat that as a condition of the heart and whatever expels these breezes, and cure those with herbal pills and medicinal pills and similar remedies.
From feather extraction.
Feathers are differentiated according to the species and according to the locations in the body where they occur. Their diversity lies in those that have large points, small ones, concave ones, dull ones, solid ones; those that have three angles, and those among them that have tongues; and those among them that have spikes.
And of the symptoms of fever are when you find it in the feather, piercing through the bone, and is set up by the fluid that is above the brain, which happens due to excessive heat, blindness, dizziness, colic pain in the veins, swelling and pain of the tongue, seizures and confusion of the mind, vomiting from anger, and fainting is caused, the word is removed and the voice is destroyed, and there appears a spot of dampness white like dust at the site of the wound, and it resembles moisture in the flesh.
And if you observe these symptoms, then abstain from the treatment and extraction of the feather, unless it is external.
The signs of the feather when it is near the left nipple, so that it feels as if it is stuck in hard cause, and this is not an external cause; and the persistent movement of the feather resembles the movement of the pulse, and the condition of the wound shows a black spot, and causes coldness at the extremities, sweat, and fainting. And therefore know that death descends completely through her whole body.
The symptoms when the feather has penetrated the lungs are a sensation of blood foam in the wound, and the vessels close to the throat become swollen, and the color of the skin changes, and one breathes out a great spirit, and demands air intake.
And if you find the feather in the abdominal cavity which is in the feet, then the pain is near the small ribs, and it causes great intense pain and sighing, and all the muscles are not swollen throughout.
And if you find the feather in the stomach, then it causes some undigested food to appear in the wound.
And if you find the feather in the belly, and it is stuck there, a hole appears at the wound or the skin, or the intestine which is ruptured, and there is no hope for the treatment of this extraction of the feather.
And if the feather finds its way into the bladder and urine flows out visibly from it, and there are processes coming out from it due to some cause outside of it, and a severe pain appears over the body, then you should know that this is fatal.
And the other limbs as well, such as the face, neck, collarbone, shoulders and accessory muscles, and the ribs of the back, the sternum, the hip, and the thing [referring to certain anatomical features], along with their respective limb structures, are preserved according to their major positions when the feather does not encounter a vein or artery and is not venomous.
And I will tell you this about these feathers that I have seen, so that you may understand their significance in regards to treatment.
The reason for this is, if someone gets hit by a feather in the inner part of their eye socket in the nose area, and I extract it from his other side, leaving the ear hair intact, they recover, and there is no damage to his nostril.
And if you extract another feather from someone named Juzeu which hits him in the outer ear, leave the eyelid intact and it alone, and the feather was already concealed so that it could not be removed, but only a small tip attached to his shaft, and it was a large feather among the sharp feathers of the Turks, made of iron without any ear hair.
And if Juzeu is alive, then there is no harm in his nostril from this unfortunate incident.
And I extracted another arrow from a Christian man who was stuck in the thigh, and it was an Arab arrow, that's the one with the holes; and then I pierced through it between two bones, already submerged in the thigh of you; and then I refined this piercing, and soon I pulled out this arrow, thus healing the Christian.
And I extracted another arrow from a man who was stuck in his abdomen, and concluded that death would occur through this one; therefore, since it had been thirty days and there was no change due to his health conditions, I pierced the arrow and applied force over it, and he was healed, and no further accident befell him.
And I saw a man in whom an arrow was stuck in his leg, the wound has healed over him, and as it had been about seven days, I pulled out the arrow from the depth of the thigh.
And I saw a woman in whom an arrow was stuck inside her abdomen, the wound has healed internally within her, and there is no change in her health status recently, and the woman does not experience discomfort during any of her natural operations.
And I saw another man to whom an arrow was stuck in his face; the wound has healed and removed the arrow, without any pain here or similar to this.
And I extracted the arrow from the king's prince's man who was stuck in the middle of his nose and had moved down to the right side slightly; the entire arrow was hidden.
And I was called for the treatment at around three days after the insertion of the arrow.
And then I stimulated the wound of the arrow scar; and then I examined that in front of a small tent; but did not feel that one; though he felt it sharply on his right ear; thus, I assumed that that spot was at the tip of the arrow.
And I strengthened the area where the attractive and digestive virtue lies, believing that this place is where we should remove it since it shows me the location of the arrow, so as to proceed over that.
And it did not happen at the significant spot where you've reached that location; and I continued strengthening over this for several days without any accident happening; and the wound has healed meanwhile, and removed the pain of removing him for a period of several days inside which I felt the arrow in his nose and recounted this to me.
And then I paused over the wound with acute corrosive medicine for several days until it opened; and from this tent, I inspected that, and stimulated the subtle tip of the arrow, which adheres to the shaft.
And then I adjusted in the opening of the wound with this acute medicine until it became visible to me the tip of the arrow, and spent time on this for a period of four months.
And then as the wound expanded, it became possible for me to insert scissors into him and refine it, without any resistance. Thus I did not cease to refine and construct this on that using various techniques, starting from one day on these using forceps designed ways of descent, according to how those appear at the tip of the nose, thus extracting that; then healed that wound again.
And some doctors judged that the cartilage of the nose could not be restored, and I healed that, and the wound has consolidated. Thus he was completely healed and did not experience any discomfort in him at all.
And I advise you on the quality of extracting some arrows where you should pause this rule and meaning on what I have not mentioned, for both parts of this art and those definitions do not understand in narration nor comprehend them freely.
And the artisans wisely compare on many; and with this what is present over what is absent; and finds new operations and novel instruments should you descend from the causes of foreign things in the art when it happens to you.
And so I say that arrows are not forcefully removed from the members where they are stuck, but rather in two ways: or through penetration of the location where it enters; or against the other side.
And that which is stuck through a location gives entry, or it's an arrow proceeding from the fleshly place, and it's shot and forcefully removed.
And if it doesn't yield to the resistance at the time of being caught, then you should leave him for a few days until the flesh around it heals and reduces the attraction and its exit.
And similarly if it is stuck in bones and doesn't yield to you resistance, then leave that for a few days and repeat this on the attraction and movement every day, thus it will be forcefully removed.
And if you don't yield to your resistance for such days, then it's advisable that you pierce through the circuit of the arrow in that bone across all parts with subtle travel until the location is expanded by the arrow, and then extract that.
If the arrow has already penetrated the body and is hidden from the feeling, then you should search for it with your hand, and if you feel it, then pull it out using such tools that are suitable for its extraction.
And if you cannot reach it over him due to the constriction of the wound and the length of the rod, and there is nothing like bone, nerve or vein here, then cut into the wound so that it is enlarged and possible to extract the arrow.
And if they are on your earlobes in which it is implanted from all sides with every organ you can do; then address this, if you cannot reach the removal of the flesh in the fracture of the earlobes and in their twisting within which they must be.
And when you administer the extraction of the arrow in any place where it is, then you use twisting of your hand with forceps at all parts through which it makes that obey; and subtlety with deep subtlety so that the arrow is not broken and that make it difficult for you to extract and that extraction as well.
And if you cannot reach that at your hand's length, then let it be for a few days until the parts which are in its circuit recover, and then continue with that which is relieved at that point. If it causes you an opposing flow of pus, then you administer what we have said about treatment in its chapter.
And keep your skill from the incision of veins or nerves, or from the chord, and administer medicine in every possible way to the extraction of the arrow; do this with ease, tranquility, speed, and firmness just as I have advised you.
And therefore make the arrow contract by itself so that the patient moves according to the figure according to which you must consider the placement of the arrow in him, which is more beneficial. And if this is not within your capability, then administer what is within your capability through the figures.
And those arrows that are stuck in the opposite direction of another part, or which already interfere with your movement through some parts outside, or causes tension in the extremity of the arrow due to feeling from the part below the origin, then you will understand it; and let this section be according to the amount at which forceps can take hold; then pull that one out, for when it is pulled slightly towards sensation.
And if it is stuck in the bone, then you twist the mouth opposite where the arrow enters the bone, and enlarge yourself inside as much as possible, then pull out that arrow.
And if not, let it be for a few days, and then continue with that which burns.
And if the shaft of the arrow is in that area, then you should push that towards him.
If the cause is due to heat and you wish to administer a stimulus, then you insert it there. If it is stubborn, agitate the cavity with your hand so that it enters the concavity of him in the area of the arrow head and push it towards him.
If the arrow is convex, then you push it with strong agitation entering that one, so that the arrow is cheered by that.
And if the arrow is corroded, then you hollow out all the flesh in which the disease lies, if this is possible for you, and then treat it with what suits.
And if the arrow is in the foot, or in the belly, or in the bladder, or on the side, and it's close to where you touch it, then touch that with your hand, and if this is possible for you, extract over that. Then extract over that and beware of veins or nerves, remove that, and according to what you need, cover the wound. Treat that within until it is healed.
Shape of forceps on which arrows are placed:
Let their ends be like the beak of a hawk that are made as if they were saws when they take hold of the arrow, so as not to let it go.
And from those are made special marks, large, few and in between, according to the quantity of the size of the arrow and its slightness, and the width of the wound, and its constriction.
Like a ray so that it cheers up him in the internal part of the concave arrow and it is pushed towards that.
Concerning bloodletting from veins.
The veins for bloodletting which usually have to be bled are... (the number .xxx, is likely an error and should not be included in the translation as it seems out of context) of which there are fifteen in the head. These are two pulsating veins which are near the ears, they are called auriculars; these are two roots that are in both nostrils noticeable; and there are two veins that are in two lacrimal cavities of two eyes, which are called aspicientes; and a vein prepared in the middle place of the forehead, and the vein that is at the end of the nose; and two guidegi that are at the neck; and two veins that are on the upper lip; and two veins that are on the lower lip; and - these are the veins called algelic; and these are two veins which leave the tongue. These are the veins that are bled in the arms, they are five; Among those that are bled from the arms are five veins. One is cephalic, and it's located under the wild hare. The people call it "the head vein," or in between. It is a medium-sized vein and made up of one branch of basilica and another branch of cephalic veins; they call this 'the vein of all the body' and basilica vein placed on the domestic hare, called 'the citillar', and the common people call it 'the belly vein'. The vein in the arm is placed over the pit, which is the one that is bled from. It appears on the wrist for a clear manifestation. There's also salvatella, this is the vein located between what they refer to as the large auricular and the small one; it has two branches.
And in the chest and back are three veins; one of those is that leaves the curvature of the wild hare's arm. The second one is sophena, its location leaves the bend of the domestic hare. And sciatic vein, its location leaves the bend of the wild hare. And in the bend there are other veins similar to those.
The youth of the veins that are near the ears is to be observed for catarrhs, inflammation, discharges and old ulcers in the head.
And the quality of having these veins is according to what I recommend to you: it should be red on the head of the patient, and the head of the patient should be rubbed at the back in the location of both veins with a wide band for good friction; strengthen the patient's neck by bringing one bend within which two appear, their locations are near the ears in two places below the cap; take that to your mention, and if you feel the pulse of those at your mention, there is doubt here.
Approach you take the surgical knife, and that is the one that is inclined, then approach you insert your hand into the vein in the groove where bloodletting reaches the bone. And lift your hand to the vein and groove up to the parts above, then cut into the vein starting from an inclined point. And make the length of the cut equal to that of two fingers or around it; and bleed out the blood as much as you want.
And strengthen with powders and leave it in such a way until it is healed.
And already, at the beginning of this text, we discussed the incision and their cautery for these procedures.
When it comes to the two arterial veins in the nostrils, the manifestation of bloodletting is old inflammation, bad congestion, frequent eye disease and excessive body heat that manifests in sudden discharges from the eyes.
And the quality of drawing blood from those is according to what I recommend to you: make the patient lie in such a position that two veins appear at sensation for manifest palpation, and demonstrate their pulse on your said hand; then try your attempt.
And then you lift the body over the vein in the parts above your said hand, and introduce the bloodletting instrument on that side, and lift the vein there. Then cut it as you did with the other veins; and let the blood flow according to the amount of your need.
And then relieve the constriction of the patient's leg, place your hand on the vein for an hour, and press that spot with your thumb and dust it, strengthening it under a firm pressure, and let it rest until it is healed.
And after the recall of theirs, and that of those, and their inscription, and the entry into the beginning of the freedom.
And therefore, the youth of bloodletting from the vein on the forehead is close to bloodletting from the cephalic area in old facial ailments and migraines, fever, and smelly ulcers.
And the quality of bloodletting for him is according to what I recommend to you: so that when he lies, one bend appears where the vein can be seen; and then take the instrument called the fossor, which is this shape:
Place the tip of the fossor prominently over that vein and strike it on him at an angle or with another cause in the manner of him, let the blood flow according to the amount you wish; and then relieve the perforation of the leg and strengthen it until it is healed.
Sometimes openings are made for bloodletting later, but it's not necessary for the bloodletting to have an acute extremity like other bloodlettings, before being on that side. Bloodletting that one according across, where the bone is close and strong would break in him the bloodletting when it is thin.
May the youth of the two veins that are in the tear ducts of both eyes through pus from the eyes due to fever and dandruff in the eyes, and for facial skin issues.
And the quality of bloodletting is that the leg strengthens itself at one bend, and then performs bloodletting for those, and you stand over his head.
And the bloodletting is done according to across longitudinally a little with several bloodlettings, and if in that place there is no flesh; and if the bloodletting is thin, its strong extremity would break.
And then let the blood flow as much as it is necessary for you, press on that spot, strengthen them for a night, and then relieve those.
May the bloodletting from the vein in the nose be related to acute fever and intense heat, as well as facial skin issues and migraines that occur on the face, especially if they are old.
And the quality of his bloodletting is that he strengthens himself while you place his nose with your left hand, take the thin long bloodletting and put it in the middle location of the nose according to right angle, where the vein does not appear at this point, and where the blood begins to flow soon.
Conclude by placing your hand on the bloodletting gradually and let the blood flow according to your need; then tie it for a night as that is quickly restored.
May the youth of bloodletting for the two guides to constriction apply to the beginning of leprosy, and the onset of skin ailments, itching, and bad corroding ulcers as well as herpes.
And the quality of bloodletting for those is that the leg strengthens each one in its own column with a bind; and there are craftsmen above the head of the leg, and the leg stands on one heel.
And then perform bloodletting for the vein along gradually with ample small bloodlettings; and then extract blood according to season amount or according to what you need that is done here; and then make it resemble another vein.
And then relieve the bind and strengthen both veins with a median constriction so that the leg is not over-heated, and leave until morning when the plague is healed.
And the youth of bloodletting from the veins in the gums relates to small pustules and bumps in the mouth, decay of the gum tissue, bad ulcers, and cracks, as well as bad ulcers that are in the nose and in the circulation around him.
And the quality of bloodletting for those is that you cut in front of him, and strengthen his column at one bend, then rotate his lips and observe two veins from which the first is on the right side of the lip and the second on the left; and the demonstration of each one is by the darkness of each of them both, and more so if in their circuit there are small black veins; then cut each one with a vertical incision.
May you doubt and know yourself if there is any uncertainty in you, or you do not know which one of those it is, then understand by incision of the largest of those, and from the obvious pus of those.
And make it resemble the two veins that are above in the lips.
The veins that are beneath the tongue and are close to the jugular vein belong to the head's lymphatic system, they are located in the throat area, at the base of the uvula, and in mouth ailments.
And the quality of performing bloodletting in those cases is to guide the patient's head between your hands in front of the sun, lift their tongue for you, watch as you do so, and observe the tongue's color from one side of the vein to the other, and both sides of the vein, and if either color turns to blackness.
And perform bloodletting for each one of them; and be careful not to end your hand in the bloodletting for these, because those are arteries.
And your veins that are subjected to bloodletting in the armpit are usually found throughout all men, and the method of bloodletting for them is performed according to two ways, either by using a pungent or an olive oil as they are applied; or by using a surgical knife and it's called pricking. This is the way:
Make the cut in this way and as often as necessary, and apply to open the concave veins that are filled with what seems like large visible veins, and there are those containing large hard lumps.
And this type of bloodletting is with less width and more subtle extremity, and it's for bloodletting veins that contain subtle lumps like those found in citrus.
You need to perform bloodletting on the basilic vein which is one of the three veins: you extract the pus from the throat and neck, as well as that which affects the legs and abdomen.
And when performing this bloodletting procedure, the one doing it must be careful not to overdo it in that area, noting if there is an artery nearby. If they make a mistake and adjust their puncture technique poorly with the bloodletting tool, it might hit the artery causing bleeding of pus, for which reason one should avoid using a sharp tool before trying olive oil pricking.
And if the basilic vein does not appear due to lack of visible manifestation, then be aware that you should leave it alone and try another spot or search for any veins present; or bloodletting might take place near the end of the arm where this is more obvious; and when performing bloodletting with olive oil pricking as we have described.
And if you wish to perform bloodletting on your patient's elbow, then be aware of the area at the bend of the arm where you can feel the pulse, and place it firmly against their body; and place the elbow and let that vein open in a concave section with olive oil pricking as we've described. And remember to perform the percussion within several inches from the site of the artery.
And when you apply pressure with strength to the area that you've placed against their body, in that place there's an inflation; then that inflation is due to the artery, so avoid that area.
And if you feel the pus flowing in that bloodletting process like urine from a child, then it means it's due to the pus of the artery; and so hold your hand against it for a long time period; and slowly lift your hand as the pus is extracted, because when the pus stops, extraction is complete; and then strengthen your arm and leave that area.
And be aware of the patient's forehead sweat, and pay attention to their body temperature without letting them cool down for a few days until they are healed.
And if the pus does not stop, and you should not apply medicine to that situation; then you will have cut into the artery if it appears like that; where its extremity is constricted, and the pus extraction is complete; or take a break with cold compresses, and perform that (indicating bloodletting); take one strength and press it firmly on the vein area at the pulse point under the arm and powders in between the other day.
And then if the pus has stopped, it's good; otherwise, treat that with the medicine that was previously indicated for remembering the site where the powder extracts pus.
And removing the pus of the patient is difficult in certain locations due to the small size of the wound and the possibility of the arm muscle.
The method of bloodletting from the dark vein is performed on the top part of the head and at the back part of the body; hence it consists of branches from the basilic and head veins as we've said.
And the one doing bloodletting should be aware that there might be a nerve in the site of the bloodletting; hence if they make their puncture and find the nerve, it could cause dizziness, making recovery difficult, and the person may not fully recover. This nerve appears as a feeling when touched by others; and for some people who hide this nerve and keep it subtle without showing it, be aware that you should pause bloodletting at the spot where you are using olive oil pricking, and avoid hitting the nerve with your strength.
And if the vein is between two nerves, then cut the vein along its length.
The purpose of head phlebotomy on the cephalic vein is to draw out the pain from the head and bring comfort to the limbs.
And do this precisely. If you want the blood to be drawn with an olive phlebotome or a myrtle phlebotome; what is saved from all veins, but not leaving your artery or nerve.
However, in certain people, it is sufficient for an abscess to form without a phlebotomy during the first percussion, but do not touch that abscess.
The first rule is that you should know that phlebotomy can only be performed for the sake of health maintenance and patient's hope as well as caution against future limb issues. Phlebotomy should be conducted on one of these veins if they are in the groin: cephalic, dark, and basilic; and a phlebotomy should be done at the beginning of spring, after fasting in spring and autumn, and during winter near the time of eating, when there are noticeable signs of repletion.
And a phlebotomy should be done and leave for three hours after the first occurrence of pus during the day.
The phlebotomy that is administered should be done when it's convenient and necessary for the situation, at night or day, always at any time and in all circumstances.
And you should know that an elephant should not have a phlebotomy until it is fourteen years old, and a woman who is pregnant should only undergo a phlebotomy from the fourth month until the seventh month, and elderly people should not be given a phlebotomy if they have already passed sixty years.
And when someone wants to undergo phlebotomy for any reason, you should know that they need to modify their intestines before bloodletting with the help of a lion's bile enema. If in those areas there is a retained soreness, so that veins do not draw excessive fluid during bloodletting from the intestines which are cleansed and do not affect the main limbs.
And do not make phlebotomy for patients with severe night sweats or fever, nor in the case of limb disease or drunkenness; nor during illness due to malnutrition, nor from dropsy. Rather, phlebotomy should be feared when there is pain from colic attacks and vomiting, when there is a sensation in the belly, when there are multiple sexual desires or labor pains, or any cause that dissolves their virtue, whether it's bodily or animal.
And also consider the reduction of humors before doing this if the pain is intense from foods and drinks, or in medicines if that's feasible for you.
And before bathing consider any cause that might prohibit it, or exercise through some activity to ensure the pain is alleviated.
And place the patient in their feet during the day, around the time of three o'clock, as we have said.
And ensure that the feet of this individual are protected from all kinds of animal mishaps during that day, such as anxiety, anger, fear, and all bodily accidents, such as labor, excess sorrow, sexual activity, and things similar to them.
And according to their wish, make the causes present in the use of which people usually customarily have for aromatics and scent, as well as balms and similar things, based on the quantity that is possible.
And have the phlebotomist lie on a cushion that's softer than the cushion that should be under whom is to be subjected to phlebotomy.
And then extend their arm, and rub the phlebotomist with their hand for two or three times; and firmly grasp the ligature and encircle it for two times.
And for the tightness that is not equal, or if there's an excess of fluid, you prohibit blood flow; or if it's for relaxation, then prohibit the flow of the blood entirely.
And at the tightness, know that whoever is to undergo phlebotomy should massage their hands repeatedly between them until the veins are swollen and clearly felt.
And for the phlebotomist, apply a little ancient ointment on their phlebotome; and place your last finger of your right hand over that vein, noting where you want to perform phlebotomy, so that the vein swells slightly, and the percussion is stopped when it's the vein you find out like heart blood flows away from this should be performed phlebotomy, and from those it's filled with windiness; and when you place the phlebotome over that area, it contracts. And the phlebotomist is exposed; and the phlebotome does not pierce the vein, and if it pierces, that one is stretched.
And thus, you should know that the phlebotomist must be firm and attentive to all these reasons.
And then place the fleshy part back, mostly if the vein is located in one place, then do so; and otherwise, you should make another incision near that spot, or over it with your finger pressure, if the area is not hardened.
And if the area is hardened, or the patient gets worse, then leave it for one day or two days, do not strain it, which will cause a pus pocket to appear and will not allow healing.
And again perform the thoracotomy if needed.
And if the incision is small and makes little sense, and you fear that not enough pus will come out, then again perform the thoracotomy in that area according to rectitude and adjustment, make a smaller incision on it before the area hardens. If you have to make more incisions in muscle men, you should limit your incisions.
And if you have already made an incision there, then do not operate over it again, for it does not justify any of your reasons. Place over it a part of the oil slit, which alleviates the body's pain. And in this place, oil is best and among other oils.
And similarly administer oil slits in all thoracotomies where you must avoid the flow of pus into the body, and do this with tyrocidine ointment and salve when it is placed over that area, so that the pus becomes diluted and mixes when it's thick.
And if in the location of the thoracotomy a large pus pocket is formed, which happens with multiple punctures especially at the site that has not been bled only from that puncture or on the small incision near the vein, then compress and place over it a sponge soaked in water and salt, one that has been cut, and strain it for an hour, so that it dissolves.
And cover where you should do this near the flow of pus from that vein up to him or another vein.
And if there remains any darkness or greenness in the place for some days, do not notice this; and if you wish, place over it some substance of aloe and myrrh dissolved, or some substance of mint juice or camomile or something similar.
And if multiple punctures occur for pus and swellings you should perform a thoracotomy of the bursa.
And then place your hand over that area, and if later you find softness you should continue applying pressure on that area; this indicates that the swelling is bad. And then remember to apply some substance as we have said earlier, for it will flow out from the blood vessel.
And apply plaster to that in which there is constriction, so that the area may endure, and then attend to it with other treatments until it heals.
And ensure that you extract the pus from every person according to the quantity of their virtue and according to the prevailing color over the pus as it appears.
And if the pus is black, then let it bleed internally until it becomes red; similarly, if you find it thick, let it bleed internally until it becomes thin; and similarly, if it's sharp, let its sharpness subside internally.
And for one who is full and strong and has the need to extract pus in a single puncture, you should expand the thoracotomy of the vein and make the thoracotomy long.
And for one who is weak, do the opposite of that, and ensure that you extract it in multiple punctures, and that the incision is straight.
And the best thing to do in a thoracotomy of a vein is to make the section transverse, not puncture.
And this method of thoracotomy protects against the flow of pus and injury to nerves, and it's useful and safe that the thoracotomy be according to width and length.
And in which it is customary for fainting to occur, you should perform the thoracotomy after curing it with a small portion of an infusion in meadowfoam oil or simple honey and lemon mixture, then cut at the location with three punctures or four.
And if it is irritated by the stomach, then take an infusion before the thoracotomy with a mixture of myrrh decoction or honey flavored with spices like pepper, cinnamon, ginger and similar, or a flavored and strongly scented bath.
And if fainting occurs, you should perform the thoracotomy, and it is due to his flow of thick pus, then ensure that he drinks water from meat and a subtle-scented bath; use aromatic herbs, and limit his food to this.
And use the other causes that we have mentioned in the division regarding fainting for evacuation.
And for those who want to cleanse his arm and dissolve his pus gradually, for which the thoracotomy is through evacuation method, and his virtue is mild, it will cleanse the pus little by little, so according to the quantity of his virtue in consecutive days.
And for those who want to cleanse his arm and extract his pus gradually, and his body is strong, then do this approximately seven or eight hours after the first thoracotomy.
And for those who want to draw pus from his body against the direction in which it declines, ensure that this is extracted on the second day or third.
When that body has been burned and is inflamed and causing fever, it appears when the infection spreads to one place and a large amount of it flows, increasing the sensitivity inside leading to syncope, because you have kept all the conditions for bloodletting; and you should put your hand on the patient's pulse, for the sake of the infected body, so that death does not occur instead of syncope. For various inflammations are like this when the bloodletter is ignorant and negligent.
And do not wait when you want to move the arm and evacuate the infection again in the second phase, just as you close the veins' outlets and make it hard for the blood to flow out, that you press under that with forcefulness and slightly bend its extension, so that this is too much.
They have the left within in order to perform bloodletting again; or they stay with this at the intensity of bloodletting which coagulates the blood inside the veins' outlets; or press on that with a tyrian brick, or with a sandstone, and compress slightly under it so that the blood can escape.
And if the vein is thrombosed, then move that and do not touch it until the thrombus is absorbed.
And if it's necessary to make you evacuate the infection again, and this is not an excuse, then you should prick that in that area or on another arm at another vein.
The vein called "arm cord" is bled in the area of the elbow or the basilic vein, when they are not blocked or hidden, which is made up of those veins.
And the quality of bloodletting is that the patient plunges their hand into hot water before it easily turns red and the vein appears clearly.
And apply strength on that with a ligature for a slight constriction; and perform bloodletting according to the transverse direction, not longitudinally nor according to length.
And if the sensitivity is wide and your bloodletting is like when you bleed there on the joint of the hand slightly.
And if the flow of blood is prohibited, then you extend your hand in hot water and let the blood run in the water until you achieve your need.
Maybe if you were in summer days, then you are excused from extending your hand in hot water, and in winter the body of the patient is immersed in hot water.
And bloodletting through this vein is safer than with all other veins, because you do not have a pulsating vein or nerve in the patient.
And bloodletting of the wrist of the right hand is relevant to stomach ailments in pregnancy.
And the quality of bloodletting is that you strengthen the hand with a ligature or with your own hand, because you have it up to your waist in hot water, while the vein inflates and is shown through trembling; and perform bloodletting across there; and if you incise that from all sides it will not return.
And remember not to finish your hand in bloodletting, because otherwise they are the nerves of the fingers exposed without flesh.
And apply your hand in hot water and let the blood flow through it; if you do not apply this part of the hand to hot water, the blood will coagulate inside the veins' outlets, which is forbidden from flowing.
And as you extract the blood according to the amount of need, then press on the vein oil and salt so that it does not solidify completely; similarly, be sure to do this in all straight lines.
The youth of bloodletting through that wrist is related to stomach ailments in general.
Do something similar with this bloodletting as you did with the other one.
And the youth of the cephalic vein in bloodletting is related to stomach ailments that occur on your left side, just like pregnancy ailments and retention of menses, as well as throat and ulcerous conditions of thighs and old chest ailments, as they correspond to stomach ailments.
And the quality of bloodletting is that the patient plunges their palm into hot water and makes rubbing on it until veins appear; lie on the joint of the chest with a girdle; at the location of the apparent vein you should be placed where they say, and from it branches off many smaller veins in the chest area.
And then bleed through the widest branch or let out the muscle where you should add salt, which is better and with more water.
And if you bleed through the chest area, then you protect against the nerves that are on that part of the chest, and stop your bloodletting from where you bleed across, as if you were going to incise it.
And let the bloodletting be possible.
And if blood flow is prohibited; then you should immerse the patient's hand in hot water and let the blood run through it until it is evacuated.
And if the bloodletter misses in the first attempt, then try at the bloodletting again with a little more caution, where it is safe; and do not fear your incompetence, but watch out for the nerves as we have said.
And similarly do it for the other foot in the same manner.
From the sciatic vein, the place as we have said you must leave the hand at the exit point of the wild cave.
And the youth of the bloodletting for the patient is when it's painful in the thigh when it comes from hot cautery.
And the quality of the bloodletting for the patient is that the patient enters into bath, and quickly strengthens the knee of the patient under the foot on four fingers along a long subtle bend, which does not appear except like this.
And when it appears, then you perform bloodletting according to each person as is possible for you and according to the direction (from side to side), and it is better; or cut that with a cut or incise that with a punction, where the patient's condition allows.
And it is in men more abundant; and if you find that, and does not appear throughout the feeling, then perform bloodletting on some branch of them, and that is which appears behind the heart and the ring finger in both hands.
And watch out for nerves, let the amount of blood run that you want.
Then gently untie the constriction and place your hand over the bloodletting spot, strengthening the area; where it is somewhat healed.
Regarding suction and the qualities to use those [tools or instruments].
Suction bags are made of horn, or reed, or leather.
And suction is performed in two ways: one of them involves incision and extraction of blood, and the other involves suction without incision.
And this suction that is without incision is done in two ways; one is with fire and the other is without fire.
And the suction devices that are administered with incision and blood extraction have fourteen parts of the body, of which one where suction devices are placed is alnocrati, and it is the last part of the head; and the middle location in both parts of the chest corresponds; and suction on the chin leaves the jaw under your mouth; and suction on two spatulas; and suction on alohoster, and it is at the end of the nose; and suction on two fires, they are at two breadths; and suction on two cavities; and suction on two thighs.
And suction does not remove the blood but from small capillaries in the flesh, and thus it does not have the same effect as bloodletting; similarly to squeezing with bloodletting; nor should suction be performed with fire or without fire on any ailment made by overfilling within which the entire body has not been evacuated.
May if necessary cause suction due to illness or continuously, administer that during the entire start of the month and at the end of it, and in the middle of it and at any time.
And when it occurs in any of those causes, and especially if it's towards the third or middle part of the month, then command that suction be performed before the day passes three hours.
The youth of neck suction is when that causes heaviness in the head and towards what is settled in the breaths; but it's better if that leads to evacuation of the entire body.
And this suction is at the site of bloodletting for the cephalic condition.
And it's not written that one should use that which is characterized by overfilling, or in the case of catarrh, which causes great harm to those who do.
And thus it's not proper to use that on the elderly, and in the heads where there are ailments of fever.
May advise those who continue over it to be forgetful; and thus it's advised that you command the suction operator to place their hand slightly under the suction device at the parts where you are, fearing the generation of forgetfulness.
May advises alcohol suction is at the site of bloodletting for the dark vein and basilica: hence it causes asthma, and constriction of the lungs, and the splitting of the alveoli, and coughing, and overfilling.
And it's advised that the alcohol suction device be small, because if left too long can cause weakness in the body and stomach.
And suction with alhamdahan causes headaches in the head and ophthalmia, and migraines, and fever, and toothaches; and it's at the site of bloodletting for the basilic vein.
And it's advised that you command the suction operator not to press their hand during incision in order not to cut an artery and allow blood flow.
And mouth suction causes alcohol in the mouth and decay of gum tissue, and appearances resembling those illnesses which are within the mouth, and it's at the site of bloodletting for aliheric that is within both lips.
The ventilation that is performed over the two spatulas contributes to heating, which is done through the filling with quality.
And the ventilation of the two parts inside the hot coals confers youthfulness of bloodletting from three veins, which are from the basilica, black and cephalic, where it takes the pain from all those large veins in the flesh, and the small veins of the other veins that are larger, through which the intake reaches the three veins.
And command the bloodletter that they do not proceed in scarification, where the place is stripped of flesh, and leave them with their nerves and arteries intact.
And it is a suction in which the sucking takes place over buttocks and contributes to bleeding hemorrhoids from the anus, as well as to ulcers.
And be sure to command the bloodletter for a strong suction, and it should be iron, where the place needs intense drying; and firmly ensure his subtle extracted suckings are made with caution, and also scarification takes place.
Let the suction on the legs decrease gradually through a clear manifestation, which carries away the pain of all parts of the body and contributes to old pains in the lungs and stomach; and they provoke menstruation, and contribute to pregnancy and vitality; and they are placed at locations for bloodletting from two saphenas, and inguinal hernias, and scrotal cysts.
However, the motion weakens all parts of the body and causes syncope in male patients.
And from the suction, youthfulness is brought to the youth of the suction on both legs.
And the quality of the position of the suction is to place the suction at the beginning of viewing and allow it to proceed through seasoned warmth, and do not prolong the position of the suction, rather pause those slightly, and continue them gradually, and let the humors come to that area evenly. And do not stop repeating this until you see the area already turn red and swell, and that the pain becomes apparent.
And then you scarify and continue with the heat gradually, considering the disposition of the body.
And for that man who has tender flesh from rare parts, be sure to scarify him once and not more times, so the area does not become ulcerated.
And command the bloodletter to expand the scarification and slightly increase it, and always use heat for ease.
And if the pain becomes swollen, then be sure to scarify twice, where in the first time you open up the path for dissipation of the pain and water within him. And in the second, to carefully inspect the acquired extraction of the swollen pain.
And if the pain is thick and viscous, then it should be done with scarification in the third time so that it achieves the final result.
And gradually afterwards, when we want to extract some pain little by little or a small amount, until one of us achieves the scarification.
And if we want to extract viscous pain, scarify with vigorous scarification; and if we know that the pain is thick, then be sure to scarify through wave-like scarification.
And the term of scarification in which the depth of the cause only exists.
And if that of which the cause is thick, hard, black, and his parts are tightened, be sure that the locations of the suction cups should be moistened more gently, opened more resolutely; if it's during summer time, as with aloe oil or violet oil, or lemon oil, or sage oil, or mustard seed oil; and if it's during winter time, then with almond oil, or olive oil, or chamomile oil, or pain oil, and like those oils.
And if the excess is thick, then make the oil with turpentine, or balsam oil, or aloe oil, or anise oil, and like those oils.
And if the bloodletter has large pores of tender flesh, then be sure that oil should be prohibited, and further that for those locations of suction near the suction with him, they should be washed with water or with aloe water from solatrum, or with water from sage, or with water from borragueas, and like those washes.
And for that whose pain is of moist quality, wash his suction points with vinegar or with water from myrtle and sumac, and like those waters.
And for that whose excesses are thick, wash his suction points with old vinegar or with water from sweet marjoram, which is sage, or from the decoction of anise, or from chamomile, and like those waters.
And be sure to keep the suction in front of bathing; also ensure that it is administered close to the bathwater for an hour or two, and make sure to sleep near the suction.
What should be done when it comes to regulating the bloodletting instrument before the process of bloodletting begins.
Make sure to take into account at the beginning: then if the bloodletting instrument or whoever is going to perform bloodletting has a temper that gets excited and inflamed over his pain, be sure that he takes cooling causes, such as vinegar, lettuce with water and milk, sugar-free, julep, and like those.
And let his meals be such as poultry, game meats, and meat seasoned with herbs, and meals seasoned with vinegar, and like those.
And for the one whose constitution is cold, advise them to consume hyssop tea or hyssop made from seeds' oil along with sumac, and aromatic mix of old and new; also recommend they limit their intake of fluids and food, avoid poultry, game meat, liver, kidneys, and small birds.
And advise that on days with strong winds and bloodletting, their water intake should exceed food consumption.
And advise that in some hours before certain individuals take Tyrica Alpharac or muscle medicines such as muscardine, or alum in front of strong winds or prior to bloodletting or nearby, so that the main members are comforted and the illness is alleviated; do not have them take that cold bath.
Let the strong winds that are like cuts be cuts made on their abdomen, and over gout and the belly button, and on the backs of the knees, where these limbs do not suffer from cuts made upon themselves.
Do not seek them for those but the elimination of pain in members, like suction on breasts during gynecological illness due to the flow of pain's essence from the essence of the heart; use it so that windiness dissolves, for the cold fluid of members, like suction on the belly and umbilicus; for which that invigorates the member and cools them down, resolving the pain caused by windiness.
And when it is placed on the heels upon their conception or pregnancy, for the force of elimination they help human conception and eradicate the pregnancy from its place.
Similarly, when it is placed on the abdomen and belly area for windiness in those confined.
And these suction treatments are administered with oil alone; some treatments are administered with fire.
And some treatments are performed fully with hot water in gynecological illnesses of the belly.
And that is why suction should be filled and be quite hot, so it's just hot water or hot water in which herbs suitable for the situation are steeped.
The form of suction treatment with fire: the size of the opening should be that of two fingers, according to how we have formed it; and the amount of charcoal is as much as a palm; place it on the side, in the location where it's in the circuit, as much as the person, make it small according to the quantity that enters into one needle.
Cut a rod of ream or citrus, large slices, lion's mane, equal and smooth so that it does not pinch the member when placing its position over them.
And at the midpoint of their horizontal rod of ream or iron, where the candle is placed when it's over the fire.
And this large suction is greater than that which we mentioned earlier; and the small quantity depends on gynecological illnesses and the condition of the one using it.
And the suction tools for infants and those with exhaustion are different from those used by adults and those with large bellies.
And the quality of placing this suction tool on a member is to extend the charcoal fire in front of a small candle made from wax, and place that over the midpoint of the horizontal rod at the center of the suction tool, so that the fire be lit near their anus to avoid burning the patient's body.
And then place it on the member of the patient, and let the tool be placed where we have mentioned earlier, so that when having suction tools and they do not require the tool to remain there, causing steam vapor over that area, then the suction will soon dissolve.
And after lighting the fire according to their manner, repeat this process if you need further repetitions of it.
In suction that is administered in gynecological illness due to pleuresy, with water, where there's no horizontal rod or tool, and it's not administered unless it's filled with water, and placed solely on the member.
And this is its form: And this suction tool, the larger it is, the better, so that it can receive large quantities of water.
Chapter XCVII.
Bloodletting is not administered in moist members but in those members where it's impossible to place suction tools due to their smallness, like the tongue and gums and similar parts; or on a naked member of flesh, like that mentioned and others similar.
And the quality of using those bloodletting tools you've found that are in hot water for pregnancy purification.
And they should be laid out throughout the day and night in hot water until they are fully used, ensuring no cause for pregnancy within their abdomen; and they should be prepared to evacuate the body before bloodletting and suction treatments; and they should be rubbed on the patient's member until it reddens; and then they should be placed over them.
And when they are filled and if necessary.
And if oil from the place with suction is possible, it's better to do so in youth.
And if not, then wash the place with warm water and afterwards with plain water; and it should be rubbed and squeezed.
And if the body of pain extends to the place where the bloodletting tools are, and this is what happens with its residue, then immerse a cloth in cold water, and place that on it so that the discharge passes through.
And if the sickness is multiplied, then apply over it vitriol or powders resembling those that cause stiffness and swelling until the illness has been dispersed; or place the ashes of cooked beans on the affected area, leaving them there until the beans adhere to the area, and once the illness has dispersed.
And if necessary, repeat bloodletting, when it is possible to change those [tools].
And if bloodletting is forbidden due to suspension, then rub the affected area with warm oil or leave an needle in those spots where it feels like there's illness; and apply them so that when feeling any illness they can be removed immediately.
And when you want to cool them down, grind a little on those pieces of castor oil that have been processed, or salt, or ashes, and apply it immediately.
So begins the treatment for the second part: restoration. This chapter discusses necessary interventions in the art of medicine; it deals with the restoration of fractures and accidental dislocations in bones.
Oh, son child, know that many doctors and common people, as well as those who for some time have not looked at the free works of the Ancients nor read any letter from them.
And for this reason, this method of the scientists on Earth is kept private; and I have not forgotten what should be done over time; and I have not included anything that was acquired through practice, but rather through the length of reading the works of the Ancients and study of their understanding, from which I extracted the science of those.
And also direct towards experimentation and study throughout my life.
And I have already described in this chapter all that constitutes my science and on which I have conducted experiments; now let me abbreviate this for you others and relieve myself of the task of lengthy explanation; then conclude this in the end of abbreviation; and demonstrate it at the end of declaration; and form it into various forms of disturbances that are administered there, just as I did with two previous chapters, adding a declaration, so too have I done.
First chapter.
Summary and collections from the existence of bone fractures, from those which must precede any attempt to recall or mention different types of fracture. Indeed, that we say in the prologue of this chapter about the summaries of speech; and the chapters to which the craftsmen must be addressed at the beginning and reflect on the truth of those; are you and those who are quick to learn or learn this noble art along with others.
And indeed say that when you encounter a fracture or dislocation or twist or compression, then consider at the beginning to apply bloodletting or drain it from there, or any time, if no contraindication exists, such as vertigo, or where it affects, or in old age, or during intense heat, or intense fever.
And also be content with food of herbs such as fennel and meats of rabbits and crabs; and forbid large meats and ensure that you have plenty of vegetables and all foods that fill the veins of illness, so you can feel assured about a boil cautery, and if you do not fear leakage of material in the body.
And then return the patient to their initial regime as which is usual for them.
And when the broken bone begins to be restored, then consider that the patient should eat nutritious foods rich in strength and bulk with viscosity, such as bread made from flour boiled in water, broth, cabbage, meat, and calf's stomachs, eggs, fresh cheese, and large and similar foods, and under this regime there is a mild coagulation of pus at the fracture site.
And know that bones heal when they are in young people and in the elderly, it is not possible for them to continue healing according to their nature due to the drying out of their limbs.
However, nature adjusts and guides you regarding the broken bones of every part with a cause similar to paste in which thickness adheres and strengthens it within them as times coagulate and stick together, within which there is the end of strength and firmness, such as fire at the beginning, without prohibiting that from doing his work.
And for this reason it is necessary that you pause the foods of the patient, foods in which there is heaviness and viscosity and bulk, as we have said.
And know that the species of fractures are diverse according to the diversity of limbs, for a fracture in the bone of the shoulder is different from a fracture in the skull bone; and a fracture in the foot bone is different from a fracture in the knee bone; similarly all other body parts are diverse among themselves.
And I complete with the recall of every species of fracture, detailed in their own chapter separate from another.
A variety of fractures internally. And they are diversified in the species of fractures within the bone; those made are arcuate fracture another which happen at his stars; and some seen are made with a longitudinal fracture according to the length of the bone: these are fractures of the sun, stars, additions and non-additions, as when writing is prepared it is done, and it is the fracture on the plague and disruption in the head, and it is small crack fracture.
And for every species, it has its own disturbance in restoration according to what will come from the patient's specific memory recalled at their respective places.
A sign of bone fracture. And for this reason, bone fracture is known: it is the deformation of the patient, and from that prominence and attachment of the patient to the sensation, and even when you press that against your hand.
And when there is no apparent deformation and the patient doesn't feel much pain upon pressing your touch against the bone under pressure, then it's not here that you have a fracture.
It's possible that there could be deformation or a small crack. Feel the area with your hand and press it, under the pressure of all parts together; rest upon them for a while with the medicines you will recall at that moment which suits this place; then stretch it through subtle constriction.
And know that the place when it is arched and does not split into two or parts that do not occur during their pregnancy, then feel where you should start from your time to correct this whenever an abscess occurs.
And if an abscess occurs in the patient, then smooth that area for several days until the abscess subsides; and then adjust that according to any lifting or technique you can use.
And know that the restoration and adjustment of your patient is less than from the bone in which it occurs during pregnancy.
And strengthen that according to what will come back as memory of the patient.
If there are pregnancies in the bone, then it is necessary to extend this broken limb from two parts, if it's the hand or the foot; or with your hand if the member is small; or with two threads or with one thread and a hand.
And place your position at which you will pause the member in a location equal according to its natural figure, while spreading the broken limb's parts; then ensure that you make these additions return with skill and according to any technique you can apply in their locations.
And watch so that you don't accidentally harm the patient with your operations or injury, and ensure that according to your strength you apply one bone against the other as per the best forms.
And know that during that useful time you touch your hand there, and if you see any different cause here, correct that and adjust it according to the quality of your virtue.
And avoid excessive extension and compression, even as many experienced doctors cause abscess formation through their operations due to excess heat or cold, or cause constriction in the limb like what we have seen through their excessive cold operations.
And the quality of the constriction of the immobilized limb is what I prescribe; and know that limbs broken vary in their size, in their extent, and in their form.
And of those that are small like the arm and such, know that the bandage should be made of soft, thin cloth.
And those that are large like the thigh or breast, know that in these there should be a bandage that is firm and hard, so that you tie up the large strong limb from all sides with equal constriction, so it does not develop a bruise.
And proceed to begin, your process of adjustment, pause reasonably for this, on the location of that fracture with three bandages or four according to the limb required; and strengthen your hand a little on the bandage.
And proceed to go towards that part closest to the top of the location of the fracture, and strengthen moderately so as not to make your constriction like the one where you have strengthened the location of the fracture. And proceed to extend the bandage at the location of the fracture slightly, gradually soften the constriction bit by bit, as you take up a large part of the place.
And proceed to take another bandage and wrap this other wound over the broken location with a bandage, and then proceed to observe the bandages at the part closest to the fracture; and for your operation in the constriction of the bandage and in softening that according to what we have said about the first bandage above.
And proceed to pause between the bandages of stopping cloth or cloth where the deformation of the fracture is equalized, if there is deformation in it; and otherwise, do not cause any disturbance.
And proceed to pause on the other bandage, and then evenly adjust over these bandages that have been made recently, if there is no swelling or abscess in this location; and then pause on that which contains the abscess and causes the swelling; and leave it for a few days; and then strengthen over this.
And if the stars of the thigh are in red color, and made wisely; or if they are of wood fiber; or of palm slices; and let each star have this size and this shape:
However, ensure that the star placed over that fracture is much bigger and somewhat smaller than the others, and the length of the star according to what is read in magnitude and size for the member; then strengthen on top of the stars another thing according to your first constriction; and place decently above it as we said about constriction, so that your constriction is more according to the location of the fracture, and the more you extend from the fracture, the more it heals.
And know that the threads should be half-thick in pregnancy and subtlety, and they should be of silk; and if the threads are thick, as I have seen through an operation on several occasions when placing those cord threads, it is a great mistake, when it was equality of the constriction.
And fine threads are not convenient because you will not be able to achieve with those what you want for constriction, and know that there should be spans of one finger between each star.
And if the patient is placed at the ends of the stars near the constriction in safe spots, then place these on wooden or dyed wool inside so that it does not harm them.
Some injuries caused by fractures lead to disruptions in the chain, and I will refer back to this in that capital according to its uniqueness.
And know that not every member broken is treated with stars on the first day; the cause is because when a member is large, it cannot have pauses over them but rather after about 3 or 7 days, or more, according to your confidence in the occurrence of an abscess cautery.
And this is the method of plastering on which the Ancients relied for repair, those which are placed over fractures and dislocations and twists.
Method of plastering as abbreviated for the restoration of fractures, suitable for complex operations and mainly for women and children, that is done on which no heat or friction comes: and you take corn powder, it's the essence of flour that one gets from the movement of the mill in the walls of the mill.
And let it be as shown like this, instead sieve that through chicken egg white, and prevent the thickening of the not-thin nor subtle mixture; and then use that.
Another method for treating fractures, dislocations, and twists: prepare a mixture of asafetida, lapdanum, acacia, wormwood, and myrrh, which is made from one thousand grains of salt, all in two drachms; add five drachms of frankincense and thirty drachms of aloes; then add twenty drachms of alcohol or the albumen of egg if the patient's body is scorched. Then use this plaster, which has good composition and restores broken bones lightly, and it gives strength to men's bodies.
Another method for preparing plaster that aids in fractures and twists: prepare a mixture of myrrh and white ash from an apple tree, ten drachms; frankincense and thirty drachms of aloes; six drachms of acacia; and twenty drachms of Armenian mastic.
All of them are ground in a mortar in the twist operation, they are sifted, and they are mixed with water or with chicken egg white and it is to be administered.
Method of plastering for joints and bones separated from their places, and sudden pain occurring in those and cracks and fractures: take wool thread and immerse it in hot wine and oil, then place it on the site.
In this plastering there is not just restoration of health, expulsion of pus from a cautery and it properly eliminates pains.
Another method of plastering that restores broken bones: take fig leaves and poppy seedlings; mix all of them together to create the plaster.
A shortened method of plastering for the restoration of bone fractures and when you want resolution of any remaining pus: use grated root, chamomile flowers, violet flowers, flour from poppy seeds, in parts each a half. Let them be treated with rest and covered warmly, if the limb has not been cut.
If it has been cut, then immerse it in water that has been boiled or use water and apply it to them.
Another method to treat pus that leads to faster resolution compared to this first one, when you encounter a hard abscess: after restoring the limb, prepare the dressing by mixing pieces of rue, sage, garlic, balm, sweet clover, basil, flowers of viola, chamomile, and a part of each; all should be treated with water from saffron or water twice boiled or wine, according to the quality of the limb and the color of the person.
Let Ypocras not write in his book that a dressing should be placed on the member that has been burned, restoring it instead if there is no other cause; and recommend that it should have a medium consistency between hardness and fineness.
Let Gualia observe that it should be covered on the broken member to restore it, and consider causes where little heat quality leads to this, such as myrrh, ashes, and things similar to those causes we have recommended.
A method to treat injury and pain: mix ground parts of plants such as yarrow, shaved human hair or dogwood bark, along with rue and salt, in equal parts; grind them finely and sift them, then apply a dressing.
The amount according to which you judge if the inflammation is spreading and is likely to subside depends on whether there was no pain or itching, nor was the bone broken at its location; then do not change your position for several days. And if there is severe pain, itching or swelling at the site, then you should move or adjust it immediately and continue with the patient's dressing.
And take flax and a sea sponge that are wet, submerge this in hot water, then wash the affected area with it until the itching stops and the pain is soothed; then let him rest for an hour; place on top of this wool cloth submerged in wine or olive oil or grated oil, cover him with this overnight until you are sure a pustule has appeared, and that the swelling of the limb has reduced, ensuring his pain is alleviated.
And then gradually loosen that tightness with small dressings and don't restrict your first movement too much, gently applying this to the area until he is healed.
And when you notice that the pustule and the heat and the pain and the swelling and all accidents have fully healed, and you need neither dressing nor tightness, then proceed with this as you did at the beginning equally.
And if there is no cause from those we've mentioned for the limb, then don't change this until about three to four or five days. And some of these treatments are left for twenty days according to how you determine the ease in movement of the limb, as we have said, until the fracture adheres and it settles onto the flesh at that place.
And then adjust the tightness more than in your first tightness completely, and adjust to the swelling of the patient's flesh, according to when his memory returns.
And if you notice that the fracture site has already dried and is exhausted more than it was before, then you know that nutrition should not reach there; hence soak this area in hot water for all days that you were soaking it; do this over three days; relax a little the tightness, and through this operation bring nourishment to the limb, which gets healed slightly.
And regarding what the restorers of limb fractures do during another phase when it is not restored at the beginning, according to whether it heals and is restored according to curvature, this is an error according to their operation, and great fear, and if they had been right in enlarging the Old ones in their books and hardened them with the work.
And I have not seen anyone of theirs do this, so it is more reasonable that this does not happen.
Section title: On fractures when they occur in the head.
The types of fractures are hits and the figures of these vary, as well as their causes which are distinct. Some fractures occur due to impact with space, where the impact remains throughout the bone inside the skull, leaving it intact, just like in a rod, hence this type is called aural; or the hit strikes only part of the bone, striking the flesh but not passing through the rear end of him/her; and this type of fracture is called absolute elevation.
And the impact of these two types of fractures is either great or slight, and for a fracture that is compressed or squeezed; and its cause is impact with rock or hammering on rock, similar to this.
And this fracture either invades the pulp which leaves the bone intact, or is in the body of the bone. The impact of these two types of fractures can be either great or slight.
And it is called bone fracture where it occurs in the bone, at the subtlety of hair-like, and this type of fracture is named capillary due to this.
And it is the fracture that occurs due to impact or hammering on rock, similar to this, causing some layer of bone to enter the divisions inside, and happens at the concave area like what happens to ore veins when they are hit, with their entry point entering into the divisions inside.
And much of this happens in bodies of wet bones, such as children's heads.
And all these species of fragmented fractures are like stars separated. And I will recount all this in its proper place.
And I know all these species of fracture through detection on them and examination of the putrid flesh that is upon them.
And the species of hairline fracture is known by what is revealed on the bone, and it is washed away, and marked around its edge, where the fracture appears black.
In the treatment of fractures, consider the patient's condition, and if you notice symptoms that manifestly indicate illness, such as vomiting from cholera, expansion, loss of understanding, voice abscesses, fainting, acute fever, sneezing episodes and sweats, and resemblances to the symptoms in major conditions, then it is not healing.
And if you notice non-occurrences (presumably referring to specific circumstances or events), you expect health, then you begin the treatment for them.
This is the cause that if it has come to you like an injury during the eating process as it happens and this occurs on the days of winter, then consider when you examine the putrefaction of the bone facing the twelfth day throughout every condition.
And if it is during the days of summer, then consider when you examine or cut open the bone facing the seventh day, because whatever has corrupted the bone from putrefaction and those accidents that we have recounted can occur.
And if the fracture has already reached the putrefaction penetrating the brain, and is divided into small parts with an oily smell, then consider when you incise the disturbed part and rub it, according to what I will recount to you.
And you examine the head of the sick person with the injury, and uncover on the bone according to custom and your skill as best as possible according to the figure of the injury, being gentle towards the body.
And if you happen to need the detection of the bone, pus or abscesses, then you oppose yourself towards this as you know how, and it is that you smell with strips infused in vinegar and rubbed oil on the place. And make the injury rest within until the abscess is sedated; and be sure about the blood flow; and then start around the circumference of the bone and in the ablation of it.
And this depends on one of two ways of operation.
And one way is that you incise the bone with an elongated blade, and this is its form: And then administer another incisioner, slightly shorter than that one; and this is its form:
And then administer the longer scalpel compared to the second one.
And you should know how many different scalpel lengths are necessary, among which some are longer than others; and some of them are shorter than the others, being at their end of sharpness, they are made of iron or steel.
And use them with ease in striking against the scalpel for fear that you injure the head and harm it.
And if the bone is strong and hard, then consider that you should perforate in the circle of it before administering the scalpel on the ribs, which are called shallow grooves.
And they are not called so simply if those do not reach the bone edge of the test towards it, for in this case that the groove has a rounded end or margin on which what is left of its sharp tip resembles a margin or small circle. This should not be submerged and pass the thickness of the bone.
And it is convenient that you take many of these grooves, each one of which agrees with the thickness of any bone, within which there is availability for all parts of the brain's end being sharp, the quantity in length and width according to the quantity of thickness of this part.
And this is the form of three types of grooves: The quality of perforating in the circle of the broken bone is that you place the groove on the bone and twist it with your fingers until you know that the bone has penetrated; then move the groove to another location, making sure that you have used the entire amount of the thickness of the ray or around it.
And then you incise with the scalpel that is between any ray of the bone, and make it as subtle as possible on this at the end of levitation, just like we said, within which you remove the bone or with your hand, or for some other reason using certain tools that you will have prepared for this, such as talons and fine forceps.
And be sure to take every caution so that the scalpel does not touch any part of the braincase.
And therefore, when you have perforated the bone and separated it from the skullcase if it continues with him, and extract that one, be sure to examine and compare that on the roughness of which is in the bone by another tool similar to a scalpel, however, consider that it should be more precise and more subtle than the other scalpels.
And if you find any fragment of wet bones and fragmented, then take that with ease according to what is necessary from the tools; and heal the injury with lint and ointments as we have said.
And the other method of operation is gentle, far from the pulse, which Galia and his assistant cut with great care; and this is what he said: it's necessary for you in the beginning to start discovering the part of the bone that is on the location where the breakage is most severe and most obvious. Once you have discovered that part and stopped the extreme end of this incision tool which cuts slowly and pleasantly, here is how it should be done:
This means that the angular part is strong and does not allow any cause, whereas the acute part is on him in two directions before length, like this. So that the angular part should be adjusted to his body so that the sharp angle comes into contact with his bone.
And then tap on the incision tool at a small angle into one part such that when you cut all the bone in an efficient manner as it has been rotated, and be sure of the direction so that it doesn't hit any accident like the fear you might have in some way. And if the doctor was the pus (contamination) of all humans and the most ignorant about them; certainly, and if he was sleeping.
And if you have found any associated cause with the bone of the operation in certain parts of the bone, apply that point towards him with the tip of this angular cutting tool, and release it from his body quickly; which is released from his pain and pulse.
And if the bone fracture does not penetrate into the operation area, and what has been separated or left from the bone is its surface, which remains in it with roughness and subtle details, then carve that roughness out and remove those subtleties through razor sharp tools you have prepared. Cut various quantities of them so that you can possibly apply those in every location according to their most suitable uses, and use the right quantity from these based on where you are performing your operation on this broken bone and its shape.
And ensure you manage in your ratio when using these razors to cut the bone at the beginning, and use the softer part of this tool closely, and continue doing this until you can administer both the coarse and subtle parts evenly.
In every other small capillary fracture or subtle break, make sure to administer care according to what you need for its correction.
And it's because there are many who have studied in that art. And we have demonstrated on what has been written about large fractures.
And if your operation causes the wound to bleed when you remove bone pieces, ensure that you apply lint according to the size of the injury. Submerge it in an alcohol-soaked cloth, place it over the wound opening; take another folded or triple-layered cloth and submerge this one in oil and alcohol-soaked cloth as well. Then lay this soaked cloth on top of the first one, do so lightly yet firmly enough to cover it without causing discomfort. And apply a layer of lint here too, don't press it hard unless needed based solely on the size of the wound.
And let it heal under this treatment for one day or two until you are sure that there is no pus left; then remove the dressing and start applying medicines that promote healing without causing excessive drying, such as linseed, corn flour, powder of ashes and aristolochia, and mixtures suitable for these.
And you must use this powder form of medicines that are powdered and applied dry to the wound. Generally, apply all medicines with properties which do not irritate or sting.
And follow your skill to ensure that the wound heals cleanly during your treatment; don't let it develop any pus or other substance. Also, avoid adding any toxicity; so when you apply this on the brain's skin, it corrupts that and affects negatively, spreading this malicious disease towards the body.
And it happens in the skull, just as if the bone there has been modified and much more so when you neglect to treat it, causing a blackness on its surface; and then consider this situation if accidents occur inside the body that we have mentioned - know that it's extremely detrimental to health.
And if no darkness occurs but due to the medicine that is placed upon it, and it is in accordance with the substance of that medicine which causes that darkness, then you should take a portion of honey and of roasted oil. And place those lines on a cloth, then put that over the head; and apply that with the spices of treatment within which suits to heal.
Cup the honey and oil mixture in your hand three times.
For the restoration of the nose when it is broken.
Know that the nose is not broken but split into two parts over time, or one of those occasionally fractured ones, in which you have two bones. The part you leave behind is cartilaginous and not broken; it does not affect the bone structure of the nose but causes swelling, twisting, and congestion.
If one of the two parts is broken, then you should introduce a small stick into the nasal cavity and equalize that fracture internally with your thumb inside and outside. Then let the nose return according to its natural shape. And do this yourself for ease, and watch that it does not fall upon the patient's entire body due to your operation.
And if the fracture is in the upper part of the nose, not at that point, then you should equalize it at the extremity of the ray where there is a small thickness.
And if the fracture is in two parts, then you do as if this were the case.
And assist in his restoration on the first day of the fracture, if possible; otherwise, then after seven or one tenth of the time you should take care of the treatment of the surgical incision.
And insert a piece of cloth at the end of the nose for him, if the fracture is in one part; or put two pins, if the fracture is in two parts. Place them so that they fill the nostril with as much thickness as fits inside the nose.
And do as some of the ancient restorers did, have the pins covered in ointment and replace them throughout the day without being seen by me. Simply ensure that the cloth is covered with an albumin paste mixed with powder; then let the pin rest inside until the bone has set and the cartilage has hardened.
And in some cases, replace the pins with something else in the nose, instead of needles, risking to have pus enveloped by lion's cloth on him; and if you already have a broken nose, there is excessive pus discharge from which the patient cannot breathe.
And this reason may not be necessary for you; if you wish, do this, and if you prefer, use needles.
And if there occurs another pus-filled surgical incision, cover the nose with gauze or with cloth that has been impregnated with a mixture of vinegar and oil, or with a poultice.
And if there is not any pus-filled surgical incision, then you should cover that area with buckwheat flour and with charcoal powder mixed with albumen of egg; and place a piece of lion's cloth over it, and do not apply anything else to the nose.
And if the bones of the nose are broken with small fractures or constricted, then you should divide over those, and remove those with instruments suitable for them; then cover the incision area, and treat that with what promotes healing and consolidation, and with bandages as is appropriate.
And if there occurs an infection inside the nose, then you should treat that with needles and administer lead canulas until it is completely healed.
Cup the mixture of honey and oil in your hand four times.
For the restoration of the jaw when it is broken.
When the jaw has been broken and the fracture is not infected, look now whether the fracture is only outside, and it is not broken into two parts but curved inward in parts, then its curvature is slight.
And therefore, if the fracture is in the right part, introduce your left thumb into the patient's mouth; similarly, if the fracture is in the left jaw, then introduce the mentioned thumb of the right hand. Push the curvature of the fracture inward with ease from the parts inside, using your other hand on the part outside of the bone; do this accordingly, making it even as you go along.
And if the fracture of the jaw has already been separated into two parts, then you should administer extension to both parts according to the correct line while making it possible for his equilibrium.
And if there is movement of teeth leading to disruption, then strengthen those that you expect will break into gold or silver or ivory; then place a gauze over the broken jaw, and lay out another layer of cloth, and a large star-shaped bandage properly made, or a pillow as long as the jaw; then apply this according to your ability in terms of the flexibility of his skin so that it allows for proper application without being destroyed.
And command the patient to rest and be calm, and keep his meals with lion's broth.
And if you estimate that it has already been altered in some way, then you take care of this on the third day; and correct whatever has already been altered from him and plaster over that with moli powder, egg albumin, or buckwheat flour, since you will have removed his gauze bandage by then, and place a lion's wool bandage over it.
And then, once this is attached and the plaster is placed on them, and the position of the bone remains unchanged, it lets him stay, until he recovers and strengthens his fracture; for these broken bones are strengthened in three weeks.
And if another wound should occur as an abscess in the leg, then administer what we have said about healed wounds during their care until it heals, and regenerate that abscess.
And if the fracture is due to an attack, then consider whether the bones are separated or stuck together. Then you refine that bone with what seems appropriate for its removal from those under pain during their treatment.
And if the openings of the wound are straightened, then you enlarge them with bloodletting according to your need.
And when you are done with those bones and they have not regrown well, then if the wound opening is wide, then enlarge it; and if not, place one of the plasters that suits here over that and allow it to heal in.
Capitol. V.
Regarding the restoration when the gullet is crushed.
Healed wounds involve breaking the furcula at the front before the muscle, and this fracture is made in three ways.
If it is broken, separated, or separated into two parts other than those that become boneless, it's easier for the restoration of them. Or if it happens to you being boneless in you, it's difficult for the restoration of you. Or it could be due to an attack causing this fracture.
And during this operation, when the fracture is caused by an attack, you must have two ministers present, so one has the assistant and follows the broken gullet, and the other extends the neck towards that part.
And when it comes to repairing the fracture with your words until you have made the form according to its shape and not a slight depression or cavity in it.
And if you need more extension, then make sure to place your fingers on the fatty part of the patient's thigh with a cloth or wool, and its size according to your need; extend and elevate the gullet and tighten the fat area with your hand until you equalize the fracture according to this.
And if you cannot pull the end of the gullet to the outer parts because it is buried up to the anus, then make sure that the patient lies on their back with their head turned, and place a cushion half as large over their muscle.
And the minister puts their hand under the muscle towards the outer parts until the bone of the gullet is lifted as far as to the anus in them, and then you correct the fracture and equalize it with your words.
And if you feel bones of the gullet that are broken, then make sure to cut over that and remove those broken pieces easily.
And if it is stuck in the bone, then you devise an incision for you with one of the scalpel knives that you have worn for this, since you have placed the gullet on the instrument that serves the scissor; and this is its shape:
It is similar to a spoon where this is its curvature; and its width according to what you need from it, according to the size of the bone or its softness.
And the length of it should be according to what is possible in the operation; that there are two ends like this, and one end is wide while the other is narrow.
And if the wound disruption that you have incised when you remove the broken piece from the bone is wide and there is a sure abscess in the leg, then adjust both edges of the wound for suturing.
And if the disruption is small, or you fear an abscess in the leg, then you cover the wound with cloths and powders according to the amount of the wound's incision.
And if an abscess occurs, then soak cloth in vinegar and oil rubbed with vinegar, and place it over that.
And altogether, if the table knife does not show over the broken bone; and make sure you see your neck every day, that when the swelling is softened or you notice the table knife already regrown, then you correct this and strengthen the healing.
And then have the patient's neck sleep on their back, and place your hand on their head every night with a small cushion; so that at that point, your assistant from behind supports them in their neck region, and thus elevates the fracture of the gullet to its elevation in the muscle or lifts their arm onto their neck.
And do not move the ligament if it does not occur at the site promptly or abscess, within about twelve days.
And after that, renew the bandage if you have seen the patient's face under water, and adjust in the constriction and restore it to smoothness until the clavicle fracture is restored and has healed.
And it becomes stronger and more comfortable by the month on the 28th day, and some patients experience improvements in their condition within that time span.
"Capitol. vi." This seems to indicate a reference or citation format often used for texts or documents where 'Capitol' might refer to the title of the document or section, and '.vi.' likely indicates version or part number 6 of that title. However, without context, this translation is speculative.
"De restauracio de fractura de la spalla." This translates to "Of the restoration of a shoulder fracture."
"Spatula tart is broken at the site on the right side of the patient, and it's not breaking from the patient but rather from the edges."
"And when the site of the patient is broken - and it breaks in the middle of the site - and it's not known except by touch, then according to how the fracture shape forces you, prepare for the patient and reduce that according to the natural figure. Do so with any skillful method of your craft where you are capable."
"And then pause over the site with powdered albumen mixed with oil, and stop it. And then place a dust of double cloth powder; and then pause on the patient's chest under the fine table board according to the total quantity or slightly more than that of the spatula."
"Or if you leave the chest cavity in some of the sites of the spatula, then fill that cavity with stoppy lion, and then adjust the chest according to equality."
"And afterwards strengthen on top with human fat about constriction and the firmness of the chest, while within which do not allow to return to its original location."
"And consider the ligament on every day; and in all stages when it has softened, apply another application and strengthen it and adjust the chest if it returns to its original position."
"And leave the patient lying on their left side like this."
"The spatula is restored in 20 days or by the XXVth day."
"And when this number is completed, then you dissolve the ligament, and that you must know safely that this was from the bones where it started, and its dissolution is not feared nor its solution."
"And if you proceed with the bone's cavity and place the cord there, then you divide over it, hold it, and do as we have said about the clavicle fracture of pus formation should occur here."
"Capitol. vii." This seems to indicate a title or section number, likely from a document or text where 'Capitol' refers to the main body or core of it. However, without context, precise translation is challenging as it doesn't provide substantial content beyond being part of an organized system of information or instruction.
"Of the restoration of the leg fracture."
"The leg, in some stages, breaks at the middle part of it and here the bone is fragmented; but its ends must not be crushed or broken."
"And of the injuries when it breaks in the middle of it, it descends into the parts inside and happens to it great pain, difficulty in breathing, coughing, nausea and weakness; and this is declared in the cavity of the broken bone and it is not hidden from feeling."
"And the restoration of it is to place the patient on their back and rest under their shoulders with a cushion; then press into the muscles, adjust the back against the ribs of two sides, and be subtle in your operation and balance according to all methods that are possible for you and which fit, so that when it returns to its original shape as expected."
"And then pause over the bandage and cover it up, and place underneath this thin table made of wax or lime, which matches in lightness; for you wrap that with cloth; and be subtle in relating that to the broken bone so as not to distort its shape; and proceed according to the roundness on your back in some stages, strengthen that at the constriction decently; and then consider the firmness all the time, and when it softens, strengthen that."
"And if it is necessary that there be removal or pressure, or pain, or abscess that occurs in the site, then take and remove that and remove the bandage and correct whatever happens according to your way of treating it; and adjust the constriction when you see its face again; and place the bandage where it is healthy."
"Capitol. viii." This indicates a title or section number, suggesting this might be part of an organized document, possibly detailing steps for restoration or treatment following the instructions provided previously. Without further context, this signifies the eighth chapter or section in that document.
"Of the restoration when the ribs are broken."
"Know that a rib fracture does not occur except in large sites that span the two; and at their ends, they do not experience that compression due to what are cartilaginous." "Recognizing it is not hidden from feeling, you should investigate it with your fingers."
"And the restoration should be as detailed as possible by aligning the fracture with your fingers according to the feasible method, within which it is swallowed as expected, then cover and strengthen the broken bone with a chest piece if you need that."
"And if the rib fracture descends into the parts inside, then it occurs with intense chest pain and puncture, like the puncture that happens in those who have pleurisy, due to which the lungs take on fluid; and it causes difficulty in breathing, coughing, and vomiting of stomach contents; and this is difficult to treat."
And already the Ancients are skilled in that amount of medicine knowledge.
And from them they say: remove or place food under the patient that causes swelling and wind, so that the stomach becomes swollen and extended, and the fracture is pushed outwards.
May we not allow this to happen lightly causing the generation of a small abscess with the cautery, if it does not occur; and if it already occurs, then help with it.
And they said that it should be placed above the windward and near to increase strength; this is like reasoning, but however it is feared that the wind will carry away the excess due to weakness.
And they said that it should be: cover the area with wool that is submerged in oil from the cautery, and place powders between the ribs where it fills up, making it as thick as you would wrap that according to its roundness; and then treat the thigh with the cure of stomach pain and medicine.
And if it causes intense constriction in the thigh which cannot bear it, and breaks the bone through the skin with a puncturing tool, we fear for the thigh; then let it be that we cut above the area, reveal from the broken rib, and place something below that instrument which conserves the operation memory, and which is guided by experience, and I will drill into the bone to facilitate it, and remove it.
And if you adjust the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with suture, and treat that with plasters until it heals.
And if an abscess occurs internally, then you squeeze and place powder in crushed oil on the spot, and let it be treated by the one that promotes healing from inside the abscess.
And it should be folded over the side on which he sleeps, until it heals.
Section Nine.
On Restoring Fractures of the Vertebrae of the Spine and Cervical Region.
Some fractures may occur in the bones of the cervical vertebrae, and similarly in their attachments, as well as in the vertebral bodies of the spine. And if you want to know whether it will heal or not when this happens with some person, then consider that if their hands are already softened and dead after the injury and cannot be made stronger nor extended nor contracted without feeling pain in them, and if you press them or needle them with a needle and do not feel any pain there, then you can know that it is not healing, and during such times it's fatal.
And if you make them sore and feel a constriction in those spots when pressing and puncturing them, then you can know that the neck of the bone is saved and that the thigh will recover with treatment.
And if you see similarities to this in the cervical vertebrae and want to know whether it will heal or not, then consider their feet.
And if you find that they are already softened, it is like what happens in their hands. And when you place your hand on their back, you can see windiness and loss of appetite according to their will; and some times the wound gets folded over their back and they want to urinate but cannot, then you can know that it is fatal, and consequently do not continue with treatment for them.
May if no cause of those happens, the cause is better and more gentle.
And the treatment for this is that you perform the desensitization of the oil cautery burn on the compressed vertebra, or with horse powders; place some wounds on those areas a day until the oil cautery burn is desensitized.
And then place one of the plasters with comfort and stability, and strengthen it with bindings; and command the thigh to rest and be calm, and not sleep on the side where it finds pain until it heals.
And if this occurs, you must remove the vertebra or any cause that has been separated from it, then let it heal over the wound and take out that bone; and adjust the two lips of the wound, with suturing if it's large; and treat that with some lard ointment until it heals.
May if the last rib bone is broken under the buttocks, this is at the end of the anus, then let it be that you place your left hand's thumb in the buttock and align the broken bone with the other hand as much as possible according to the second equation; and adjust on top of its plaster and charcoal dust if you need those, and strengthen that.
And if you feel broken bones in it, then let it be that you cut there, and stay with that, and treat the wound according to the treatment that leads until it heals.
Section Ten.
On Restoring Width.
The bones of the widths break, and if they do break, then the fracture is merely communication in the ends of those ones and are imprinted along the length; and it causes pain at that spot and puncturing, and the change becomes numb when it's a fracture.
And the restoration of this is that you place your hand over there within which is where the figure of that fracture lies.
And if the fracture is only at the end of it, then you align that according to what fits your hand by equal equation within which it will be assembled to its natural figure.
If the fracture is in the leg or already declining to the parts left, then you make the patient lie on their belly with their stomach prepared for your preparation of restoring that fracture. And when you have equalized that one, place plaster on them, and place your hand near the firewood or candle stake, and apply pressure with a grip on it that you do not fear the puncturing of the fracture nor the movement of the star.
And level the depression as it fills that space where the grip will take its place according to equality, and instruct the patient to sleep on their elbows or without turning their side.
If it happens that the cauterized burn spreads, then you stop the extension of them and their restoration until the cauterized burn is sedated, and place plaster on them where they were heated according to what precedes; and then return to the restoration, and apply strength to this as if for a wound.
And if it happens that in the socket they are displaced or broken, then you treat them.
Capitol .xi.
Of restoration of the fracture of the auxiliary.
An adjunct is that which is between the shoulder blade in the head of the shoulder.
And if it is broken, then the restoration of them is in one of two ways, of which you take wood flat for coarseness according to this form:
And they are fixed at both ends with two ligaments, and then they are suspended from the elevated place.
And let the patient lie on their back; and place their broken arm on the beam so that it reaches to the nipple in the middle, where its curvature is attached to the beam.
And suspend over that some heavy object, or the surgeon extends it to the broken parts; and place your hand near the patient's breasts so that the fracture returns as if for a wound.
And the other way is that the patient lies on their back, and has their hand suspended from the collarbone with ligaments; and command two attendants to one of them hold what is below the fracture near their breasts, and the other holds their broken part. And each extends to their part.
And if you want the extension to be stronger, then apply strength on the fracture with ligaments and near that with another ligament, and each of the two attendants extends to both their parts.
And if the fracture is close to the end of the muscle, then you cover half of the ligament over the nipple and the other part of the fracture goes towards the shoulder blade.
And similarly if the fracture is close to the shoulder blade, then you cover the ligament over that area and near that shoulder blade.
Level it with ease and proceed to work, and when it is equally levelled according to how it is handled and well applied, then apply strength if no cauterized burn occurs.
If a cauterized burn occurs, then smooth the grip within the seventh day, and place woolen thread surgically cut in vinegar for it to rest on the cauterized area, and then you apply strength to this.
And the way to strengthen this is to place plaster on the fracture, and near wrap the new sail fabric around the plaster; and adjust their arm over this auxiliary, and place their hand opened over their muscle.
And place the cloth and apply strength on this auxiliary arm in such a way that the arm is in the position of stars, if you do not prevent any cause from the broken bone.
And then use stars.
And you place that star over the fracture which is closer and stronger than the other stars; and between each star is the width of a finger, and the length of the stars according to the breakage up to three fingers from every part.
And then apply strength over the stars towards the grip which I mentioned at the beginning of this treatise.
And your grip on the place of the fracture should be stronger. And when it is more extended, the grip will be smaller.
And if you consider the position of the stars and the grip as we have said when restoring the limb to its place, then you do.
And if you fear a cauterized burn, then you smooth the grip and the stars within the seventh day as we have said.
And then consider the ligaments in all parts for three days so that it does not occur at the cut or swelling place; or forbid food to reach the limb due to an excess of grip; and therefore correct everything according to what we have said.
If you are confident that no cause will occur from this, then do not loosen the bandage but after three days or more.
And if the patient's sleep is on their back, and their breasts are over the stomach.
And place a full plate of wool on the auxiliary, and consider at all times whether it is not distorted or dissolved in shape of the broken limb, or if the ligaments are softened, then correct this entirely according to your skill.
And serve the patient's food according to the order we have before us, so that the food is fine at first as it begins to be strengthened; and then let us know when you increase the food of them.
When following the custom of the assistant and the patient's chest, they should be strong in forty days; then it is necessary that they are relaxed and treated with baths and medicated with ointments which correct those things.
And if the fracture is rubbed outwards, then you do not release from that ligament and the stars inside one or two days.
Chapter XII.
On the restoration of a forearm fracture.
The arm is made up of two bones which are called the radius and the ulna; among them, one is small, and that is what we call the wrist bone, while the other is large, it is the bone placed beyond the small one from the wrist.
And if a slight fracture affects only the larger radius bone or the smaller one, and if it is broken at the same time.
And when the smaller radius bone is broken above, then its restoration is slight, and its healing is even more so.
And when the fracture affects the radius bone on either side, then it is bad for him and his healing is difficult.
And even worse than that is when both bones are broken at the same time.
Therefore, if the bone that is broken is the small radius above, then it is convenient for the surgeon to restore him, and you should facilitate a small extension in which that can be equalized.
If it is the large radius that is broken, then it is necessary to take a more vigorous extension.
And if both bones are broken at the same time, then you should undertake the surgery with much greater force.
And when you undertake the figure of the hand, you should restore him and extend his arm over a cushion, and place his wrist above all the other points, besides this, and the ear point is below all the others, and his thigh is centred on a fallen chair.
And put a cushion in front of him at the height or level of his body, so that his thigh does not move during work.
And the minister should extend the arm from the part further down towards his own hand or ligament, and another minister should do similarly above.
And the surgeon should equalize the bones within that according to the best figure possible.
And if in the piece of the bone there are damages, then you must reduce it to its place with your strength.
And if you find a separate damage that breaks the continuity and is beyond your hope for restoring him, then you apply to him and hold it in place according to the method we mentioned above.
If the fracture is from an attack, I have already treated this chapter separately, and so take care of that.
And if you happen to get an abscess in the beginning of your restoration, then you lay out a piece of cloth impregnated with roasting oil and white wax, with a mixture that balances between strength and subtlety, firmly covering it on that spot for the abscess to heal; then replace the dressing and apply plaster made from moli powder mixed with butter, and place stars; and ensure that the star placed above that fracture is closer and more forceful.
And know that the number of stars for an arm is indicated in major dispositions, or if there's a fracture in one radius bone or both bones at once.
And continue to hold your tension on the place of the fracture firmly and vigorously, and when it's more advisable for the tension at the top parts of the fracture or at lower parts of him, hold the tension slightly moistened a few more times following his memory in the beginning of this chapter.
And the cloths that envelop the fracture should be moist and slightly damp, neither hard nor abrasive, and the wax on which they are strengthened should be of medium consistency between subtle and coarse, as we have recommended.
And consider the limb and the ligament for several days. And if any cause requiring correction occurs, as when something happens to the limb, then you should immerse the limb in warm water until that pain subsides.
And let the limb rest without strain, and soon resume tension.
And if the tension has already been softened and the bone has already been restored to those points, then correct all of this with your strength.
And consider more if nutrition is prohibited from reaching the limb due to excess tension, then you should make that softer for a little and let it alone for a few days until its nutrition starts flowing back to that, and soon strengthen that.
And if nothing happens to the thigh from those causes that we have mentioned, then do not release him within about 20 days or so of these.
And have the thigh of the patient suspended by his own strength for vigorous movements, and let him sleep on his back.
And know that this fracture is restored in thirty days or thirty-two days, or moderately it's restored in twenty-eight days, and all of this depends on the completeness of the body parts and the position of his strength.
Chapter XIII.
On the restoration of a wrist fracture and finger fractures.
And know that the wrist of the hand and the joints of the fingers are likely to have fractures, and they do not occur solely due to movement injuries.
And when it happens to me a fracture or twist, then have the patient lie down and in front of them place their limbs at equality, and also place my hand on that which is extended.
And then the minister extends the broken bones, and the doctor adjusts those within where they are set properly for good healing.
And then cover it with plaster and stop it, if no pus comes out from the cautery; and place stones according to the amount of the area, and you have already enveloped that in a linen cloth.
If the fracture is in the parts inside you should bend it to the belly of the hand, and then make a similar shape with linen cloth, and command the patient to hold that on their bent hand; have it strengthened on long linen.
And if the stone of the heart is in the linen cloth on which it rests, so that the heart may be applied to the hand; strengthen that as you see fit.
If the fracture is on the outside parts, then have you place one stone and another stone of the part under your hand, so that the hand may be opened and straight; and also place the constriction, as the hand turns inwards between its fingers evenly.
And if it happens that there is a fracture in some of the joints of the fingers, then when you place your finger down, adjust it according to what you see and also have it strengthened on the palm; and if you wish, place a small stone straightly so that the fracture may be elevated and not be twisted.
If the fracture is in other fingers, just like at the center of your palm or on the index finger, or on the ring finger, or on the little finger, then adjust and align it with that finger where that is; or all are aligned continuously, which is better; or place a small stone over that, as we said for the thumb.
And consider in your restoration and near that, the disposition of pus from the cautery and oppose - during your operation - as you see fit according to what comes up when any cause of those occurs, following the repeated story of it.
Chapter XIV.
On restoring a fracture of the bone in the foot.
The bones of the ankle are broken and judged according to their transformation into the part in front, and the resulting pus.
And the restoration of it is done so that the muscle is strengthened on the fracture and another muscle left with the fracture, and the patient lies on their belly and their face.
And then the minister extends all the muscle according to its quality when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
If it approaches the length of the ankle bone, then have the muscle close to the heel part of the fifth toe, so that the extension fits into them, and the other muscles left with the fracture.
And similarly if the break is close to the heel, then make the muscle close to the heel, and let the extension be on the remaining parts.
And then the doctor adjusts the bones between both of their hands so that it returns as per its natural shape and the bone is joined with good connection; then have you place plaster and bandage, if there is no pus in the member. If pus occurs in it, then you leave that for some days until the pus from the cautery subsides, and then return to your treatment.
The bandage of it is done like this: have you wrap around the fracture with a hard bandage, fold that two or three times, and remove excess from it; then encase the joint so that it reaches to the ankle bone.
And insert a long needle between the ankle bone and the joint near the heel on the remaining parts, the ends of the needle extend from that joint's pus-covered part to both sides, then rotate around the joint and the ankle bone as much excess of the bandage is left.
And then place on the ankle bone at the location of that fracture stones, and under those place a stone on the bone of the joint.
And then fill the gaps between the joint and the foot with many cloths, so that the bandage may be.
And then start with a strong bandage in the middle over the area of the fracture with three or four layers, and as you move further away from that area of the fracture, your bandage becomes smaller and softer.
And then extend both ends of the needle to the remaining parts between which it reaches into the abdomen cavity, and strengthen both ends of the stones from the other side so that the muscle does not move out of its place.
And then leave the bandage on that area so that no harm befalls the member, neither from pus in the cautery nor from inflammation or resembling those; and if any cause of these occurs, then assess yourself with the strength of it, and correct whatever happens all nearby as we have discussed broken bones.
If it's in the bone that has space, then have you adjust that according to what is possible for you; and if not, apply over it and leave that, and treat with whatever comes before the healing reminder within which it will be healed.
And in some instances this bandage is strengthened for this fracture of the ankle bone just like it's adjusted to your stones, as we have said in the assistant and in the arm.
However, during the restoration of the patient in such a manner, no limpness befalls the patient; and if it is restored alone, another part that is applied to this other leg, then it becomes necessary for that one to limp which is his turn.
Know that the thigh is strong for about 10 days or a few months, and all this depends on the diversity of constitutions and other dispositions.
Chapter XV.
On the restoration of the fracture of the knee joint.
Know that while fractures of the knee joint are rare, they do occur in those with weak joints due to strain.
If such a fracture does occur, then it is merely a crack or break in its parts, and this can be either an ordinary injury or severe damage, and the entire situation depends on one's feelings.
And the restoration of this (referring to a broken limb or similar body part) should be such that it matches what was broken in its parts, within the joints where the pieces are added and joined according to what is possible through accuracy and ease of workmanship and fabrication.
And apply plaster and rest over that round pillar, if you need from that; strengthen above with a bandage suitable to this.
And consider all the dispositions that we have recommended in other fractures, such as applying pus extractors and similar things to those where rest is placed against everything that is convenient for this within it until it is healed.
Chapter XVI.
On the restoration of the fracture of the hip joint.
Know that in the hip joint there are two bones, one of which is thick and is named as such: the hip bone; and the other is thin and is called easy.
And it happens with the various types of fracture as occurs in both bones of the arm, and thus restoration is done on him in the same way as for the arm, and the operation for this is one.
And if two bones are broken at once, the hip joint turns into all parts.
And if only the thinner bone is broken, the hip joint turns to the front parts.
And if it's the thick bone that's broken, you'll find those causes which are not within your control.
And apply extension and accuracy in aligning the bones according to this matching.
However, if the fracture of the hip joint lacks major joints, then extension should be stronger and more gentle, relying on your skill.
And in the hip joint there's some operation reason on the arm, this happens when you align the joints and complete all your operation, then you'll take the weight of the stick that is placed under these causes which are suspended in air, and they happen simultaneously with palm branches; adjust those to which there's a slight clumsiness, not allowing the fingers, but making it according to the length of the hip joint, and within the knee between the two ends, leave it.
And then wrap it with any cloth in two layers according to the length of this, and place one layer over the hip joint part from one side and the other part from the other side, and both within the knee between the ends are at the bottom location on the chest.
And then tie the two joints at three points of each extremity and in the middle point; with this structure, the hip joint is prevented from inclining to either the right or left part, and stays in good position.
And already the rod of wood has been applied according to the length of the hip joint; and the hip joint is placed on him in such a way that it retains some mobility.
And most importantly, do this with fractures, and when that one is healed properly.
And consider every day the hip joint and study it thoroughly after each examination, and keep it free from pus and swelling or other similar causes; and if any of those causes occur, then rest it as necessary until it is healed.
Chapter XVII.
On the fracture of the ankle and bones of the foot and fingers.
Fracture of the ankle does not occur completely; but some fractures do occur in the bones of the foot; and some fractures occur in the fingers too, but they don't occur in them unless there's strain during certain months with disposition.
And if there's fracture in the bones of the foot and they happen to be elevated among themselves, then the patient should place their foot on a prepared ground as usual.
And place one foot on what is elevated from those bones, and press with the others, apply pressure, and align them according to where they return in their places.
And place plaster and stop above, and leave the patient's belly with a small table under which two cushioned seats are placed.
And then strengthen that with the foot in descending position, for you have wrapped that with cloths and from other causes which you need.
And as time passes for three or four days, then you'll loosen that ligament, which you will find the bones aligned, whether they are broken or dislocated, and the operation in those cases is like what you know.
And if some fingers are broken, then restore those, and align them as I have recommended to you for the restoration of the fingers of the hand. And then place the cut star-shaped metal according to the length of the finger, and put some padding under you; and then let your leg rest on this table which is recommended for you, and strengthen that with proper tension.
If it is the case that what is cut from the bones is two or three or more, then you place over each finger up to its quantity enveloped in lion's skin, and strengthen the table at the lowest point of the foot, and standing on one of the table's ends touch the belly of the foot so that it has good retention.
And it is convenient for you not to forget that you do not consider all the causes which we have mentioned to you in other fractures of accidents as we have said; and prepare yourself against every accident with this.
Chapter XVIII.
On fracture of the knee joint and the patella bone, and on the shinbone of men.
When the knee of the woman is cut, then let that bend in the crease formed by it, and slightly incline that towards the division between the two, and hold it behind.
And let the midwife lift the knee of the calf, and do it in the knee of her like how she expects; and let the woman be bent down, and raise her two small ones gradually, so that all this is outside until the knee part is like what she expects and the cut bone returns.
And let powders be placed on her back, and when she wants to urinate, relieve the calf so that it becomes easier for her to urinate, and let urine flow, then return it according to the method with which you set it before eating, and let her return to her original powder.
And do this for seven days or about those, until that is restored.
And if you wish, take an ewe's bladder and place a reed in the abdomen of her; then immerse the whole bladder into her knee, and blow through the reed with force so that the bladder inflates inside the knee, where the fracture returns.
And let it be filled up to the calf and stay for some days as we have recommended, until she is healed.
And when the patella bone of men or women is cut, then manage in its restoration and adjustment what we have recommended for the thigh bone.
And what is right should not be hidden in these nearby fractures that are rare, mostly for those who have some study and understand this my free advice; for that fracture means to you in the most important directions through mechanical theory in its restoration and tensioning, so understand well.
And in the shinbone when it is cut, take care of her and place the shinbone inside; then let her lie wrapped in cloth, which she should be covered with, then let her rest for three days or about those, until she is healed.
Chapter XIX.
On the restoration of bone fractures when they are under plaster.
It is convenient for the one who experiences fractures under plaster, especially if the bone is large such as the thigh or knee bone, or resembling that one, in which you take care of it and immediately do bloodletting there whenever your conditions allow or testify thus as we have mentioned above.
And if the plaster flows with pus, then take care of its retention for you by dusting it over her swollen area, if there is no other cause present.
And then begin restoring the fracture on that same day, and do not extend this too long if there is no formation of abscess.
If an abscess occurs, then delay your restoration of her until the pus is drained, and do not approach it on the third day or in total four days, where you may cause bad accidents.
If the broken bone is prominent over an exposed wound, then take care to reduce it and equalize it with your hands for ease and limited extension.
If extension is not prepared for you and the alignment of her with your own hands, then let you reduce it with these tools; and this tool is made of iron, its length being seven or eight fingers, and its width according to the size of the wound; thus it is necessary for the doctor to take three or four of them according to what he needs in treatment for all types of fracture.
And make it round, and let there be a slight hardness for fear that it may bend; therefore during the operation press upon it.
And let it have an acute end with a margin on her own extremities; and let the surface of it be smoothly rounded everywhere except inside the parts.
And this is its form:
It is named in Greek "labre volenz atelarem", thus it is a small palette.
And take care to elevate the end of her so that it rises above the prominent end of the bone.
And press that into a groove until the bone returns and is equalized with some alignment.
And thus strive to equalize the ends of the fracture between them, and if the broken end is subtle and cannot take that tool for a good position, then take care to insert her bone end into where the instrument has power for this.
If you cannot return the bones to their entirety as we have advised, then cut out that part which is appropriate to your patient from among the incisioners we mentioned; or cut it down with one of the scalpels in whatever way is feasible for you.
And remove that which sticks in the bones of roughness and small pains.
And when the bone is returned, and after that the return of the patient experiences intense pain, then understand that the bone has not returned to its natural place; and immediately do what you prescribed for the patient in his youth.
When your restoration for the bone is completed, then immerse a cloth in astringent black vinegar, and especially during summer, do not apply ointment or any other cause that might lead to infection or decay on the wound. This ensures it doesn't happen to you.
And after the time of your completion of the restoration of the bone, let the wound be uncovered and allow that which is removed by the scalpel to heal with bandages according to the size of the wound.
And take care with all caution not to disturb the wound near the fracture, as doctors have done in the past, and let no decay or serious illness happen on your patients' bodies or worsen their health; this is healing. And if your constriction is slight, soft, different from the constriction of other fractures.
And if the wound is large or a bad wound, and you fear the harmful accidents we have advised, and you feel pain in that area, then don't hesitate to apply something over it. Instead, use hard bandages instead of scalpels and bind them tightly on him like this.
And as the wound begins to heal within one or two days, let there be a scab formed on him. Then you remove the cloth which you had placed over that area with vinegar, and then apply ointments, the ones we usually use for healing wounds, such as tetrarhomapharmaceutical ointments and so on.
And remember to loosen the bandage and examine the wound every morning and evening until it is consolidated and sealed, then ensure that the body is prepared in such a way that healing proceeds from him to the parts around with ease.
If the wound lasts for several days and is not consolidated or the scab does not fall off with the natural process, then understand that these are instances where you should take action to remove the scab whenever necessary on your own. And of those that separate naturally, you should remove them. Those that do not separate on their own and cause pain in the body when they are left alone, puncture them according to what is possible for you.
And if pus or liquid accumulates in the wound, it is an indication of inflammation or putrefaction, then remove what you can from each one according to what you find appropriate for your patient's treatment as described in the subsequent section on that topic in his chapter.
And in the case where you need to ensure proper drainage and you make your presence known: when bones are broken, treat them as if they were part of the thigh or helpmate or similar parts of larger limbs, and do not assume there is injury to him, nor expect his death from wounds that might happen in this way; instead leave it inside where pus can accumulate, which will eventually fall out on its own within about 20 days or thirty days. And then treat the wound if you see it, and if not, leave it as is.
Chapter 20.
On the treatment of inflammation that occurs in the aftermath of a fracture.
Wounds often occur in this inflammation at the site of healing of a fracture, especially near joints, and he feels the shape of his limb is altered; and you forbid him from performing his natural function.
Then consider if the inflammation is recent and administer medicines that have astringent properties such as aloes, herbs, vinegar, lemon juice, and so on; you should take some or all of them, and apply them with vinegar, or with egg white, or with garlic oil, then place that over the inflammation to help dry it out, and bind those things around him for proper constriction.
And let the constriction not be so tight that you cannot remove it for a few days; then loosen that and replace it with another until the inflammation is reduced; or bind that sheet of lead on top, as lead has the property of reducing all swelling in limbs.
And if the inflammation has hardened and is difficult to remove, then if necessary remove it gradually, and cut off the excess or swollen part, or cut that into sections as it gets better; treat that area until it heals.
Chapter 21.
On the restoration of a fracture when it has healed, and how to treat delicate or fragile limbs not according to their natural state.
When a bone fracture has healed, and how to treat delicate or fragile limbs not according to their natural state: this should only be done for certain reasons. Among these, one is the excessive accumulation of fluid in the tissue and the lack of mobility causing by that; or due to excess constriction of the muscles preventing nutrients from reaching the limb; or due to an excess of unneeded ointment; or due to unnecessary movements before healing has taken place; or due to weakness of bones within the patient's body, and due to his debility.
And the treatment for this is to reduce the patient's discomfort and have their body ready so that the medicine can multiply within them; give them baths; and apply heat and joy on them.
And place a poultice on the limb, so that the poultice draws their strength, or continuous application of heat to them with water's heat; let the nutrient flow and return to its natural shape within.
Chapter XXII.
On the treatment of bone fractures when they are being restored in a tortuous manner, and forbidding operations involving them.
When it happens to the restored limb near the healing of its tortuosity and eminence in the broken bone, and this is reduced in shape of the limb, however the limb is not forbidden from its natural operation, so that you accept the word of the one who exists that part of the limb is new broken.
May there already be skilled surgeons and restorers who have done this in our land; and this operation is highly reprehensible leading to great fear, which is the sign of death.
If there is a limpness or nodding recently, then apply it in water with heat in which medicinal herbs are boiled, such as poppies and grasses of the field, and milkvetches, and so on; do this to the dressing with the dressing for mollification as with calendula well done; or take honey from tall grasses and mix it with ghee or with almond oil, then apply the paste with that; or take fat fruits and cut them with the fat of a goose, and similar things to those used in medicines called consolidators.
And sometimes it is dissolved by frequent light rubbing that is done with the most humid parts, and it is administered movement of the limb to all parts at all times.
If the tortuosity has already gone ahead and been hardened into a hard mass causing the need for treatment with iron, then it should be that pus is above the cavity and the continuity of the bone is dissolved, and the application of what makes unnecessary nodules in that part on the bone using fine surgical instruments should be administered with diligence and study.
Chapter XXIII.
On speaking about dislocation.
Dislocation is an impairment of any joint in its place, preventing mobility, and it causes deformation of the limb, causing great pains and injuries to occur on the patient.
So when it happens to a certain dislocation, you should immediately perform such that it is reduced, and do not delay in reducing it, because if it's delayed, the place gets stuck and hardens up under this, making it difficult to reduce the dislocation.
And for this reason, don't let it be too hot or cold during the process of fixing, as heated or cooled places bring about painful contractions.
If this happens, you should apply to the feverbath of the patient, and let it stay in order for the abscess to rest; and place the limb in hot water with oil, and let it be reduced with ease.
And every limb should be treated with what is remembered of its location.
And I have already and arranged the chapters on dislocation according to what precedes in fracture; from the part of the body, pus rises above the part with the pus left behind.
Chapter XIV.
On the treatment of dislocation of the jaw, left side.
So if the two mandibles are not torn; and dislocation of both is done according to one of two ways: either they are slightly moved back to their places by a little action and made somewhat soft; or they are completely dislocated and completed, with them being softened at the junction part where saliva flows from the patient, so that it cannot have that nor can close its mouth, and the tongue is enveloped in its word.
If the dislocation of the patient is slight, then in major arrangements it returns by itself with a slight cause.
If the dislocation is complete and filled out, then it should be that a reduction of it is administered lightly, and do not delay at all.
And the minister should have the head of the patient, and have the surgeon put his one hand on the side of the patient's face near the point of the dislocated jaw inside their mouth, if the dislocation is from one part; or both of his hands at once, if the dislocation is from two parts, and all other commands should be made to those facing inwards with them equal; and command the patient to stop moving their jaws and return them from every direction; and the surgeon should align the jaw and push the jaw back into its place.
And if the reduction of it is difficult, especially if both jaws are always dislocated, then administer evacuation with hot water and oil, within which a slight reduction of both should be done, and do not delay in reducing both completely as we have said.
And when they return and are aligned, and the mouth of the patient is closed and not softened, then place those powdery substances of wax on them with cerat, and make it out of melted wax and oil; and let it be held in place with soft bandages.
And have the patient lying on their back, and the head of them is between two pillows, in order that neither the right nor the left part gets swollen; do not force anything to cause any pain to him. Have his food forbidden until the swelling subsides and his jaws are numb, then let this one go as he wishes.
And this one should be given in an easy manner, and do not work on the opening of the mouth regarding food, drink, and rest until the jaw is numb and healed.
And if it's difficult to reduce two jaws that are dislocated at any hour and have not been converted to their original places, then fevers and constant sweating occur, and the strength of the patient is weakened, and the stomach becomes nauseous, and the strength and vomiting become pure.
And when you do this, know that it's a loss; and for the one to whom this happens, they will die in about three days.
Chapter XXV
On reduction of the dislocation of the furcula and extremity of the muscle.
The furcula is not dislocated inside the stomach by its continuity with the bones; sometimes it is dislocated towards the outside, and this is declared to the feeling.
And the restoration for him is that the patient lie on their back and extend their arms. Then with your palm you compress the area with strong compression, so that it will return.
And place over there an ointment and powder and strengthen that.
May the extremity of that which is inside it and continues with that, is not dislocated in any day; then know that you should reduce and equalize it according to what we have said and according to what suits your equipment.
And place over there an ointment and powder, and a bandage, and command the patient to adhere to rest and repose until they are healed.
And with this medical treatment is reducing the extremity of the muscle when it is separated from its place.
Chapter XXVI
On reduction of the dislocation of the muscle.
Know that the muscle is not dislocated in any way other than three, of which one is when it is dislocated from the nipple to the side.
And the second is when it is dislocated at the top of the muscle, and this is made sharp; it is not dislocated from the sides behind the shoulder; and it is not dislocated from the fronts in relation to nerves.
It is mostly dislocated and sticks out at the sides of the body on the side of the nipple, especially in those with few muscles, it can be easily dislocated; more in those with many muscles, it stays out with difficulty.
And strength is taken by some people due to blows or impact, and the muscle of them is swollen with a lump from the pus of a cautery, and it becomes dislocated because of this.
And know that you should do this while you are over-satisfied with them, and then proceed in the treatment of them.
And when you know the dislocation of them when it is at the sides of the body on the side of the nipple; then distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the intact muscle, which you find among those with a manifest variety; you find in the head of the muscle a concavity and leave the nipple touching the top of the muscle's head as if with one eye, and the patient cannot reduce their hand to their armpit, nor even that one by any movements.
And if it is dislocated from the bones or nearby, then you can find a distinct touch there, and it is not concealed.
And with this dislocation, a gentle reduction is made when it's fresh and the patient is young.
And the reduction of them is that the minister raises their hand of them to the top parts; then place your fingers on the side of the nipple of them and raise the joint with strength to its place, the minister raises their hand of them and extends that one towards them; then pause it there so that it returns slightly.
And if it does not return for what we have said and is due to the nature that causes dislocation, several days later know that the patient should be bathed in hot water and administered oil that soothes and lines as if they were almond leaves, and fenugreek, and tansy in water, and should be administered.
And then the patient should be rolled onto their back and have their nipple placed under wool that is equal in lightness and constriction, and place the doctor's arm on the spot, raise the head of the muscle vertically, pull the patient's hand so it does not get swollen at the sides, and another minister should hold the head of the patient, so it does not swell at the sides, which will return to its place almost immediately.
And if you wish, reduce it according to this manner: and what you should do is have a person present who is much taller than the patient, located on that side, insert their muscle from the nipple of the patient and raise the nipple above them while the patient hangs in the air, and another minister pulls the patient's hand away from the sides of their stomach. If the patient is lighter, then suspect that another cause is hanging down, given that it's serious, for the dislocation returns almost immediately.
This is how it's reduced using another method: you place a long rod with a rounded end, like a mortar spoon, not too thick or thin. Then have the patient lie down; place your hand on top of the head of the rod and have the patient stand according to the length of the rod. Extend your other hand from the patient's side. And stretch the body of the patient from the opposite side with strength until the joint returns to its place at speed.
And if it's difficult to reduce the patient due to all the causes we've mentioned, then use this cure: take a rod whose length is that of two arms and its width is four digits wide, and the thickness should be made from the palm of your hand according to this shape:
And place a sheet of lions' wool on top of the rounded head so that the rod does not dislocate the patient.
And have your hand or arm extended over the rod under the patient's buttocks, and extend your hand or arm on top of the rod in between the parts. Place the rod on the support and your arms and the tip of your hand.
Extend your arm on a scale ladder according to its width, and keep your hand extended in between the parts. The other side of the body should be suspended from the other side, until the joint returns almost immediately.
And when the treatment for the patient is completed according to any method possible, then place a quantity of woolen cloth equal on their buttocks; apply a prepared plaster made from moly powder and albumin of egg over all the muscle tissue everywhere it's rubbed, ensuring that it's mixed with the plaster. Keep your hand tightly bound around them for several days, and do not let your hand be disturbed by someone else for seven days.
And ensure that the food of the patient is minimal while their member is being comforted, as this makes it easier for their recovery.
And increase the food given to the patient slightly or very much and exercise some movement; if it's closed without being softened, then they are already healed.
If the joint is dislocated due to swollen joints caused by moisture or for any other reason, then it must be treated with three applications of a cautery as described in the section on using a cautery.
And if all of this has been done and about seven days later the joint is released but the joint isn't closed, and the plaster and stiffness are reduced in some places, but it's not closed or tightened, and they can't lift that arm above their sides, then you should know that the nerves of the patient, which are at the head of the muscle, have either been cut, extended, or softened. And know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
As for the dislocation of that which happens to the feet or breasts or behind parts, the reduction is done through pressing and stretching at their hands until it returns.
And another bandage should be applied there for the other stiffness, and care that part until it is healed.
And if there is serious healing in the body and delayed movement in them, then the patient uses warm baths until that heaviness is alleviated and returns to their natural state.
Section XXVII
On the treatment of joint dislocation.
Know that the elbow joint is dislocated with difficulty and similarly returns with difficulty; it can be dislocated in any direction, but most commonly in front or behind. Its dislocation doesn't escape notice when you feel or touch them according to its shape once it's dislocated. When adjusting the displaced elbow, it's clearly declared to you, because the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm, nor can they touch that part of their muscle.
And keep your elbows and reduce the dislocation as soon as it reaches their hollow. If it reaches their hollow, reducing them becomes difficult, and without much effort they're not completely healed; especially when in the back parts, which is worse than all other types of dislocation and with more pain; hot baths worsen that situation.
And the restoration of their elbow, when it's possible to reduce them, is that their hand should be extended between two hands, and their arm spread out. The surgeon's hands are on the elbow and under them, and you push the joint with the heels of their own hands or at the base of their palm until it returns to its place.
If the dislocation is in front parts, then it returns this way by bending their hand to their hand, while striking the elbow at the base of their palm.
And if the dislocation doesn't respond to reduction, then apply strong extension and vigorous force.
And have two attendants stretch the arm, with each attending to their own part in such a way that it's not increased against the extension.
And have their arm rotated throughout its entirety; because it's enveloped in a folded long cloth around their hand or bandage.
And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, he applies some oil to it so that certain causes which help in lubricating the joint and facilitating it are applied; then vigorously pushes the joint into a thrust until it returns.
And for the reduction of that lump which is placed on the area to be compressed where there is stiffness and movement in the fluid, apply cold oil, and stretch it with stretching, and the arm should hang from the neck, and be left for a few days.
And then it should be released; and therefore if the joint has formed in its place, then you release the ligament of it and leave that.
And if you see the joint not to strengthen, then you repeat the plaster and the ligament, and leave that for a few days until it is stretched; then release that.
May if it happens that the gravity is near the reduction of the joint, and the position of the patient is in motion, then apply moisturizing baths and subtle friction, and compression, until it becomes supple; or place your hand on the joint gently, using a fatty hand massage; then bind it, and leave that over the bones during the day and night. And hold that, and put that in the bath; and when it gets dirty, then you scrub the joint with a seasoned friction, and then place your hand gently over that several times, using a spicy hand lotion, once, and then the second, and the third time. Corruption has already reached within the liver's innards, where it can be found.
And if you wish, place your hand on that wet and irritated cow's hole and press down over it; and do this several times, so that the area is wet and returns to its position.
Chapter XXVIII.
On the cure of dislocation of the shoulder blade, it is about the joint that is between the arm and the hand.
The shoulder blade of the hand sometimes gets dislocated, and the reduction of the dislocation is easy, but the opposite applies to other joints; however, it's important that there be speed in the reduction when it occurs, before it stops or when pus forms under it.
And the reduction of the dislocation is that you place the hand joint of the shoulder blade on a table and extend the arm of that person, and the doctor places his hand or palm over the edge of the joint, and pushes it until it returns to its position.
However, it is important to consider if the palm has already been at the belly of the hand, then the shoulder blade should place both hands on a table and you need extension and reduction; and if the dislocation was previous, then the position of the arm itself is inherently on the table, so that the doctor's hand can be over that edge of the joint.
And if it returns right away, that's good; and otherwise, then strengthen that with plaster near the pus sac and leave that; and don't repeat this, because if not, you neither endure nor can you on the reduction of pus that passes through your days.
However, the joint moves according to its stiffness; and don't blame the shoulder blade for any cause, but when the hand is softened and can't strengthen any cause; then you know that the nerves are compressed or twisted, and otherwise it's not inside him but you strengthen with a cautery near the site and fortify him, so apply this if you give rise to any cause.
So when the shoulder blade returns, then place your hand on the plaster which we have reapplied, and leave it strengthened for several days; then release it and leave it and exercise the arm of that.
And if the movement of that is still limited and occurs in it some gravity, then moisten that with warm water and apply friction several times, until it becomes supple.
Chapter XXIX.
On the cure of dislocation of the fingers.
Several times you can dislocate the fingers in all directions.
And when any finger is dislocated from that to the back of the hand or inside it, then hold the finger and push in the dislocation with your thumbs until it returns.
And then hold the tip of the finger, suspend that from the part where it is dislocated, and leave that for two days.
And then suspend that and extend that until its rightness matches in its day.
And when it wakes at night, place that according to that narrative, and do not stop releasing that during the day and exercising with movement, and place that in the evening; then do this for a few days until it is straightened.
And make it like this if it is dislocated inside the hand, place that towards that part and do it like this for your first operation, until it heals.
Similarly do it in this case when it is dislocated to other parts.
Chapter XXX.
On the cure of dislocation of the scapulae of the back.
When it happens to any of the scapulae of the back or neck fully dislocated, and strengthening the muscles of those areas is enough, then there is no cure, for death follows that person.
And the sign of this is that the excretion from the back is excessive without his will, and he can't hold it; several times you soften some parts of him or his legs or two arms, or one of those; or strengthen a scapula in its place, for softening with several applications helps to remove these towards four directions.
When it has been remedied in the rear parts, it is named gelbozitat.
The cure of the patient is whether it is considered if the gout occurs in childhood, for there is neither cure nor healing from that.
In cases where it occurs through impact or through percussion or through similar actions to those, the Ancients would have discussed at length the methods of treatment, of which the most important returns to profitability; but I have already shortened that from them due to my familiarity with their exposition and explanation, to which I refer and expand on using various tools related to that.
And only that which occurs in both properly is cured by me as I recommend.
And that the patient lie on his back with his feet about halfway to the wall and spread them apart so wetting does not cause his foot to slip.
And place a long stick straight up, fixed in the ground near the wall at the head of him, and another stick at his feet on the opposite end of the room.
And the minister holds the stick, not buried in a hole; and another minister holds the other according to that form.
And cover the head of the patient with it and let him tie tightly around his eyes; extend the end of the bandage to the stick which should be under his head, bind that on him; and tie the other bandage around his buttocks and heels, place them under his feet; and adjust all the bandages and fix those onto the other stick which should be under his feet.
And the minister extends the bandage to the junction of the stick, and do not make them too tight on both sticks and the bandages in their places where they are fixed, but rather do not tighten them as we said.
And the doctor places his palms on the spine with strength so that it returns or places a table there and makes sure to adjust his feet onto the table as they return.
If it does not return in this way, then take a table whose breadth or length is about three arm lengths away from the wall which we said has a place for the patient between the end of the table. And place the table on the spine, and the doctor places his feet at the other end, stretching until the spine is compressed and returns to its place.
And if you wish, open the one that is turned to your hand; and it's that you place in the ground the head of the patient at the back of a wall with two sticks, their length being about an arm's reach, and place his head at the back of the wall also with two sticks; and let there be this length between each stick as one palm, and it has been done in each stick pull towards that, and every one is firmly placed on the ground so that it does not move.
And make another stick straight for the turn, and it is turned in the two grooves of the two sticks.
And at the end of it is a groove in which is formed the stick, whose length is one hand as that which is turned; and on the other two sticks is similar to this.
And adjust the bandages that you tightened on the feet of the patient in the groove which should be under his head, and the bandages that you tightened on his thighs in the turn which should be under his feet.
And for each turn place one minister who twists the turn with his hand, and the doctor adjusts the spine according to what we said.
And once the spine has returned and the area is adjusted, then cover with an excreted plaster on a goose feather, and seal; and place on the plaster until you have a table whose width spans three fingers or about those, and the length that takes up the location of the gout, and over the junction of the spine.
And let it be observed by the bandage which we said, and use the patient to receive subtle nourishment so that they may be healed.
And if there is any lingering concern in the area at the end of recovery, then cover that you administer medicines that soften and clean until after a long time of applying the table which we recommended; and it has been administered to that location with a sheet of lead.
And some inflammations may occur at the end of the spine on both sides, and it is hurt by that dislocation; and it is this bone which already inflames so much that you should not expect any improvement from it for administering this medicine, which will cause your death to happen.
Captulo XXI.
On the treatment of a dislocated hip.
Understand that the joint of the hip and the joint of the muscle do not only suffer from dislocation, but do not occur as those that happen to other joints with slight movement and curvature.
And the joint of the hip is dislocated in four ways: it can be dislocated internally or externally, or anteriorly, or posteriorly.
And it is more significantly dislocated within parts, or to the front parts or to the back parts.
And the sign of the dislocation towards the internal parts is quarr, when you adjust the healthy side to the sick side, it's longer and more prominent than the healthy one, the malaute cannot bend its foot due to this condition; it feels that bending hurts a lot in the area where it should be bent, because by doing so, the tip of the thigh bone gets stuck at the place it shouldn't. As a result, the pain is intense here.
The sign of the one who suffers from dislocation is when things happen to him in opposition to this condition.
The sign of the one who suffers from dislocation in front is when his own side expands according to fullness, but it doesn't bend that much pain where it should be bent; if you press forward and he can't move on further than that; and his urine gets retained and bending hurts a lot for him; thus his movement relies only on the heel.
The sign of the one who suffers from dislocation in back is that he doesn't expand backwards, nor can he bend the part forward where bending would normally hurt; his own side is shorter than the other side, and bending gets softened; the tip of the thigh bone feels this softness at that spot.
The possible reduction of this kind of dislocation depends on your consideration. If the dislocation is old and established, you have to carefully manage its reduction in relation to his position, not for all; one does not impose a prognosis in that treatment process.
For the one whose dislocation is recent and belongs to one of the four types of dislocations, you should guide it so that the joint returns back and extends internally and externally. Move it towards the right and left sides; let this return naturally and do not require other treatments.
If it does not return in this manner, then prepare to apply force and extend his own side from the part more towards you, or on his chest, or from what is located over the side of his body; another should extend his hand above him so that his legs touch his ribs. Then, strengthen firmly at the place where the thread is tied over his back, have another hold the end of the thread; and press lightly on the tip of the thread elsewhere.
And whether it is extension of him or internally from the part towards the sternum part, or externally from the back part to the part between the ribs, or internally from the back part to the second part.
And that extension of all, within which the foot should be raised to his height on the ground and swings downwards.
And this type of extension is common to all four types.
And so if the dislocation returns as we have said, it's good; otherwise, for all types, you need to proceed with its own treatment accordingly.
In your own reduction, when dislocated, if the dislocation is internal, you should make the foot bend upwards on its side; then place the threads under the back of the thigh bone at that point where it is between the tip of the thigh bone and the point where it feels to be bent. Then extend the thread from the part towards bending to the other part of the sternum.
And then another should take hold of his arms firmly, press the fat area on the back of the heel bone, extend it externally by extension forcefully until that returns to its place.
And this type requires lighter treatment for the reduction of this member than the others.
And if you are excused about it and do not follow the treatment for this type of treatment all together, then you should have both heels on the thread simultaneously with strong but gentle force, over both ankles and both calves.
And the length of each is by quantity of four fingers, and the heel bone extends more than the other by quantity of two fingers.
And make the heel bone hung from the shaft's head, and it should be in the majority. And the length of him from the ground is by quantity of two arm spans.
And order a strong youth to minimize the tip of the thigh bone, and have it hung by another young man with the heel bone; and let the other youth force down the hip with impelling strength until the joint returns to its place at speed.
And in your own reduction, when dislocation is external, make the heel bone jump according to what we have advised upon inspection; strengthen the thread specifically on the heel bone and on his feet.
And two shafts should be placed, one on his foot, and the other on the buttocks; and two shafts should be adjusted halfway on the thigh where wet cloths are wrapped around it, so that the heel bone does not get damp by the shaft being between his thighs; thus you ensure that extension of parts left is not pulled.
And each person should extend according to their part, and the doctor uses his hand to manage the reduction according to skill.
When the dislocation is in front parts, then the bed should be slightly extended, and according to this surgical procedure it's about gout; and the doctor places the palm of his right hand on the patient's back, and near that with his other hand, and for that action he pauses that extended towards the parts leaving the part behind.
And if the dislocation is in the back parts, then do not have the patient lying on their sides, but instead elevate them above the ground; when this happens, have them lie with a hard cause, as would happen with sitting straight if their waist was dislocated to the outside, according to what we said about their position over two waists; and that their head and ribs be extended, as we said, without much difference.
And have the application of compression on the table over the area where the joint is located.
So when the reduction is completed as it should - and the sign of joint reduction in them does not hide from you, which means that when you extend their legs they are equal, and when you bend them equally and the patient straightens their leg and expands their inner thigh, then you know that the member as per your instruction has returned - and then you adjust both parts and apply plaster and stretch it on the part so that the width is not exaggerated in any of the sides; and keep the patient resting for three or four days.
And then remove the bandage and plaster, and compare one leg with the other.
And when you see them equal in appearance, then you know that the dislocation has already been fixed, and then let the patient walk.
And if you see any cause for softening, then you return and plaster that area again, and stretch it according to your first stretching, and let it rest for three days.
And then remove that plaster, and make the patient walk on both legs for some days until they are comfortable.
Captulo xxxii
On the treatment of dislocation of the elbow.
The elbow can be dislocated in three ways: it is dislocated to the outside, towards the inside, and more towards the back than towards the front; it does not get dislocated towards the front.
And the sign of elbow dislocation is when you command the patient to press their leg against the thigh; then you know that the elbow has been dislocated.
And the restoration of all its ways is that you make the patient lie straight, so that they can extend their leg if possible; attach your knees to their back and hold their foot between your feet; then have them press their thigh against yours as firmly as possible while extending their knee until the elbow returns to its place.
The sign of restoration is that their leg sticks to the thigh at rest without effort.
And then plaster that area and have the leg stick to the thigh, and tie those in place on one side for three or four days, and then remove that.
And do not use both legs for walking for some days, until they are healed and comfortable.
If the reduction of your elbow is acceptable to you, then administer strong stretching to the muscles as described in the previous chapter on hip treatment.
Captulo xxxiii
On the treatment of shoulder dislocation.
The shoulder can sometimes be slightly displaced due to minor dislocation, and in other instances it can be completely dislocated. The dislocation of the shoulder can occur either towards the inside or outside parts.
The sign of shoulder dislocation is that you move it to the swollen part where it has been dislocated.
The treatment for minor displacement of the shoulder is relatively simple restoration, which involves having it extended with ease and equality until it returns to its place.
And in the treatment of shoulder dislocation when it's completely out, you should make the patient lie straight, and have one person hold that part strongly and firmly behind their elbow at the midpoint.
And then position your right hand under their upper arm and place your left hand on the opposite side of the elbow at the location of the armpit.
And then pull the arm towards you with your right hand, and by two means on the left side, and extend the left. And push the elbow of their arm from the right side so that it touches their leg.
And perform these actions in this manner as we have discussed.
And then push the elbow of their arm towards the back for the third time, and you are at the armpit.
Then if it returns in one or two times using this method, and when you move their arm equally, it's good; otherwise, then for this purpose repeat the operation until it returns.
And if you are not allowed to reduce the shoulder as we have recommended, then make the patient lie on their back on the ground, and extend a towel against solid ground, and have them place between their thighs, and you already have covered them with a cloth so that they don't move.
And the minister of their mouth holds their thighs; and another minister extends their arm towards their chest or as far as it lies on top of their rib cage; and this minister extends each one against his partner's extension, and the band is held between their thighs by the minister, so that their body is not pulled to the parts left behind by its extension.
And the surgeon will reposition the dislocated joint at his own place, and another minister holds the healthy thigh at the left overs, where the dislocation returns with ease.
And so when the dislocation returns and you are told of the health of the reduction, then pause with the plastering and strengthen that considerably, and connect the arm to the chest.
And consider that you protect or shield from the nerves which are behind on top of the foot, so that the muscle over there is not too forceful and injures it greatly.
And let that be for two days or for three; and if the muscle has softened, strengthen that.
And then, on the third day or the fourth, untie that, and prohibit the patient from walking for forty days. May it be that if they are eager to go before this space, it is not safe that the dislocation will not dissolve and corrupt over them, and so that there is nothing receiving treatment.
And if it happens that they get an abscess, then consider that you administer in the distribution of them what we have described before this narrative, in another place of treatment and dressing until it is healed.
Chapter XXXIV.
On the treatment of dislocation of the fingers of the foot.
Consider that when it is dislocated you will equalize with a slight extension for a few steps; and what is not difficult, before it becomes easier.
May it be that if the dislocation is in some bones of both feet, then consider that you must make the patient lie down on their foot onto a place as equal to the ground or onto a table, and being standing like they were walking.
And then stand on your foot, place your hand onto what is in front of the joints, and bend that towards your foot with strength until it returns, and observe that it is already equalized and does not appear in the same spot.
And then pause the patient's belly of their foot on a table that takes all their foot, with two ends, and strengthen that with decent and firm structure for three days; and then untie it and have them rest from walking for several days, until it is strengthened and its use is assured.
Chapter XXXV.
On the types of dislocation that may occur from a wound or from fracture or at any time.
When there is a cause of those things happening, and you take care of that and restore them, premature deaths may occur.
And for this reason do not presume on the treatment of him, but rather someone who is wise in the art, long-used, merciful and compassionate; he should be slow, non-impulsive and not presumptuous. And when beginning medicines that lead to abscesses alone, let the patient's fate be left to divine judgment, but to one towards whom you hope for salvation from loss, for relief from illness, and in which there appears some hope. And then strive to immediately make the reduction as soon as possible for him in the beginning of the cause, before it becomes an abscess.
And then if the limb returns as we wish, then administer treatment which leads to an abscess and heals the wound according to what suits you from desiccating ointments.
And if dislocation occurs with fracture and happens in the separated bone sockets, then you should reposition them, and proceed as we have said about simple wounds from what was discussed earlier in the locations of these.
And according to your skill, guard and avoid the inner instrument in the ways of fear as you have been preceded by my preaching; for that is better for you from what belongs to your Creator, more permanent to your glory, and more healthful to your true body, you will see those things in your time. So ends the words of Al-Bujajsi, completely worthy of God's blessing. Amen.
